
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/28335/2015
     IA/28333/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 July 2016                               |On 4 August 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             mr Kishor Adhikari
                          mrs Rajani Adhikari Thapa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                       Respondents/Claimants


Representation:

For the Appellants:                 Ms Z. Ahmed, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimants:       Mr Howells, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Nixon  sitting  at  Birmingham  on  19
    January 2016) whereby the Tribunal  dismissed  the  claimants'  appeals
    under the Rules, but allowed their  appeals  against  the  decision  to
    remove them on the ground that the imminent removal  of  the  claimants
    and their two children under the age of 5 to Nepal in the winter months
    would expose them to a real risk of harm of such severity as  to  cross
    the threshold of Article 3, ECHR.  The First-tier Tribunal do not  make
    an anonymity direction, and  I do  not  consider  that  the  claimants
    require anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 2. On 20 June 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin gave his reasons  for
    granting the Secretary of State permission to appeal:

    1.   The respondent seeks permission to appeal against the decision  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Nixon promulgated  on  20  January  2016,
         allowing the appellants' appeals against the Secretary  of  State's
         decision to refuse leave to remain as a PBS student and  dependent.



    2.   The grounds requesting permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
         argue that the judge erred in:

         (1)  allowing the appeal under Article 3 where the  appellants  did
             not make a protection claim and taking on the role of  primary
             decision maker;

         (2)  a procedural matter  in  that  it  is  not  indicated  in  the
             decision whether the Article 3 issue was  in  the  grounds  of
             appeal or whether there had been  leave  given  to  amend  the
             grounds.

    3.   The judge has dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

    4.   It is arguable that it was an error of law for the judge to  treat
         the matter as a protection claim (whether or  not  the  grounds  of
         appeal were amended).

    5.   I grant permission on the above grounds.

Relevant Background

 3. The claimants are husband and wife respectively, and both of  them  are
    nationals of Nepal.  By letter dated 10 July 2015 their solicitors made
    a request to the Home Office  that  they  and  their  two  children  be
    granted humanitarian protection.  They drew attention to the fact  that
    the first claimant had an outstanding application for leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  Migrant.   He  had  received  a  letter
    confirming he had 60 days to obtain a new CAS letter, after  which  his
    student leave application was going to  be  determined.   That  60  day
    period expired on or about 12 July 2015.  There had recently been  many
    earthquakes in  Nepal  since  25  April  2015  of  varying  degrees  of
    magnitude.  Large parts of Nepal had been damaged by  the  earthquakes,
    so that the local infrastructure had been  devastated.   The  claimants
    were from Gorkha district, which was the epicentre of the  initial  and
    most significant of  the  recent  earthquakes.   The  effects  on  both
    children, who would  both  be  extremely  vulnerable,  the  absence  of
    appropriate accommodation in Nepal, the  forthcoming  rainy  season  in
    Nepal, the uncertainty of food  and  water  supplies  and  the  limited
    availability of medical care in Nepal amounted to inhuman and degrading
    conditions.  Compelling  the  family  to  go  to  Nepal  would  in  the
    circumstances  amount  to  inhuman  and  degrading  treatment.    While
    international aid efforts would ensure that over time Nepal  recovered,
    its low infrastructural starting point and national poverty would delay
    recovery.  The claimants had no adequate support structures  in  Nepal,
    and they would struggle to provide themselves and their  children  with
    adequate food, medical assistance and care, hygiene and/or shelter.

 4. On 4 August 2015 the Secretary of State gave her reasons  for  refusing
    the first claimant's application for  leave  to  remain  as  a  general
    student migrant, and for making a concomitant decision  to  remove  him
    and his dependent wife from the UK by way of directions  under  Section
    47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 5. The refusal decision made no reference to  the  issues  raised  by  the
    solicitors in the letter of 10 July 2015, and it did not engage at  all
    with the impact on the children of the  prospective  removal  of  their
    parents to Nepal.

 6. Both claimants were issued with a One-Stop Warning pursuant to  Section
    120 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   They  were
    told they must inform the Home Office of any reasons why  they  thought
    they should be allowed to stay in the United Kingdom.

 7. The claimants' solicitors settled the grounds of appeal to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  They pleaded that the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State was not in accordance with Articles 3 and/or 8 of the ECHR.   The
    Secretary of State had not engaged with the representations made  in  a
    letter of 10 July 2015,  and  the  Secretary  of  State  had  also  not
    considered the impact of the prospective removal on the two children of
    the claimants who had been born in the UK.  As a result  the  decisions
    were not in accordance with Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The judge's findings of fact are set out in paragraphs [11] to [15]  of
    her decision.  There was no dispute that the conditions in  Nepal  were
    appalling and had worsened since the devastating earthquakes  of  April
    2015, owing to the blockades of the  Nepali  Indian  border  preventing
    essential charitable aid getting  through.   She  had  heard  and  read
    evidence confirming that the claimant and his wife's family homes  were
    destroyed in the earthquakes.  His parents were  living  under  plastic
    sheeting and it went without saying they would not be in a position  to
    support or accommodate the claimant and  his  family.   She  read  with
    concern the UNICEF press release of  30  November  2015  that  children
    under 5 in Nepal were at risk of death  or  disease  during  the  harsh
    winter months due to a severe shortage of  fuel,  food,  medicines  and
    vaccines, and she noted that the Secretary of State had paid no  regard
    to this.  The judge continued in paragraph [15]:

         It seems to me that if the conditions  in  Nepal  were  to  improve
         drastically, such that the blockades came to an end, charitable aid
         could get through and reconstruction of the country  started,  then
         the return of the family may no longer be a breach of  their  human
         rights.  However, as it stands and bearing in  mind  the  onset  of
         winter and the increased risk this poses, I find that the return of
         the [claimant] and his family would be a breach of their Article  3
         rights.  This appeal must succeed accordingly.

Discussion

 9. Ground 1 is that the judge  erred  in  consideration  of  the  case  by
    failing to provide any legal justification  for  allowing  the  appeals
    outright under Article 3  in  circumstances  where  the  claimants  had
    simply failed to make a protection  application  to  the  Secretary  of
    State.

10. Ground 2 is that there was a procedural irregularity amounting to error
    of law in that the judge had not recorded in her decision  whether  the
    claimant's grounds relating to the earthquake in Nepal were part of his
    original grounds of appeal or whether the claimants  had  been  granted
    permission to amend their grounds at a preliminary hearing stage.

11. Ms Ahmed did not pursue Ground 2 as it was clear on the documents  that
    the claimants had relied on the  consequences  of  the  earthquakes  in
    Nepal in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

12. As to Ground 1, Ms Ahmed acknowledged that it proceeded  upon  a  false
    factual premise.  It was not the case that the claimants had failed  to
    make a protection application to the  Secretary  of  State  before  the
    Secretary of State had made the decision which was under  appeal.   The
    claimants' bundle contained a certificate of posting which showed  that
    the letter of 10 July from the solicitors had been posted to the  Home
    Office on that date.

13. But even if the claimants had not advanced  a  humanitarian  protection
    claim before a decision was taken to remove them under  Section  47  of
    the 2006 Act, the First-tier Tribunal would still have had jurisdiction
    to entertain a humanitarian protection/Article 3 ECHR claim  by  virtue
    of the fact that the claimants had  been  served  with  a  Section  120
    notice.

14. The Secretary of State was represented at the hearing in the First-tier
    Tribunal, and the Presenting Officer did not seek  to  argue  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to  entertain  a  human  rights
    claim under Article 3.  As is  apparent  from  paragraph  [10]  of  the
    decision, the line taken by the Presenting Officer was simply that  the
    claim was not credible.  He submitted that  the  claim  had  only  been
    raised because the first claimant had been unable to meet the Rules  in
    respect of his  student  application.   He  submitted  that  the  first
    claimant had known of the earthquake before his CAS was revoked, but he
    had not made an application for protection until he was unable to  find
    another college.

15. It was open to the judge to find that  the  evidence  deployed  by  the
    claimants was credible and that  they  had  discharged  the  burden  of
    proving that their imminent removal to Nepal in  January  2016  exposed
    them and their children  to  a  real  risk  of  inhuman  and  degrading
    treatment and accordingly a breach of Article 3, ECHR.  It was open  to
    the judge to allow the appeals outright on this basis, rather than only
    allowing the appeals on the limited ground that the Secretary of  State
    had failed to consider the best interests of the children before making
    a decision to remove their parents.

16. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed, as I informed the parties at the conclusion of the hearing.



17. Mr Howells informed me that he intended to apply  for  a  wasted  costs
    order against the Secretary of State, and  asked  me  to  reserve  this
    matter to myself.  I declined to do so, as it was  likely  to  be  more
    administratively convenient for there to be complete flexibility as  to
    which Upper Tribunal  Judge  is  assigned  to  hear  this  freestanding
    application.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date         04/08/2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson













