
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28814/2014
                                                             & IA/28819/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 January 2016                   |On 9 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     M C
                                     M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    No Representation
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Bangladesh.  The Second Appellant is the
    wife of the First Appellant and his dependant.  Their  dates  of  birth
    are 3 December 1990 and  1  January  1989.   They  appeal  against  the
    decisions of the Respondent dated  25  June  2014  refusing  the  First
    Appellant's application for further  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 Student Migrant and refusing the Second Appellant's
    application as his dependant.  The First  Appellant's  application  was
    refused under Paragraphs 322(1A) and 322(3) of the  Immigration  Rules.
    The basis for the refusal was that the First Appellant  had  worked  in
    breach of the conditions of his Student Visa and had failed to disclose
    this on a subsequent application form.  Because of this the  Respondent
    contended that the First Appellant had failed to meet the  requirements
    of Paragraph  245ZX(a).  Removal  Directions  were  also  issued.   The
    appeals were heard by Judge of the First Tier Tribunal  Shamash  on  18
    May 2015.  She dismissed the appeals under the  Immigration  Rules  and
    relating to Section 47 of the Immigration Asylum and  Nationality  Act.
    She found that Paragraphs 322(1A) and 322(3) apply.  Her  decision  was
    promulgated on 3 July 2015.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and this was allowed
    by Judge of the First Tier Tribunal Zucker  on  8  October  2015.   The
    reason for permission being granted was that Judge Shamash at paragraph
    26 of her decision placed the burden of proof on  the  Appellants  with
    respect to Paragraph 322(1A) and erred in so doing.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response which states that  the  Respondent  accepts
    that there is an error at Paragraph 26 of the decision  in  respect  of
    Paragraph 322(1A) but it is not material to the outcome of the  appeal.
    The response states that the Judge at  Paragraphs  33  to  38  makes  a
    series of very damaging credibility findings and at Paragraph 33 states
    that she did not find either of the Appellants credible or honest.  The
    response states that the Respondent contends that the Judge  was  fully
    aware of the facts and legal issues before her  and  Paragraph  26  was
    potentially a typographical error and further, or  alternatively,  that
    any Judge properly directing himself on  the  facts  as  found  by  the
    Judge, would have reached exactly the same conclusion.`

 4. A letter was received by Universal Solicitors  dated  13  January  2016
    which states that they have been unable to contact the  Appellants  and
    they will therefore not be appearing on their behalf at this Hearing.

 5. There was no appearance at the Upper Tribunal  Hearing  either  by  the
    Appellants or by their representatives.  This is the Appellants' appeal
    but as the Appellants were not in attendance  I  asked  the  Presenting
    Officer if she wished to make submissions and she did so.

 6. She submitted that credibility is an issue in this claim and  when  the
    First Tier Tribunal's decision is considered it was open to  the  Judge
    to come to the decision she did, based on the evidence before her.

 7. I was referred to Paragraph 33 of  the  decision  in  which  the  Judge
    states: "In dealing with credibility I considered the documentation and
    the evidence as a whole.  I did not find the  First  Appellant  or  the
    Second Appellant to be credible or honest witnesses."  The  First  Tier
    Judge goes on to state  that  the  First  Appellant's  and  his  wife's
    evidence was not  corroborated  in  any  way,  for  example  the  First
    Appellant provided a copy of a letter dated 4 July 2012 which  he  said
    he had sent to UKBA when he did not  receive  his  Biometric  Residence
    Permit but there was no proof of postage with the letter and  similarly
    his letter of resignation to Starbucks could have been generated at any
    point.  There was no evidence that the  First  Appellant  had  actually
    handed in his notice to Starbucks.

 8. The Presenting Officer then referred to Paragraph 32  of  the  decision
    which states that the First Appellant asserted that his  solicitor  had
    known from the outset that his partner had signed for the letter.  This
    was not in the grounds of appeal.  His solicitor  indicated  that  this
    was correct and the Judge invited him to consider whether he wished  to
    submit an Affidavit explaining the position about when he had  received
    these instructions from his client.  The Judge  gave  Mr  Hossain,  the
    representative, ten working days to submit this  but  no  documentation
    was sent and there was no further communication from Mr Hossain.

 9. The Presenting Officer then  referred  me  to  Paragraph  26  which  is
    incorrect as it states that the burden of proof  is  on  the  Appellant
    relating to paragraph 322.  She submitted that this is not material  in
    the circumstances.  There was no evidence before the First  Tier  Judge
    that the Biometric Residence Permit  was  not  received  by  the  First
    Appellant.  She submitted therefore that the burden of  proof  was  not
    discharged by  the  Appellants.   She  submitted  that  the  Respondent
    discharged the burden of proof relating to this.  It was  not  believed
    by the Judge that the Second Appellant received the Biometric Residence
    Permit and signed for it and did not give it to the Appellant.

10. The Presenting Officer submitted that  there  was  sufficient  evidence
    before the Judge to find that the Respondent had discharged the  burden
    of proof in this claim.  She submitted that it is clear that the  First
    Appellant knew that he had worked in breach of the terms of his visa so
    he made misrepresentations to try to cover this up.  She submitted that
    even had he not done so he worked against the terms  of  his  visa  and
    failed to discharge the evidential burden on him.

11. With regard to Article 8 the Presenting Officer submitted that there is
    no merit in any Article 8 claim.  She referred me to the case of  Patel
    and Others [2013]  UKSC72.   She  submitted  that  she  is  relying  on
    Paragraph 57 of this case which states that Article 8 is not a  general
    dispensing power.  It has to be distinguished  from  the  Secretary  of
    State's discretion to grant leave to remain outside the rules which may
    be unrelated to any protected human right.  She submitted  that  having
    been educated for a period in the United Kingdom is not sufficient  for
    a successful private life  claim.   She  submitted  that  although  the
    grounds refer to Article 8, based on what  was  before  the  judge  any
    Article 8 claim could not have succeeded.

12. I was asked to dismiss the appeal.

Decision

13. The permission states that there is an error of law at paragraph 26  of
    the First Tier Judge's decision.  That is true, there is an error.

14. I have to decide if this is a material error and I have considered  the
    evidence which was before the Judge and the fact  that  the  Appellants
    were unable to corroborate their statements relating to the letter sent
    to the First Appellant, by the Respondent,  restricting  his  right  to
    work.  This letter was dated 8 May 2012.  It is clear  that  the  First
    Appellant worked until 13 October 2012.  The Appellant stated that  his
    representative would support his account that  his  wife  had  received
    this letter and had not given it to him but Mr Hossain  was  given  the
    chance to produce an Affidavit to this effect and was given ten days to
    do so but he did not.

15. I have noted that the First Tier Judge found that the  Appellants  were
    not credible and were not honest.   She  gives  reasons  for  this  and
    states that it is clear from  the  documentation  from  UKBA  that  the
    letter containing the Biometric Residence Permit was a letter which had
    to be signed for and the Post Office will have details of that  letter.
    She found that it was open to the  Appellant  to  provide  confirmation
    that his partner's signature was on this letter  which,  although  this
    would not have been decisive, would have provided some support for  his
    account.  The Judge states that she finds the First  Appellant  stopped
    working in October 2012.  She finds that the First Appellant knew, when
    he filled out his application form in 2014, that he had, for a  limited
    period of time, worked in breach of his Visa requirements and  so  when
    he  answered  question  J16  and  did  not  admit  this,  this  was   a
    misrepresentation.

16. Based on what was before the Judge it is clear that she was entitled to
    find that the Appellant, having worked in breach of the  conditions  of
    his Tier 4 Student Visa falls within  one  of  the  general  exceptions
    under Paragraph 245Z(a).  The decision that the Appellant should not be
    granted a further sixty days in which to find another college where  he
    can study must be correct based on what was before her.

17. There is an error at Paragraph 26 of the decision but I find that  this
    is not a material error.  Had there not been this error I find that the
    Judge's decision would have been the same.

18. At paragraph 40 the First Tier Judge states  that,  in  line  with  her
    decision to refuse the  appeal,  she  upholds  the  Removal  Directions
    relating to the Appellants under Section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act.  She was entitled to do this.

Notice of Decision

19. I find that there is no material error of law in the First Tier Judge's
    decision and that her decision, promulgated on 3 July  2015  dismissing
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules and  under  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act and finding that Paragraph  322
    of the Immigration Rules applies, must stand.

20. Anonymity has been directed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
