
IAC-AH-CJ-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28827/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rd April 2015                   |On 19th May 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           mr Kenneth Kwama Asare
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Jorro (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr David Clarke (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    S. Aziz, promulgated on 7th January 2015, following a hearing at Hatton
    Cross on 23rd December 2014.  In the determination, the  judge  allowed
    the appeal of Kenneth Kwama Asare.  The Respondent Secretary  of  State
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of  Ghana,  who  was  born  on  16th
    January 1980.  He  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 26th July 2014  cancelling  his  Tier  1  visa
    valid, upon arrival at Heathrow Airport, on 26th July 2014, on  grounds
    that he had made false representations for the purpose of obtaining his
    leave.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he is  a  person  with  a  good  previous
    immigration history, having come to the UK on many occasions previously
    and returned back to Ghana.  He had come to the UK as a visitor  before
    gaining his  first  work  permit  in  2007.   After  an  investment  of
    �1,000,000 in 2010, he was issued with a Tier 1  (Investor)  visa.   He
    was granted a further Tier 1 visa in October 2013.  He had submitted an
    English language test certificate as part of his application.   He  had
    explained that the English test was at Watford College and it was taken
    on 16th or 17th July 2013.  It was taken on a computer in a  room  with
    30 other people and he had his photo taken on that day.  He rejects the
    Respondent's  case  against  him  that  when   questioned   about   the
    arrangements made for him to take the test he was unable to recall  any
    information.  His explanation that the fees had been  arranged  through
    an agent was not satisfactory because he  could  not  name  the  agent,
    according to the Respondent, and he was also unable to explain  why  he
    had chosen the particular college to undertake the test,  according  to
    the  Respondent.   Thereafter,  when   the   Respondent   carried   out
    investigations it was revealed that  deception  had  been  employed  in
    order to gain the certificate.   Consequently,  the  Appellant's  valid
    leave was cancelled.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge heard evidence from the  Appellant  in  person  that  he  did
    undertake the English language test.  He also heard evidence  that  the
    Appellant maintained that, provided he could be returned  his  passport
    by the Home Office, he was quite prepared to retake the test again  and
    to show that he was able to pass it.  The passport was not returned  to
    him (see paragraph 24).  When the Appellant was cross-examined, he said
    that he took his English language test at Watford College  and  paid  a
    fee and did so in cash.  He received a receipt,  a  copy  of  which  is
    contained at page 53C of the Appellant's bundle.   At  the  hearing  he
    produced the original receipt.

 5. The judge considered the applicable law and drew attention to paragraph
    321A of the Immigration Rules.  This makes it clear that,

         "The following grounds for the cancellation of a person's leave  to
         enter or remain which is in force on his arrival in, or  whilst  he
         is outside, the United Kingdom apply:

         (1)  there has been  such  change  in  the  circumstances  of  that
             person's case since the leave was given,  that  it  should  be
             cancelled; or

         (2)  false  representations  were  made  or  false  documents  were
             submitted ..."

 6. The judge then referred to the law on deception, and drew attention  to
    Ahmed (Pakistan) [2011] UKUT 00351, which made it clear that  in  order
    to have made false representations or submitted false documents  so  as
    to attract a mandatory refusal under Part 9 of the  Immigration  Rules,
    an applicant must have deliberately practised "deception",  as  defined
    at paragraph 6 of the Rules.  The  meaning  of  the  deception  is  the
    making of false representations.

 7. The judge then proceeded to make findings of fact.  He noted  that  the
    Appellant's leave was cancelled at Heathrow Airport on 26th  July  2014
    and that, "he was someone who  had  an  excellent  immigration  history
    dating back many years" (paragraph 35).  Attention was  also  drawn  to
    the fact that, "since the  late  1990s  he  has  been  granted  various
    immigration visas.  There is no evidence to suggest that he has  failed
    to comply with any of the conditions ..." (paragraph 36).  A  reference
    was made to, "a large amount of documentary evidence at pages 59 to 226
    of the Appellant's bundle" which corroborated the Appellant's assertion
    that, "over the past few years he has  invested  large  sums  into  the
    British economy" (paragraph 37).  However, there was  evidence  in  the
    form of statements from the Respondent's side of two witnesses, namely,
    Miss Rebecca Collings and Mr Peter Millington, both of whom  worked  at
    the Home Office, who stated that various investigations had shown  that
    systematic cheating had been  taking  place  with  respect  to  English
    language tests through Educational Testing Services ("ETS") "at several
    English language test centres" and that "ETS was one  of  the  nineteen
    providers granted permission by  the  Home  Office  to  offer  approved
    English language testing ..." (paragraph 40).

 8. The  Respondent's  representative  argued  that  the  two  Home  Office
    statements confirmed that some of the candidates "who produced  English
    language certificates issued by ETS as part of their  PBS  applications
    had not genuinely sat the  test"  (paragraph  41).   In  response,  the
    Appellant's  representative  had  argued  that,  "these  were   generic
    statements and did not establish that the Appellant was  one  of  those
    individuals ..." (paragraph 41).

 9.  However,  the  Respondent's  representative  then  relied  "upon   the
    statement from Mr  Michael  Sartorius  dated  22nd  December  2014,  as
    evidence that the  Appellant  had  been  singled  out  as  one  of  the
    individuals who had not genuinely sat the test".   The  judge  observed
    that Mr Michael Sartorius was another one of the employees at the  Home
    Office and that, "he states that the Appellant is an  individual  whose
    English language test has been invalidated by ETS" and the  reason  for
    this is that, "because ETS were not  satisfied  that  he  had  sat  his
    English language test" (paragraph 42).

10. The judge's conclusion was that he would "place little  weight  on  the
    statements from the Home Office  officials  which,  at  best,  provides
    'hearsay' evidence as to what ETS have informed them in respect of  the
    Appellant's English language test" (paragraph 43).

11. Moreover, the judge went on to say that, "even if I were to accept that
    the document from ETS shows that the Appellant's English language  test
    has been declared invalid, it does  not  explain  'why'  the  test  was
    invalidated ..." (paragraph 45).  Therefore, it was concluded that  the
    Respondent had not discharged the burden of proof  that  was  upon  the
    Respondent.  Therefore, it was concluded that the Respondent's decision
    to cancel the Appellant's leave under the 1971 Act was  incorrect  (see
    paragraph 47).

12. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

13. The grounds of application  state  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    allowing the Appellant's appeal on the basis that little weight was  to
    be given to generic evidence produced  by  the  Respondent  as  it  was
    "hearsay" evidence.

14. On 24th February 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

15. There was a Rule 21 response by the Appellant (who is  referred  to  as
    such on the basis that he was the Appellant in the appeal before  Judge
    Aziz below).

Submissions

16.  At  the  hearing  before  me  on  23rd  April  2015,  the  Appellant's
    representative, Mr Jorro of Counsel, also presented a skeleton argument
    for consideration.  The Respondent Secretary of State's representative,
    Mr Clarke, identified the issues before this appeal.  He submitted that
    a civil standard of proof should have been applied.  The judge's  error
    principally lay in his conclusions from paragraphs 43 to  45  where  he
    stated that, "little weight on the  statements  from  the  Home  Office
    officials" was to be placed (see paragraph 43).  This was because  they
    amounted to hearsay evidence.  Furthermore,  at  paragraph  44  of  the
    determination, the judge refers to the fact that,  "we  simply  have  a
    record sheet purporting to be issued by ETS", which was  wrong  because
    this was accompanied by  witness  statements  from  three  Home  Office
    officials (see paragraphs 40 to 41).  And this  appears  to  have  been
    overlooked.  Furthermore, the judge's suggestion that, "even if I  were
    to accept the document from ETS" that this would not  make  a  material
    difference was wrong on the basis of the judge's conclusion  that,  "it
    does not explain 'why' the test was invalidated" (paragraph 45).

17. Second, Mr Clarke submitted that there  was  an  application  to  amend
    grounds that had to be made today on the basis of a "Robinson  obvious"
    point.  This was to do with the fact that, as the judge recognised, the
    "English language test has been invalidated by ETS" (paragraph  42)  in
    consequence of which, the Appellant's leave had also been cancelled  by
    the Home Office.  The effect of this was that there had been "a  change
    of circumstances of that person's case since the leave was given"  (see
    paragraph 321A(i)).

18. For his  part,  Mr  Jorro  submitted  that  the  burden  of  proof  lay
    fundamentally upon the Respondent Secretary of State to show  that  the
    Appellant  had  been  guilty   of   deception   by   making   a   false
    representation.  This was far from proven.   It  simply  had  not  been
    proven that the Appellant had cheated in taking his test.  If he  could
    not recall the precise details of the test when he  was  questioned  at
    Heathrow, this was because it was a year since he had taken  the  test.
    But even so, if one looks at the interview itself, it  is  plain  that,
    rather than  saying  that  he  cannot  recollect  the  details,  he  is
    remarkably accurate, consistent, and plausible with respect to what  he
    says.

19. One only has to look at the interview from the beginning  to  see  that
    this is the case.  For example, when he is asked (Q.3) how many  people
    were in the test, he replied, "a lot of people,  more  than  a  hundred
    people.  But the room I did the test in, there was  30  people  in  the
    room".  He went on to explain he did  the  test  "on  computer".   When
    asked whether this was a question and answer test, involving typing, or
    a multiple choice test, he replied, "some of them.  It  gave  a  choice
    and you selected the answer and some of them you type answer".  He told
    the interview he sat the test last July and he told the interview  that
    it was on 16th or 17th July (see Qs.6  to  7).   He  went  on  to  even
    describe that the test took two to three hours (Q.9).  If he was unable
    to remember his score, and replied, "can I have a look and  tell  you?"
    this was hardly surprising (see Q.10).   Read  as  a  whole,  Mr  Jorro
    submitted,  the  interview  actually  shows  that  the  Appellant   was
    perfectly conversant with the test that he had taken a year earlier.

20. Second,  just  because  evidence  was  being  submitted  through  three
    employees of the Respondent Secretary of State, did  not  mean  to  say
    that this evidence had to be accepted as determinative  of  the  issues
    before the Tribunal, which were whether the Appellant had  been  guilty
    of deception.  The matter went to "adequacy of reasons",  as  explained
    helpfully in the Appellant's skeleton  argument.   Mr  Jorro  submitted
    that there was a difference between a case where the reasons are  wrong
    and a case where the reasons are simply inadequate.  If the reasons are
    wrong, then  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State  needs  to  make  an
    "irrationality" challenge.  They  had  not  done  so.   Therefore,  the
    challenge to the judge's decision  could  only  lie  on  the  basis  of
    "adequacy of reasons" and as such, this was bound to fail.

21. The established case law is clear.   My  attention  was  drawn  to  the
    judgment of Carnwath LJ in HS (Afghanistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 771,  which
    referred to "the limited circumstances in which one  should  set  aside
    the  judgment  for  inadequate  reasons"  (paragraph  27).   The  court
    explains that,

         "A claim that the reasons are inadequate must be distinguished from
         a claim that the reasons are wrong.  That is  only  permissible  in
         this jurisdiction if it can be  shown  that  the  reasons  are  not
         merely wrong, in the sense that the conclusions are not  ones  with
         which the Appellant or indeed the court might agree, but that  they
         are irrational.  In this case, as I say, the challenge  is  to  the
         adequacy of the reasons ..." (paragraph 29).

22. Mr Jorro submitted that if one looked at the question of "inadequacy of
    reasons" one had to turn to the judgment of Ward LJ in the  same  case,
    because His Lordship makes  it  abundantly  clear  that  the  essential
    question is as follows:

         "In a nutshell I have to say to myself: do  I  understand  why  she
         decided how and why she did?  I am in no doubt about it.  She found
         the applicant credible because she had seen her  and  observed  her
         and she gave her evidence in a  straightforward  manner,  in  other
         words, the classic advantage  a  trial  judge  has  of  seeing  the
         witness's demeanour and deciding accordingly.  That  by  itself  is
         often enough to bolster a credibility finding.  I saw her, I  heard
         her, I believed her: cadit quaestio." (Paragraph 41)

23. Third, there could be all sorts of reasons  why  the  Appellant's  test
    certificate was invalidated, and not all of them need have anything  to
    do with the exercise of  deception,  but  it  was  for  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State to  prove  the  issue.   The  judge  held  that  the
    Respondent could not so prove and that the Appellant  was  credible  in
    what he said.  That was a matter open to the judge.

24. Fourth, the consequences of taking an alternative  view  in  this  case
    were very far ranging and serious.  The Cambridge College case,  though
    very  long,  makes  it  abundantly  plain,  that  the  consequences  of
    deception are that a party would be shut out from  applying  again  for
    the next ten years, because he or she had made  false  representations.
    It is for this reason that the bar is set at a high standard and it  is
    for the Secretary of State to satisfy that bar.  If  the  Secretary  of
    State is unable to do so, then though the test may be  invalidated  and
    the leave may consequently be cancelled, at least it  is  open  to  the
    Appellant to apply to retake the test, and having passed  it,  to  then
    apply to have his leave reinstated.

25. For all these reasons, submitted Mr Jorro, the proper course  here  was
    not to make a finding that the Respondent Secretary of State  had  been
    able to show that the Appellant had exercised deception, because on the
    facts of this  case  the  judge  simply  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Respondent had been able to so do.

26. In reply, Mr Clarke submitted that there was  an  allegation  from  the
    Respondent Secretary of State that the Appellant  had  been  unable  to
    understand and recall the questions and the  nature  of  the  interview
    which he purported to have undertaken.  The  judge  did  not  make  any
    findings on this issue.  A failure to  so  do  was  an  error  of  law.
    Second, as far as the "adequacy of reasons" was  concerned,  the  judge
    had given a very low  weight  to  the  three  witness  statements  from
    officials in the Home Office and it must be questionable that this  was
    right.

Error of Law

27. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error of law (see Section 12(1)  of  TCEA  2007)  such
    that I should set aside the  decision.   My  reasons  are  as  follows.
    Whereas the judge was entirely right in concluding as he did  that  the
    burden of proof on the Respondent  Secretary  of  State  had  not  been
    satisfied to the extent of being able to demonstrate that deception had
    been exercised in the form of the making of  false  representations  or
    submitting false documents, because he had heard the evidence from  the
    Appellant himself, who had been cross-examined, he was not correct  and
    that he failed to deal with all the other issues that were  before  the
    Tribunal.  Therefore, whereas it follows on from the  judgments  in  HS
    (Afghanistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 771, that the judge cannot be faulted for
    showing the right level of "adequacy of reasons" because he does indeed
    do so from paragraphs 40 to 47, he  fails  to  deal  with  the  law  at
    paragraph 321A(i) of the Rules.  This  deals  with  "a  change  in  the
    circumstances of that person's case since the leave was given".  In the
    instant case, the judge failed to address this issue.  This was a  case
    where the Appellant no longer had a test  certificate  because  it  had
    been invalidated by ETS itself (see  paragraph  42).   The  Appellant's
    leave had been curtailed.  His possession of a valid  test  certificate
    was pivotal to his appeal.  The Appellant's leave in the  UK  therefore
    stood to be cancelled by virtue of that reason alone.  That  does  not,
    of course, mean to say that the Appellant was also guilty of exercising
    "deception" because that is a far too great  a  leap  in  the  argument
    given what was said by the Tribunal in  Ahmed  (Pakistan)  [2011]  UKUT
    00351, which the judge properly had regard to at paragraph  32  of  the
    determination.

Remaking the Decision

28. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing the appeal of the Respondent Secretary  of  State
    for the following reason.  The Appellant does not have a valid  English
    language test certificate such that there has  been  a  change  in  the
    circumstances of the Appellant in consequence of which the Secretary of
    State was entitled to cancel the Appellant's leave to enter  or  remain
    in the UK.  It is, of course, on  this  basis,  entirely  open  to  the
    Appellant to apply to re-sit the English language  test  again  and  to
    subsequently thereafter apply for leave to enter.  Whether  or  not  he
    does so is a matter entirely for him.

Notice of Decision

29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  by
    the Secretary of State is allowed to the extent that there has  been  a
    change in the circumstances of the Appellant since the leave was  given
    and that paragraph 321A(i) has been met by the Respondent Secretary  of
    State.  For the avoidance of doubt, the Respondent Secretary  of  State
    has not been able to show that the Appellant made false representations
    or submitted false documents.

30. This appeal is allowed by the Respondent Secretary of State.

31. No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        14th May 2015

