

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: IA/28060/2014




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 2nd June 2015                             |On: 5th June 2015            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                              Mr Muhammad Umar
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Brown, Counsel instructed by Arshed & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                             DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan date of  birth  26th  September
    1987. He appeals with permission[1]  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Graham) to dismiss his  appeal  against  a  refusal  to
    issue him with a residence card confirming his right  of  residence  as
    the spouse of an EEA national.


 2. The only matter in issue before the Judge was whether  the  Appellant's
    wife, Slovak national Ms Zuzana Pulkova, was exercising treaty  rights.
    It was the Appellant's case, at the date of application  that  she  was
    working, in both a self-employed and employed capacity  as  a  cleaner.
    The appeal was determined on the papers, and at that time the Appellant
    had, it is accepted, submitted a large bundle of documents  in  support
    of his appeal.  On appeal he contended that his wife continued to  work
    as a cleaner, but also that she was employed as a  carer  for  Trafford
    Metropolitan Borough Council (MBC).

 3. The appeal was listed on the 9th October 2014. At  paragraph  10-12  of
    the determination the First-tier Tribunal considers the evidence of  Ms
    Pulkova's employment with Trafford MBC.   It  is  found  that  she  had
    submitted a "solitary payslip" relating to September 2014 and in  those
    circumstances had not shown  that  she  continued  to  be  employed  by
    Trafford MBC. It was accepted that she had worked as a cleaner  between
    September 2013 and April 2014 but  since  there  was  "no  more  recent
    evidence" of her economic activity after April 2014, it  could  not  be
    demonstrated that she was exercising treaty rights at the date  of  the
    in-country appeal.

 4. It is now contended by the Appellant, and accepted by  the  Respondent,
    that the bundle before the First-tier  Tribunal  did  in  fact  contain
    evidence of economic activity that post-dated April 2014.   There  were
    a number of invoices for cleaning of the same type which  had  led  the
    Tribunal to accept the self-employment prior to April 2014; there was a
    receipt for payment of Class 2 National Insurance  Contributions  dated
    20th July 2014  and  Barclays  Bank  statements  showing  regular  cash
    deposits right up to September 2014, when  the  documents  were  lodged
    along with the grounds of appeal.   It follows that  the  Tribunal  did
    err in that it failed to have  regard  to  material  evidence  and  the
    decision must be set aside.

 5. Before me the Appellant and Ms Pulkova attended, and produced a  number
    of original documents showing  that  she  was,  and  continues  to  be,
    employed by Trafford  MBC  as  a  carer.  This  evidence  consisted  of
    original payslips, her P60 for the year ending  April  2015,  and  bank
    statements showing deposits corresponding to  her  payslips.  She  also
    produced her original invoice book showing the copy receipts for  money
    received to date in her part-time self-employment  as  a  cleaner.  She
    further relied on original  invoices,  stamped  as  paid  by  the  Post
    Office,  for  recent  payments  of  national  insurance  contributions.
    Having regard to all of the evidence before me I am satisfied  that  Ms
    Pulkova is exercising treaty rights.



    Decisions


 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and it
    is set aside.


 7. I re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by  allowing  it  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.
 8. I make no direction for anonymity because neither party  has  requested
    one and on the facts I do not consider such an order to be necessary.






                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               3rd June 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge JM Holmes on the
30th January 2015

