
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
Ia/28234/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Determination Promulgated       |
|On 14 March 2016                          | On 20 May 2016                  |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ARCHER

                                   Between

                              mr kamran khadim

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SecretARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr Seb Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Liddington) dismissing the appellant's appeal against a decision
    taken on 7 July 2014 to refuse to issue  a  residence  card  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the Regulations") as a  spouse  of
    an EEA national.



Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 4 November 1981.  He  is
    married to VG, a citizen of  Lithuania  born  in  1991.  The  appellant
    previously entered the UK as a Tier  4  student  with  leave  until  28
    February 2014 but his leave was curtailed on 15 February 2014 when  his
    college lost its sponsor licence. The current application was  made  on
    30 January 2014 after the parties were married on 15 September 2013.

 4. The Secretary of State accepted that the parties were married  but  the
    marriage   interviews   disclosed   significant   discrepancies.    The
    relationship was a marriage of convenience and therefore  fell  outside
    the Regulations.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Taylor House on 28 August 2015. He  was  represented  by  Mr
    Raja, Solicitor. The First-tier Tribunal found that the  appellant  did
    make  the  statements  contained  in  the  summary  of   the   marriage
    interviews. The witness statements failed to address the discrepancies.
    VG did not attend the hearing.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law by  not  requesting
    the full interview and  it  was  unduly  harsh  to  conclude  that  the
    marriage was one of convenience based on just 15 questions from a total
    of over 100. Numerous  requests  had  been  made  for  a  copy  of  the
    interview notes in full. The pages provided  were  only  those  showing
    inconsistent answers. The appellant and  VG  had  been  married  for  5
    months before his leave was curtailed and it was unfair to assume  that
    the appellant knew that the college licence had been  revoked  in  late
    2012.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on
    1 February 2016 on the basis that it was arguable that  the  judge  had
    acted unfairly in finding against the appellant on  the  basis  of  the
    marriage interviews when the wholly inadequate  reason  given  for  not
    faxing them to the Tribunal was that they were  too  long.  The  second
    ground was also arguable.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me. The appellant and his solicitors  were
    sent notice of the hearing in the Upper Tribunal on 18  February  2016.
    They failed to attend the hearing and no  reason  has  been  given  for
    their non-attendance. I decided to proceed to  hear  the  appeal  under
    rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  on  the
    basis that the parties had been notified of the hearing and that it was
    in the interests of justice to proceed in the absence of the  appellant
    and his representative.

Discussion

 9. Mr Kandola submitted that the judge was entitled to proceed without the
    full interview records but with a summary. The judge was right  in  law
    to continue because the appellant accepted the discrepancies; paragraph
    16 of the decision. There is no realistic prospect that the judge would
    have come to a different conclusion given that the EEA sponsor was  not
    present. That was indicative of a sham marriage. The parties have  also
    failed to attend the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing.  There  is  nothing  to
    suggest that this was  a  genuine  marriage.  The  appeal  fell  to  be
    dismissed.

10. The judge found at paragraph 15 of  the  decision  that  the  interview
    summary gave considerable detail about the discrepancies that arose  in
    respect of the first meeting, first and second dates of  the  appellant
    and VG, their ages and religion, details of  the  engagement  proposal,
    the surroundings of the address where  they  claim  to  live  together,
    travel to the wedding venue and details of the wedding plus  what  they
    had done on memorable dates and the previous Saturday. At paragraph 16,
    the judge found that the appellant confirmed in oral evidence that  the
    summary was accurate. At paragraph 17, the judge was fully  aware  that
    there were some 15 wrong or contradictory answers out of  over  100  in
    total. The appellant's case was not based  upon  unreliability  of  the
    summary but upon the low proportion of  inconsistent  answers  and  the
    fact that the appellant was very tired during the interview.

11. In the particular circumstances of this appeal, I find that  the  judge
    was entitled to consider the interview summary and  the  findings  made
    were properly open to the judge. The absence of VG at the oral  hearing
    was a further telling factor against the appellant.  I  find  that  the
    judge was further entitled to take into account the uncertainty of  the
    appellant's immigration status as at the date of  the  marriage  on  15
    September 2013. The judge considered the  appellant's  submission  that
    the fact that the appellant was granted 60 days to find a  new  college
    on 17 December 2013 indicated that the  marriage  was  genuine  because
    there was no attempt prior to then to rely upon the marriage.  However,
    the judge was not obliged to accept that submission and the finding  at
    paragraph 20 of the decision that the appellant must have known by  the
    date of the marriage that  he  was  no  longer  attending  college  was
    properly open to the judge  on  the  available  evidence.  No  material
    errors of law arise.

12. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal under the Regulations did not involve the making of an error  of
    law and its decision stands.



Decision

13. Consequently, I dismiss the appeal of the appellant.

Signed                          Date 18 May 2016

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Archer
