








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28023/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 18 January 2017               |On: 6 February 2017                      |
|                                  |                                         |

                                   Before
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between
                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Ms Yeshoda Thapa
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma, counsel, instructed by Hiren Patel
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as 'the secretary of state' and to  the
      respondent as 'the claimant'.


   2. The claimant is a national of Nepal, born on  31  December  1981.  Her
      appeal against the decision  of  the  respondent  dated  21  May  2015
      refusing her application to vary her leave to remain in the UK and  to
      remove her, was allowed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett  in  a
      decision promulgated on 5 July 2016.


   3. The claimant had been granted leave to enter the UK  on  24  September
      2009 as a Tier 4 (General) Student until 17 April 2011. That leave was
      extended on two occasions until 19 March 2016.


   4. The Judge noted at [3] that on 3 May  2014  she  applied  for  further
      leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant,  which  the
      claimant claimed was refused on 21 July 2015.  The  respondent  stated
      that she was granted leave until 19 March 2016 and  that  she  applied
      for further leave to remain on 9 January 2014 and that her  leave  was
      curtailed on 6 May 2014 to end on 5 May 2014.


   5. As a result of that curtailment the claimant made an application on  3
      May 2014 which was refused on 21 July 2015.


   6. In refusing her application  the  respondent  contended  that  in  her
      application dated 12 April 2013 she submitted a TOEIC certificate from
      Educational Testing Service (ETS) but ETS  subsequently  declared  the
      test to be invalid on account of the presence of a proxy tester.


   7. Judge Grimmett referred to the recent decision of the  Upper  Tribunal
      in SM and Qadir v SSHD (ETS - evidence - burden of proof) [2016]  UKUT
      00229 (IAC). The President concluded on consideration of the  evidence
      of the respondent's witnesses, Miss Collings and Mr Millington and the
      evidence of Dr Harrison, that although they had reservations about the
      strength  and  quality  of  the  respondent's  evidence,  it   was   a
      comparatively  modest  threshold  and  he  was  satisfied   that   the
      respondent had discharged the burden of showing sufficient evidence of
      deception to discharge the burden that deception had been used in that
      application.


   8. Judge Grimmett noted that she only had the evidence of Ms Collings and
      Mr Millington before her as the report of Dr  Harrison  had  not  been
      served on the claimant. She declined to accept that statement  at  the
      date of the hearing.


   9. Judge Grimmett  was  accordingly  not  satisfied  that  the  documents
      produced showed that the  respondent  had  discharged  the  evidential
      burden on the basis of two reports, neither of  which  indicated  what
      this particular claimant is said to have done wrong.


  10. Even if she had been satisfied that the respondent had discharged  the
      burden, she was satisfied that the claimant had shown that her English
      language proficiency was sufficient to enable her to have obtained the
      scores that she did [10].


  11. She noted at [10] that the claimant has been in  the  UK  since  2009.
      That by itself would not show that she was  able  to  obtain  the  5.5
      overall score she did in the "IELTS" test. However,  she  produced  an
      undated certificate showing that she attended a three month  intensive
      English course at the London College of Commerce and  that  by  itself
      was not helpful as it was undated.


  12. She noted that there was however a City and Guilds  certificate  dated
      19 June 2014 showing that the claimant achieved a first class pass  in
      International Spoken ESOL - Communicator. She obtained  an  integrated
      graduate diploma in Business Management and Marketing although failing
      the International Marketing  section.  She  passed  the  Business  Law
      section and achieved a merit  in  January  2013.  She  had  previously
      obtained other qualifications from the same college in  2012  although
      she had not passed all the exams she had taken  in  the  UK.  She  has
      however continued to study throughout the time, and the  teaching  had
      been in English [10].


  13. Bearing in mind the  certificate  in  English  that  she  had  already
      obtained in the UK, her study in the UK and the length of time she had
      been here, Judge Grimmett was satisfied at [11],  that  it  is  likely
      that she would have achieved the  pass  that  she  did  in  the  IELTS
      examination which took into account her  evidence  that  the  claimant
      gave before her which was given "in clear English ."


  14. She was therefore 'not satisfied'  that  the  claimant  had  used  any
      deception in obtaining the result in the IELTS examination [12].


  15. Her application had also failed as the college lost  its  Confirmation
      of Acceptance for Studies (CAS) and it was not listed on  the  Tier  4
      sponsor register when checked in July 2015.


  16. The Judge noted that the claimant had not  been  granted  60  days  in
      which to find an alternative establishment. It appears that  that  was
      because  the  respondent  considered  that  the  claimant   had   used
      deception. As the Judge was not satisfied that she had used deception,
      she found that she was entitled under the respondent's policy to a  60
      day period in order to enable her to find an alternative course [15].


  17. On that basis the appeal was allowed.


  18. On  7  December  2016  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rimington  granted  the
      secretary of state permission to appeal.


  19. She found that the Judge made no reference to the spreadsheet from ETS
      which noted the invalidity of the TOIEC test and which was included in
      the respondent's bundle before the Tribunal. That the evidence was not
      considered constituted an arguable error.


  20. In addition, Judge Rimmington noted  that  Judge  Grimmett  took  into
      account evidence of a first class pass in  International  Spoken  ESOL
      Communicator. That evidence would appear to post-date the  TOIEC  test
      in dispute.


The appeal


  21. Mr Clarke submitted that there was  an  ETS  spreadsheet.  Accordingly
      there  was  sufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the  respondent  had
      discharged the eviential burden relating to deception as  set  out  in
      Qadir. The City and Guilds certificate was dated 19  June  2014  which
      post dated the ETS certificate.


  22. He submitted  that  the  Judge  has  given  an  inadequately  reasoned
      decision. It might have  been  convenient  or  opportunistic  for  the
      claimant to have obtained the certificate via a proxy.


  23. In reply, Mr Sharma referred to the response to the notice  of  appeal
      at pages 86-89. He submitted that the grounds seeking permission  were
      'essentially based on the issue as to whether the Judge considered the
      ETS spreadsheet and extract  which  was  at  E1  of  the  respondent's
      bundle'.


  24. However, the spreadsheet extract was not accompanied  by  any  witness
      statement to 'corroborate'  how  that  particular  piece  of  evidence
      proved that the  claimant  used  deception.  The  author  of  the  ETS
      spreadsheet extract was not disclosed. It was not disclosed whether it
      was the evidence of the secretary of state or  evidence  of  the  ETS.
      Accordingly in the absence of any explanatory witness  statement  with
      regard to the alleged spreadsheet, it was  left  to  the  Tribunal  to
      infer its contents.


  25. Moreover, even if the Judge had been satisfied that the  secretary  of
      state had discharged the  burden  of  proof,  the  Judge  nevertheless
      concluded that the  claimant  did  not  use  deception  based  on  the
      explanation that was provided by her.


  26. Further, even if it were  to  be  accepted  that  the  Judge  did  not
      consider the ETS spreadsheet while  deciding  the  initial  burden  of
      proof on the secretary of state, it would not have changed the overall
      outcome of the appeal.


  27. Mr Sharma also pointed out that the hearing was initially  listed  for
      11 April 2016, which was then adjourned to 27  June  2016.  There  had
      been ample opportunity to provide evidence,  which  the  secretary  of
      state still failed to produce. She 'unsuccessfully attempted to adduce
      last minute evidence'.


  28. Mr Sharma referred to the  claimant's  witness  statement  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal. She gave evidence at the hearing. She set  out  a
      positive case that she sat the TOEIC English language test herself  on
      19 February 2013 and described that she travelled to Canada Water area
      herself.


  29. She had done quite a few English language tests in the past.  She  was
      confident to face that test. She set out various details  as  to  what
      transpired on the day including passing  through  a  reception  and  a
      third floor where they checked her ID  and  her  appointment  booking.
      They took a photograph of  her  and  registered  her  details  in  the
      system. She was held in a waiting area and was told to go into a  test
      hall a short while later. She was assigned to a  desk  in  the  middle
      row. She completed the parts of her test there. She was  surprised  to
      hear that the Home Office stated that her test had  been  fraudulently
      obtained.


  30. She referred to the fact that she  had  passed  her  English  language
      IELTS test in 2008. She has studied at various institutions in the  UK
      after her arrival in 2009. All the courses were taught in English. She
      has never had any problem with studying in English in the UK. She  had
      thus spent seven years here and has studied in  several  colleges  and
      institutes. She has never had any reason to have a proxy taker for any
      exam.


  31. He submitted that the reference by the Judge at [11] and [12]  to  the
      'IELTS examination' was a typographical error. The Judge  stated  that
      she was satisfied that it is likely that she would have  achieved  the
      pass that she did in  the  TOEIC  exam.  She  took  into  account  her
      evidence before the Tribunal which was given in clear English. She was
      therefore not satisfied that the claimant had used  any  deception  in
      obtaining the result in the TOEIC examination.


      Assessment


  32. Judge Grimmett was aware of the contention by the secretary of  state,
      namely that in her application dated 12 April 2013  the  claimant  had
      submitted a TOEIC certificate from ETS which subsequently declared the
      test to be invalid on account of  the  alleged  presence  of  a  proxy
      tester.


  33. It is unfortunate that the Judge referred to this as  an  IELTS  test.
      However, it is plain from the context in which reference to the  IELTS
      is made, that she in fact intended to refer to the TOEIC examination.


  34. The claimant gave evidence before the Tribunal, stating that  she  sat
      the test herself. The Judge directed herself in  accordance  with  the
      judgment in SM and Qadir, supra.


  35. Notwithstanding the fact that the case was adjourned for a significant
      period, the secretary of state had still not served the report  of  Dr
      Harrison in accordance with the Tribunal's directions.  That  evidence
      was accordingly not admitted on the day of hearing. There had been  no
      explanation, reasonable or otherwise, given for the failure to  comply
      with directions.  On  the  basis  of  the  two  reports  provided  the
      secretary of state had not discharged the burden of proof [8].


  36. Even assuming that the burden has been met the Judge took into account
      evidence that was put forward by the claimant herself,  and  concluded
      that her English language proficiency was sufficient to enable her  to
      have obtained the scores she did.


  37. That evidence related not only to the actual taking of that  test  and
      the circumstances on the date of the examination but  also  took  into
      account the various certificates  in  English  that  she  had  already
      obtained and the courses that she had studied. Those courses  were  in
      English.


  38. These findings were based on  the  evidence  before  her.  Whilst,  as
      submitted by Mr Clarke, there may have been reasons why  a  person  in
      the claimant's position would have found it convenient to use a  proxy
      taker, the Judge was satisfied on the evidence as  a  whole  that  the
      claimant had shown that she obtained the  necessary  English  language
      qualification following the examination which she undertook.






      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any material error on a point of law. It shall accordingly stand.


      No anonymity direction is made.










      Signed                             Date  3 February 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer





