
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/28900/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 September 2017                  |On 25 September 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                            ms dora asiedu farkye
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara of Counsel instructed by Jade Law
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Miles promulgated on 10 January 2017, brought with  the  permission  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford granted on 24 July 2017.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born  on  23  November  1976.   She
    first entered the United Kingdom in April 2004 with leave as a visitor.
     She overstayed her leave, and seemingly did nothing to regularise  her
    immigration position until she made an application for a Residence Card
    as the family member of an EEA national  on  30  September  2009.   The
    application was based on her marriage to  Mr  Jedson  Joel  Dos  Santos
    Carvalho, a national of Portugal.  The  Appellant  was  issued  with  a
    Residence Card on 10 March 2010 valid for five  years  until  10  March
    2015.  The marital  relationship  broke  down,  and  the  marriage  was
    dissolved on 20 May 2013.  In October 2013 the  Appellant  applied  for
    right of residence following the dissolution of the marriage which  was
    refused.  However, on 11 March 2015 the Appellant applied for permanent
    residence as a  family  member  with  a  retained  right  of  residence
    pursuant to regulation 10(5)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.  The  Respondent  refused  the  application  by
    decision dated 12 August 2015.


3.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


4.    At  the  commencement  of  the  appeal  process  there  was  only  one
    outstanding  issue:  the  sufficiency  of  the  evidence  provided   to
    establish that Mr Carvalho was exercising Treaty rights at the date  of
    the dissolution of the marital relationship.  This issue was dealt with
    by way of Directions issued by the Tribunal at an adjourned hearing  on
    17 August 2016: as may be seen at paragraphs 10-13 of the  Decision  of
    Judge Miles the materials obtained from HMRC in  consequence  of  those
    Directions were sufficient to meet the  outstanding  concern  that  had
    been raised by the Respondent.  Judge Miles expressed himself to be  so
    satisfied at paragraph 13.


5.   Accordingly it may be seen that the Appellant had met the  case  raised
    against her by the Respondent.  However Judge Miles  raised  a  further
    point not relied upon by the Respondent in relation to  the  status  of
    the marriage between the Appellant and Mr Carvalho.


6.   It was apparent that the marriage had been what is sometimes  called  a
    'proxy' marriage contracted in Ghana in the  absence  of  both  of  the
    parties to the marriage.  Judge Miles raised this  issue  with  Counsel
    appearing for the Appellant on that occasion.  (It is to be noted  that
    there was no representative for the Respondent  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.) Indeed Judge Miles went on to determine the  case  adversely
    for the Appellant by reference in particular to  the  case  of  TA  and
    Others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316.   In  essence  Judge
    Miles identified that there was no evidence  to  show  that  the  proxy
    marriage contracted in Ghana had  been  recognised  by  the  Portuguese
    authorities, or was otherwise recognised as valid under Portuguese  law
    - Portugal, of course, being the country of nationality of Mr Carvalho.
     The appeal was dismissed on that sole basis.


7.   The Appellant made an application for permission to  appeal  which  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford on 24 July 2017.  Judge  Ford
    recognised that the line  of  authority  in  Kareem  and  TA  had  been
    overtaken by the Court of Appeal decision in Awuku v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 178, and granted permission  to
    appeal on the basis that this indicated an arguable material  error  of
    law.


8.   In a Rule 24 response dated 10 August 2017 the Respondent  acknowledged
    the effect of Awuku, stated that the  Respondent  did  not  oppose  the
    Appellant's application for  permission  to  appeal,  and  invited  the
    Tribunal to consider the case by applying the ratio in Awuku.


9.   I note that the case of Awuku was heard on 28 February  2017,  and  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal handed down on 23 March 2017.  To  that
    extent it postdated the hearing before Judge Miles which took place  on
    3 January 2017.  However it is also to be noted that at paragraph 2  of
    the decision in Awuku it is recorded that  at  an  earlier  hearing  in
    proceedings before the  Court  of  Appeal,  on  6  December  2016,  the
    Secretary of State had notified the court  that  she  had  changed  her
    position and invited the court to allow the appeal on  the  basis  that
    the decisions in Kareem and TA were  wrongly  decided.   It  may  be  a
    matter of speculation, but perhaps  if  there  had  been  a  Presenting
    Officer attending before Judge Miles, upon the Judge raising the Kareem
    issue the Presenting Officer may have been able to  indicate  that  the
    Secretary of State had conceded this line of authority before the Court
    of Appeal.


10.  Be that as it may, the Court of Appeal necessarily has  overturned  the
    line of authority applied by Judge Miles.   In  those  circumstances  I
    have no hesitation in concluding that Judge Miles' Decision must be set
    aside for error of law.


11.  It follows that the decision in the appeal requires to be remade.


12.  The effect of the decision in  Awuku  is  that  an  evaluation  of  the
    validity of a marriage is to be assessed by reference to the lex  loci,
    that is to say by reference to the law of  the  country  in  which  the
    marriage took place and not by reference to the law of some  other  EEA
    state.  In other words if domestically this  country  acknowledges  the
    validity of a proxy marriage in  Ghana,  then  that  is  sufficient  to
    establish a marriage for the purposes of the EEA Regulations.   In  the
    context of this case, this is precisely what the Secretary of State had
    previously done in granting a Residence Card to the Appellant in  2010:
    the marriage to Mr Carvalho was accepted  to  be  a  marriage  for  the
    purposes of the Regulations because it was a valid marriage  in  Ghana.
    Consistent with her position in 2010, the Respondent did not raise  any
    issue in respect of the validity of the marriage in the context of  the
    current decision letter.  Ms Isherwood  today  does  not  indicate  any
    document or any other material in which any question as to the validity
    of the Appellant's marriage has  been  raised  or  articulated  by  the
    Secretary of State, nor is there anything apparent in the case of Awuku
    that would suggest - notwithstanding the overturning of the Kareem  and
    TA line of authority - there might be some other  reason  for  doubting
    the validity of this marriage, previously recognised by  the  Secretary
    of State.


13.  In all those circumstances I find that the Appellant  has,  by  way  of
    the materials presented from HMRC pursuant to the Directions before the
    First-tier Tribunal, satisfactorily addressed the one  issue  that  was
    standing in her way of obtaining a Permanent Residence Card. The appeal
    is allowed accordingly.


Notice of Decision

14.  The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.


15.  I remake the decision in the appeal. The appeal is allowed.


16.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.



Signed:                                 Date: 24 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and in all of the circumstances make  a  full  fee
award in favour of the Appellant.

Signed:                                 Date: 24 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
(qua a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal)
