
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/28787/2013

                                        IA/28788/2013

                                        IA/28789/2013

                                        IA/28791/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 4 April 2014                          |On 10th April 2014        |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between

                      Mrs NIRALIBAHEN BIMALKUMAR PATEL
                         Mr KUMAR BUPENDRABHAI PATEL
                        MASTER DEEP BIMALKUMAR PATEL
                        MASTER VIYAN BIMALKUMAR PATEL
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, Counsel
      (Instructed by Farani Javid Solicitors LLP))
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



      Introduction


      1.    The Appellants in these linked cases  appealed  with  permission
           granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Goldstein  on  4  March  2014
           against the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  S  Aziz
           who had dismissed the Appellant's  appeals  in  a  determination
           promulgated on 6 January 2014.


      2.    The Appellants are nationals of India, a family, who  after  the
           parents had overstayed, and had two sons born  to  them  in  the
           United Kingdom, had sought Indefinite Leave to Remain on Article
           8 ECHR grounds.  Removal Directions had been made  against  them
           by the Respondent when their applications were refused.


      3.    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by  Upper
           Tribunal Judge  Goldstein  (permission  to  appeal  having  been
           refused in the First-tier Tribunal)  because,  he  said  without
           wishing to raise the Appellants' hopes, he  considered  that  it
           was arguable that the judge  had  (a)  made  errors  as  in  his
           approach to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and (b) as
           to the proportionality of removal. The Respondent indicated that
           the onwards appeals were opposed.




      Submissions - error of law


      4.    Mr Iqbal for the Appellants relied on  the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal on which permission to appeal had been granted.  The only
           issue before the judge had been Article 8 ECHR.  In summary,  Mr
           Iqbal submitted that the determination showed that  the  judge's
           approach to Article  8  ECHR  was  erroneous.   There  had  been
           insufficient attention to the position of the  children  and  to
           their private lives.  They had lived in the United  Kingdom  all
           their lives.  The distinction which the judge had  made  between
           the relative importance of respective periods  of  7  years  was
           unfounded. The determination was inadequate and  should  be  set
           aside for material error of law, and the appeals reheard.


      5.    Mr Tufan for the Respondent contended that there was no material
           error of law.  The determination was thorough and well  reasoned
           in all respects.  EX.1 of the Immigration Rules was inapplicable
           because neither child had spent 7 years in the United Kingdom as
           at the date of the application.  Any policies of  the  Secretary
           of State about 7 years residence were long  gone.   The  parents
           were educated in India and it was reasonable for them and  their
           family to return there.  The Appellant's arguments  amounted  at
           best to no more than disagreement with the  decision  which  had
           been properly reached.  The judge had dealt  with  the  evidence
           and was entitled to reach his best interests and proportionality
           findings.


      6.    Mr Iqbal submitted by way  of  reply  that  section  55  of  the
           Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  had  not  been
           complied with.  The judge should have considered the position as
           at the date  of  the  hearing.   It  was  unreasonable  for  the
           children to be removed to India.




      No error of law finding


      7.    The tribunal reserved its determination which now follows.   The
           tribunal finds that the judge had not fallen into error of  law.
           The  experienced  judge  had  heard  and  seen  the  Appellants'
           witnesses, and reached conclusions which were open to him.


      8.    The tribunal accepts the submissions  made  by  Mr  Tufan.   The
           determination is well structured, careful and  thorough  in  all
           respects.  The judge cited all relevant current authorities  and
           applied them.


      9.    At paragraph 67  of  the  determination  the  judge  gave  close
           attention to the  children's  position.   He  quoted  accurately
           without direct attribution (which was  not  required)  from  the
           leading case of E-A  (Article  8  -  best  interests  of  child)
           Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315 (IAC).  He was entitled to  find  that
           the period of time which the children had spent  in  the  United
           Kingdom was not conclusive as to the reasonableness of  removal.
           He gave sustainable reasons why both children could go to  India
           with their parents: see, e.g. [88 to 89].  He  gave  sustainable
           reasons why the children could adapt readily.  It is  now  trite
           law  that  their  best   interests   are   not   the   paramount
           consideration in the evaluation of proportionality.


      10.   The judge's discussion  of  proportionality  and  the  balancing
           exercise he conducted was against the legitimate objective under
           Article 8.2 ECHR which  is  usually  summarised  as  immigration
           control.  The judge applied EB (Kosovo)  [2008]  UKHL  41,  took
           into account delay by the Respondent and gave proper reasons for
           his finding that the parents' immigration history was very poor.
            He was entitled to find that the parents could and should  have
           left the United Kingdom voluntarily.


      11.   It has to be said that the grant of permission to appeal by  the
           Upper Tribunal was generous and failed to reflect  the  care  in
           preparation and  depth  of  reasoning  which  the  determination
           demonstrates.  The tribunal finds that there was no error of law
           and that there is no basis  for  interfering  with  the  judge's
           decision.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making  of  an
error on a point of law and stands unchanged

      Signed                                  Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




      TO THE RESPONDENT
      FEE AWARD


      The appeal was dismissed so there could be no fee award


      Signed                                  Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
