
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal Number: IA/28045/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 1 April 2014        On 8 August 2014
                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                           Phyllis Muthoni Kariuki
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Mannan of Counsel  instructed  by  Springfield
                       Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Monro promulgated on 6 February 2014,  allowing  Ms  Kariuki's  appeal
      against the Respondent's decision dated 21 June 2013 to refuse to vary
      leave to remain in the UK and to remove Ms Kariuki pursuant to section
      47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


   2. Although in the proceedings before me the Secretary of  State  is  the
      appellant,  and  Ms  Kariuki  is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of
      consistency with the proceedings  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  I
      shall hereafter refer to Ms Kariuki as the Appellant and the Secretary
      of State as the Respondent.


Background

   3. The Appellant is a national of Kenya born on 24 April  1967.  She  was
      granted leave to enter the United Kingdom as a visitor on  28  January
      2013 valid until 14 May 2013. On 9 May 2013 the Appellant applied  for
      leave to remain as the wife of a British citizen, Mr Louis Cohen.  The
      Respondent refused the Appellant's application for reasons set out  in
      a 'reasons for refusal letter' dated 21 June 2013,  and  a  Notice  of
      Immigration Decision, which also communicated the section  47  removal
      decision, of the same date was served on 23 June 2013.


   4. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Monro
      dismissed the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  but  allowed  the
      appeal pursuant to Article 8 of the ECHR for reasons set  out  in  her
      determination.


   5. The Respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which
      was granted on 25 February 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan.


Error of Law

   6. Having considered  the  submissions  of  the  representatives  I  have
      reached the conclusion that the Judge erred in three respects.


   7. I  accept  the  substance  of  the  Respondent's  principal  basis  of
      challenge  -  that  the  Judge  had  erred  in  her  approach  to  the
      Appellant's precarious immigration status. The precarious nature of an
      applicant's immigration status - and a couple's  knowledge  thereof  -
      are relevant and proper considerations to weigh in  the  balance  when
      considering the merits of Article 8: see e.g. Hayat  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
      1054 at paragraph 51.


   8. However, Judge Monro stated no more than this  on  the  subject:  "The
      respondent may submit that the appellant should not have entered  into
      a serious relationship knowing that her status was uncertain; however,
      she did so..." (paragraph 26).  In my judgement that is an  inadequate
      way of dealing with the issue: indeed  it  avoids  engaging  with  the
      issue of precarious status and inappropriately avoids according it any
      weight - thereby rendering it irrelevant rather than relevant.


   9. Further, in my judgement, the Judge erred in not identifying  that  an
      element of 'exceptionality' was required to succeed under Article 8 in
      circumstances where the Rules were not met. Although the  Judge  cited
      case law in context of the two stage process (Izuazu and Nagre  -  see
      determination at paragraphs 22  and  23),  and  expressed  herself  as
      satisfied that it was appropriate to conduct an Article  8  assessment
      beyond the scope of the express wording of the Rules  (paragraph  23),
      she  nowhere  identified  the  parameters  of  the  ultimate  test   -
      essentially whether there were exceptional circumstances  which  would
      result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  if  the  Appellant  were
      removed from the UK - and did not make any specific finding as to  the
      exceptional or compelling nature of the case.


  10. Yet further, although the Judge identified that this was essentially a
      Chikwamba type case, and cited passages from Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40,
      (determination at paragraphs 27 and 28), she did not explain how  such
      passages  applied   in   the   context   of   the   particular   case,
      notwithstanding that the passages cited from the speech of Lord  Brown
      of Eaton-under-Heywood (which the Judge wrongly attributed to Baroness
      Hale and also contain misnumbered paragraphs) identified that in  some
      cases it will be reasonable and proportionate to expect  an  applicant
      to seek entry clearance from abroad. Judge Monro gave no  reasons  for
      her decision as to why proportionality favoured the Appellant in  this
      regard.


  11. In the circumstances I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      erred in law in her consideration of  the  Appellant's  case  and  her
      determination must be set aside.


Re-making the Decision

  12. Although the Judge erred in her evaluation of proportionality for  the
      reasons identified above, there is no criticism made  of  her  primary
      findings of fact so far as they go. In all  of  the  circumstances  it
      seemed to me that this was a case where the  decision  in  the  appeal
      could be remade  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Mr  Mannan,  after  taking
      instructions, confirmed that the Appellant wished to proceed with  the
      appeal before the Upper Tribunal.


  13. Accordingly I heard evidence from the Appellant and from Mr  Cohen.  I
      then heard submissions from the representatives. I have kept a careful
      note of the evidence and submissions in my record of proceedings which
      is on file. I have had regard to all  of  the  supporting  documentary
      evidence, which is a matter of record on file, and everything that was
      said at the hearing in reaching my determination.  (In  this  context,
      whilst there has been some delay in finalising this  determination,  I
      made preparatory notes at an early stage and have had the  benefit  of
      the record of proceedings: I do not consider that the passage of  time
      has impacted upon recall of the issues, evidence, and arguments.)


  14. As noted above it is unnecessary to disturb the  primary  findings  of
      fact of the First-tier Tribunal: in particular that this was a genuine
      marital relationship, and the acceptance - indeed embracement - of the
      Appellant by Mr Cohen's family.


  15. It continues to be the case that the Appellant does not  dispute  that
      she does meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules: paragraph  E-
      LTRP.2.1(a) of Appendix FM stipulates that an applicant must not be in
      the  UK  as  a  visitor.  As  regards  paragraph  276ADE(iii)-(v)  the
      Appellant does not meet any of the qualifying periods, and in  respect
      of (vi) it is not disputed  that  the  Appellant  retains  family  and
      business ties with Kenya (see further below).


  16. I pause to note that as regards the financial  requirements,  although
      Mr Cohen's employment is limited, the Appellant would benefit from the
      more relaxed requirements consequent upon Mr Cohen being in receipt of
      Disability  Living  Allowance  (E-LTRP.3.3(a)(i),  and  see  also   E-
      ECP.3.3(a)(i)).  Indeed  Mr  Mannan  acknowledged  in  the  course  of
      submissions that it appeared that  the  Appellant  would  satisfy  the
      requirements of entry clearance were she to have to apply from  abroad
      - although he rhetorically questioned how long such  a  process  might
      take.


  17. The Respondent did not dispute before me that this  is  essentially  a
      Chikwamba type case. It is unrealistic to expect Mr Cohen to  relocate
      to Kenya given in  general  terms  his  age  and  strength  of  family
      connections in the UK, and more  specifically  that  his  anxiety  and
      panic attacks  prevent  him  from  flying:  see  per  Judge  Monro  at
      paragraphs 21 and 26, (although of  course  flying  is  not  the  only
      method of travel). Accordingly the real issue  is  whether  Article  8
      would be breached by the Appellant returning to  Kenya  to  pursue  an
      application for entry clearance.


  18. In this context I make the following observations and findings:

(i) In oral evidence before me both the Appellant and  Mr  Cohen  emphasised
      concern over  the  possible  delay  and/or  failure  to  secure  entry
      clearance as a spouse were the Appellant to return to Kenya  for  that
      purpose. Indeed this was the main objection raised  to  following  the
      route expected under the scheme of immigration control represented  by
      the Immigration Rules. Both made reference to people they knew who had
      found themselves 'stranded' and denied visas - a  couple  of  Kenyans,
      some Nigerians and some Jamaicans. As the Appellant repeatedly stated,
      they did not wish to take a chance.

      (ii) Whilst subjectively understandable, there  is  no  evidence  that
      the concerns expressed in this regard are objectively well-founded. As
      noted above, Mr Mannan accepted that on the face of it  the  Appellant
      appeared to meet the requirements for entry clearance. Further,  there
      was no evidence of any undue delay  in  processing  applications  from
      Kenya. I do not accept that the essentially anecdotal evidence  (which
      is in any event  devoid  of  any  particularisation  of  the  specific
      circumstances of any of the referenced individuals) is  persuasive  of
      either a lack of prospective success for the Appellant if required  to
      make an application for entry clearance, or likely  significant  delay
      in processing an  application  by  the  Appellant.  Indeed  given  the
      acceptance of the relationship by the  Respondent  -  and  indeed  the
      findings in this regard made by the First-tier Tribunal - much of  the
      application should be processed readily and without controversy.

      (iii) Ultimately the Appellant's and Mr Cohen's reluctance  to  submit
      themselves to the inherent  uncertainty  of  the  application  process
      cannot in my judgement sound with any material significance - far less
      be a determinative factor - in the absence of  any  adequate  evidence
      that the system does  not  operate  fairly.  Such  uncertainty  as  is
      engendered - which is inherent in any system involving  a  process  of
      application, evaluation, and decision - cannot  in  itself  provide  a
      justification for by-passing the  established  system  of  immigration
      control.

      (iv) The Appellant and  Mr  Cohen  have  also  made  reference  to  Mr
      Cohen's state of health. Supporting evidence was provided by way of  a
      GP's letter (Appellant's bundle page 74), and the First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge made comments and findings accordingly (paragraphs 21 and 26). I
      note that the GP refers to 'blackouts' as matters in the past: "He has
      fainting episodes as well in the past". In any event, as  pointed  out
      by Mr Wilding Mr Cohen has coped previously without the support of the
      Appellant, and there is no evidential basis to consider that he  would
      be unlikely to cope again during any period of the Appellant's absence
      - notwithstanding the element of uncertainty and concomitant worry  as
      to if, and when, he might be reunited with his partner.

      (v) In this context I acknowledge that previously  Mr  Cohen  had  had
      the advantage of receiving assistance and care from a person  who  had
      also been a lodger  -  and  that  such  immediate  assistance  is  not
      presently available to him were the Appellant to quit the UK.  However
      - whilst I  accept  that  there  is  a  difference  between  receiving
      practical care from a carer and receiving love and practical care from
      a spouse or partner - I find on a balance  of  probabilities  that  Mr
      Cohen would have available to him adequate care to meet his particular
      needs in the absence of the Appellant.  I  observe  Disability  Living
      Allowance is paid to him for the very reason of assisting in his  care
      needs. Moreover he  has  children  who  I  find  may  offer  help  and
      assistance. When asked why his children could not help he replied that
      they had families; that may be so but I am  not  persuaded  that  they
      could not between them provide  some  support  on  a  temporary  basis
      during any absence of the Appellant.

      (vi)  Two  other  matters  are,  in  my  judgement,  significant.  The
      Appellant continues to maintain a business in Kenya; and she has a  10
      year old son in Kenya. She said her son  had  been  a  school  boarder
      since the age of 7 so she was used to not seeing  him  for  protracted
      periods - he would be at school for 3 months at  a  time;  necessarily
      this in no way has weakened the mother/child bond, and when  asked  if
      she did not want to see him she answered "Of course I do". As  regards
      her business this I was told that this was currently  administered  by
      the Appellant's sister - with whom the Appellant's son  stays  out  of
      term time. Although the Appellant has now  given  up  her  own  rented
      property in Kenya, she acknowledged  that  she  could  stay  with  her
      sister, albeit this was not ideal given her sister had her own family.



      (vii) Whilst I accept that it is the  Appellant's  ambition  that  her
      son join her and Mr Cohen in due course in the UK - and Mr Cohen spoke
      of the wish to adopt him - I find it is more likely than not that were
      the Appellant to be granted leave to remain she would then  visit  her
      son in Kenya before such an eventuality. In this context it is  to  be
      remembered that he is still of relatively tender age, and when he last
      saw his mother it would have been with the expectation that she  would
      be returning to Kenya after a short visit to  the  UK.  I  acknowledge
      that Mr Cohen expressed reluctance when asked if the  Appellant  would
      go back to Kenya if she secured status in the UK, saying that  he  did
      not want to be parted from her for any length of  time,  and  that  he
      would not like it if she went to visit her  son.  However,  I  do  not
      accept that on reflection he  would  stand  in  the  Appellant's  way.
      Moreover, in my judgement, it is inevitable that  both  the  Appellant
      and Mr Cohen have contemplated the reality of  such  a  visit  by  the
      Appellant and  therefore  have  recognised  the  likely  necessity  of
      spending some time apart - although in this context I acknowledge  the
      different nature of a period apart spent with the security of a  leave
      to be resumed in the UK, in contrast to the  uncertainty  of  awaiting
      the outcome of an entry clearance application.

      (viii) In general terms, outside the concept of an arranged  marriage,
      any couple in love seeking to marry will inevitably  have  discussions
      about their  prospective  married  life,  and  such  discussions  will
      inevitably involve consideration of matters beyond  the  romantic  and
      will include some consideration of where will be the marital home.  If
      one or other or both of the prospective parties  to  the  marriage  is
      subject to immigration  control  then  necessarily  that  will  add  a
      further dimension to such discussions - particularly in the context of
      where the couple may live.  If  they  think  they  may  like  to  live
      together in the UK, then necessarily with reference to the Immigration
      Rules this will add a particular further dimension. In this case it is
      acknowledged that just such discussions  were  had  and  there  was  a
      recognition of the expectation that the  Appellant  should  return  to
      Kenya - but nonetheless it  was  decided  that  solicitors  should  be
      consulted and the  instructions  in  due  course  given  to  make  the
      application that is the foundation of these proceedings. The Appellant
      and her husband went into the  marriage,  and  made  the  application,
      knowing full well the possible outcome. They must  be  taken  to  have
      married in that knowledge and to that extent to have factored  in  the
      possible adverse outcome, and therefore have  resigned  themselves  to
      the possibility of dealing with it if it eventuated. (If  not  -  they
      were reckless, and that should not now sound in their favour.)

      (ix) Ultimately, this is essentially a couple who would prefer not  to
      be apart for any time. That is not  an  exceptional  feature.  In  any
      event, both recognised that that might be forced upon them  by  reason
      of the Immigration Rules; and further both recognised - as  I  find  -
      that some future separation was likely even if only for the  Appellant
      to visit her son in Kenya.


  19. In all of the circumstances of this particular case I do not  consider
      that any exceptional or compelling factor has been shown as to why the
      Appellant's  circumstances  and  those  of  her  partner   should   be
      determined in  a  more  generous  way  than  the  Rules  would  allow.
      Accordingly, whilst there is no particular controversy in  respect  if
      the first four Razgar questions, I find  that  the  fifth  question  -
      proportionality, is not to  be  answered  in  the  Appellant's  favour
      bearing in  mind  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  a  fair  and
      consistent  system  of  immigration  control  primarily  through   the
      consistent application of  a  published  body  of  Rules  approved  by
      Parliament.


  20. There is present  here  nothing  of  comparable  circumstance  to  the
      presence of a child of the couple or  a  difficult  country  situation
      that  were  identified  in  Chikwamba  as  favourable  factors  in  an
      evaluation. I do not consider Mr Cohen's age or health to be similarly
      compelling.


  21. Accordingly, on the very particular facts of this case,  I  find  that
      the Immigration Rules provide a complete  answer  to  the  Appellant's
      case under Article 8. There are not exceptional circumstances in  this
      case which would result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  if  the
      Appellant were removed from the UK with the expectation that she  seek
      entry clearance from abroad


  22. I find that the Respondent's decision to refuse to vary leave  and  to
      remove the Appellant from the UK  does  not  breach  her,  or  anybody
      else's human rights.


Decision

  23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  an  error  of
      law and is set aside.



  24. I remake the decision in the appeal. The appeal is dismissed.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     6 August 2014

