
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28492/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11th June  2013                            |On 3rd July 2013             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before
                  SENIOR UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J PERKINS AND
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MISS Fatou Sanneh

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Quereshi , Counsel instructed by Stuart Karatas
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is a resumed hearing following a decision on 20.5.2013  by  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Black who found that there was an  error  of  law  in  a
    determination promulgated on 21 February 2013  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Elek (FTJ) in which she  allowed the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.
     Deputy Judge Black found that there  was  an  error  of  law  for  the
    following reasons.     The  FTJ  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  fully
    consider the public interest in her assessment of proportionality,  and
    failed to give proper  consideration  to  the  reasonableness  and  /or
    existence of sensible reasons to justify the return of the appellant to
    Gambia to make an  application  for  entry  clearance.   The  appellant
    overstayed for a period of 5 years during which she had  developed  her
    private life in her relationship with her partner.  The FTJ's  decision
    on the specific facts failed to place sufficient weight on  the  public
    interest argument that those persons remaining unlawfully in the UK and
    in breach of immigration rules ought, even where the interference is so
    limited as to amount to inconvenience, to be required to return to  the
    country of origin to make an application for entry clearance. She  made
    directions for a resumed hearing for submissions only  on  the  limited
    issue of the public interest in the reasonableness of requiring  return
    to Gambia.

2.   There was no challenge to the findings of fact made by  the  FTJ.   The
    appeal cannot be allowed with  reference  to  the  amended  immigration
    rules which purport, but fail, to encompass all matters relevant to  an
    assessment of the appellant's rights under article 8  of  the  European
    Convention of Human Rights (see  MF  (Article  8-  new  rules)  Nigeria
    [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC).)


Background


3.   The appellant at the First tier was Miss Sanneh. Her date of  birth  is
    26 February 1981 and she is a citizen of Gambia.   She arrived  in  the
    UK on 20 March 2007 with entry clearance as  a  domestic  worker  valid
    until 1 September 2007.  Following the expiry of her leave to enter she
    remained illegally in the UK and sought to regularise her  stay  on  18
    July 2011.  She applied for leave to remain outside of the  Immigration
    Rules.   which was refused by the Secretary of State on 26 August 2011.
    A decision was made on 27 November 2012 for her removal as  an  illegal
    entrant.  The Secretary of State refused her application with regard to
    requirements for leave to remain as a partner as set out in Appendix FM
    of the new  Immigration  Rules  and  under  Article  8  ECHR.   Further
    consideration was given  to paragraph 276CE of the  Immigration  Rules.
    She appealed and her appeal was allowed under Article 8.

Law

4.    In SSHD v Hayat (Pakistan); Treebhowan (Mauritius) v SSHD [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 1054 the Court of Appeal held that an  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom which cannot succeed under the Immigration
    Rules, and is being pursued under Article 8,  should  not  be  rejected
    simply on the procedural ground that the applicant can apply for  entry
    clearance from abroad.  On the "one stop" principle, the merits of  the
    Article 8 claim should be assessed, and the claim should be allowed  if
    the applicant does in fact have an Article 8 right to  remain  in  this
    country.  If the requirement to apply for entry clearance constitutes a
    disruption  sufficient  to  engage  Article  8,   there   will   be   a
    disproportionate interference unless there is  a  sensible  reason  for
    insisting on it.  Whether there is a sensible reason will depend on the
    facts of the case, including such matters as the length and  degree  of
    disruption and the effect on other family members.  Where Article 8  is
    engaged and there is no sensible reason for the disruption, the Article
    8 claim should be determined on its substantive merits.  In the instant
    cases, neither applicant was  in the United Kingdom  for  more  than  a
    temporary purpose, and neither had such  a  strong  claim  to  make  it
    disproportionate for him to apply for  entry  clearance  from  his  own
    country.  Chikwamba is not confined to settlement cases, but unless the
    likelihood of being granted entry clearance is very  strong,  Chikwamba
    does not come into play.



The facts

5.   Miss Sanneh is a citizen of Gambia who came to the  UK  lawfully  as  a
    domestic worker and thereafter remained in  the  UK  unlawfully  for  5
    years and 5 months.  She met her partner through her employer and  they
    have been in a relationship and living together since the end of  2007.
    Her leave expired in September 2007. In 2008 they decided to marry  but
    have not yet done so. The parties have entered  in  to  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship. Mr Allen owns a property in  which  they  live
    together.  He is a business man who owns  other  properties  which  are
    rented out. It was accepted  that  the  maintenance  and  accommodation
    requirements of the rules were satisfied and that the appellant met the
    English  language  requirements.   Miss  Sanneh's  family  (mother  and
    daughter) in Gambia have met and formed a relationship with  Mr  Allen.
    Mr Allen visits frequently and sees the  appellant's  daughter.  He  is
    building a house in Gambia  for the family to live in and for  him  and
    Ms Sanneh to stay in when they visit.  He visits Gambia every 2  to   3
    months and  supervises the building works.  He stays in  an  apartment.
    He could stay there for a temporary period but ultimately needs  to  be
    based  in the UK for business reasons. Miss Sanneh would  be  happy  to
    return to Gambia for a temporary period to apply for entry clearance.

The Hearing before us

6.   At the hearing before us Mr Jarvis submitted that the Court  of  Appeal
    overturned the Upper Tribunal decision of Hayat relied on by the  First
    tier Tribunal.  He further relied on ZS (Jamaica)  and  Another  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1639 and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin). He emphasised that the
    appellant had a  family  life  in  Gambia  and  that  her  partner  had
    connections in Gambia where he travelled regularly and was  building  a
    house. The appellant had not lost her ties with Gambia and it  was  not
    unreasonable to expect her to return there to make an  application  for
    entry clearance.  He further submitted that where there was a  sensible
    reason in support of return  Chikwamba did not apply. Relevant  factors
    included the length of time the application  would  take,  whether  the
    party had a legitimate expectation to remain beyond the period of leave
     and if the relationship was established at  a  time  when  immigration
    status was precarious. ZS (Jamaica)  involved  a  child,  however,  the
    Court held that overstaying could amount to  a  serious  countervailing
    factor  as  against  the  individual's  private  interests.  Mr  Jarvis
    submitted that five years overstaying was a serious factor.

9.   Ms Quereshi submitted that the appellant  entered with valid leave  and
    established a long term relationship with Mr Allen. Overstaying was the
    only countervailing factor and this was the only basis  justifying  her
    return on grounds of public policy.  There was no  other  reason.   The
    appellant was in a genuine relationship and there were no issues as  to
    finance or accommodation. She cited  the  judgement  of  Turner  J.  in
    Shuaizhang 2013 EWHC 891 (Admin)  where the  Court  concluded  that  it
    will be rare indeed that the immigration priorities of  the  state  are
    such as to give rise to a proportionate answer to Article 8  rights  to
    family life where requirement (h) (i) is engaged.

Discussion

10.  We have regard to the judgments in  VW (Uganda) [2009] EWCA, the  House
    of Lords decision of  Chikwamba  and  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Hayat
    together with Nagre,  ZS (Jamaica), Shuaizhang ( cited  above).   These
    are cases in which the courts have recognised that the  application  of
    Razgar principles, as seen thorough lens of  Chikwamba,  leads  to  the
    conclusion that an article 8 compliant requirement for an applicant  to
    leave the UK before making an application is the exception rather  than
    the rule.

11.   Ms Sanneh has established a family and private life in the UK with  Mr
    Allen to whom she  is  engaged  to  be  married.   There  would  be  an
    interference in the event that she is returned to Gambia and that would
    be of sufficient gravity to engage Article 8.  The  interference  would
    be in accordance with the law as she has no lawful leave to  remain  in
    the UK and fails to meet the amended immigration rules.

12.      In Hayat  the Upper Tribunal reviewed the House of  Lords  decision
    in Chikwamba and stated that "where the only matter  for  requiring  an
    appellant to return is the public policy of requiring  and  application
    to  be  made  under  Immigration  Rules  from  abroad,  the  legitimate
    objective  will  usually  be  outweighed  by  factors  resting  on  the
    appellant's side of the balance".   Thereafter  the   Court  of  Appeal
    held that where the only matter to require return is to apply for entry
    clearance simply  on "procedural grounds ", the Courts must look at the
    substantive Article 8 claim  and the appellant be allowed to remain  in
    the country if she has an Article 8 right to remain in the country.  If
    the requirement to apply for entry clearance constitutes  a  disruption
    sufficient to engage  Article  8,  there  will  be  a  disproportionate
    interference unless there is a "sensible reason" for insisting  on  it.
    Whether there is a sensible reason will depend  on  the  facts  of  the
    case, including such matters as the length and degree of disruption and
    the effect on other family members.  Where Article  8  is  engaged  and
    there is no sensible reason for the disruption,  the  Article  8  claim
    should be determined on its substantive merits.

13.  We consider whether there  is  a  sensible  reason  for  requiring  the
    appellant to return to Gambia ?  We find  that the  length  and  degree
    of disruption of family life is at the very lowest  end  of  the  scale
    given that the appellant's partner frequently visits Gambia without any
    difficulty every two to three months. The appellant's evidence was that
    he visited her 10 year old daughter who has grown up calling  him  Dad.
    He has an apartment where he stays and  he  has  connections  with  the
    appellant's family in  Gambia  which  are  being  strengthened  by  his
    building a property for the family to live in.  It  would  be  possible
    for both of the parties to live in Gambia at least for some of the time
    in which an application for leave is made and  decided.  Certainly  the
    appellant adduced no evidence to show that returning  to  Gambia  would
    create a long or  otherwise  unacceptable  degree  of  separation.  The
    appellant has  family members living in Gambia. There is no evidence of
    any strong private life in the UK aside from her relationship with  her
    partner. The only child involved is the appellant's daughter in  Gambia
    with whom Mr Allen has  established  a  relationship.  He  is  able  to
    accompany her to Gambia for a temporary period  of  time.  The  parties
    wish to settle in the UK where Mr Allen  owns  property  and  runs  his
    business. It is accepted that this would create significant  disruption
    and interference in the long term if the  appellant  were  not  granted
    entry clearance.

14.       Where there is family life the Secretary  of  State  must  justify
    the interference and that according to the Court  of  Appeal  in  Hayat
    necessitates "a full consideration of the merits". A proper  assessment
    of the public interest must involve consideration  of  overstaying  and
    the  length  of  overstaying  during  which   the   appellant   further
    established  her  private  life  which  commenced   during   precarious
    immigration status (ZS (Jamaica).  This is not simply  a  case  of  the
    appellant "jumping the queue" and gaining advantage over those applying
    from outside of the UK for procedural reasons  only.   The  significant
    issue  is  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  orderly  immigration
    control.   The  rules  prescribe  that  a  person  in  the  appellant's
    circumstances apply for entry clearance as a spouse. It is not fair  to
    people who chose to follow the rules even  though  that  inconveniences
    them to see other people being given preferential treatment  when  they
    have ignored the rules for no good reason. There was no evidence as  to
    why the appellant  failed to regularise her stay for some years  having
    come to the UK on a temporary basis only.  We  must  ask  ourselves  if
    there is a public interest in the appellant and her partner  being  put
    to expense  and  inconvenience  by  returning  to  Gambia  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance  as a spouse ?

15.   We have regard to the change in  direction  following  Chikwamba.   We
    find that the  disruption  to  the  private  and  family  life  of  the
    appellant and her partner is really limited to  them.  This  is  not  a
    case, for example, where children are involved. Further,  as  explained
    above, the  appellant  has  strong  links  with  Gambia  and  both  the
    appellant and her partner are able to visit there.  The  disruption  to
    the appellant's and her partner's private life and family life inherent
    on removal is at the lowest end of the scale possible in such cases. If
    removal is not proportionate to  the  proper  purposes  of  preventing,
    disorder and protecting the rights and freedoms of  others  then  there
    will be almost no circumstances where the law can be  enforced.  We  do
    not accept that requiring  a  person  in  the  United  Kingdom  without
    permission to leave and  apply  from  outside  the  United  Kingdom  to
    regularise her stay is always wrong and it is not wrong here.

Decision

16.      We remake the decision and dismiss Miss  Saneh's  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds under Article 8 ECHR.



Signed                                  Dated  2.7.2013
GA Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



Anonymity - no order was or is made for anonymity.
Fee award - no award is made for repayment of a fee.



Signed                                  Dated 2.7.2013
GA Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


