
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28816/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |     Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                       |
|On 14  December 2015                          |     On 2 February 2016           |
|                                              |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                   Mr c y
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Hoshi of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 18th January  1974  and  he
    appealed under Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 against a decision by the Secretary of State dated  24th  June
    2014 to refuse to grant him leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on
    human rights grounds. The appellant's wife, Miss  D  S  and  their  two
    children born on 14th February 2007 and 27th March 2011 (now aged 8 and
    4 years old) had no separate valid appeals  but  their  interests  were
    said to be relevant to the appeal under the principle of Beoku-Betts  v
    SSHD [2008] UKHL 39 and were to be considered.

 2. The appellant's appeal came before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  was
    dismissed on 1st December 2014.  The Upper Tribunal found an  error  of
    law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (a  panel)  decision  erred  in  its
    assessment of proportionality by failing to make a finding  as  to  the
    length of time the appellant had spent in the United Kingdom.  Although
    challenge was made to the assessment  of  the  best  interests  of  the
    children the findings made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  regarding  the
    children's interests were, however,  found to be sound (particularly at
    paragraph 39 of that decision).  As stated at paragraph 49 of the First-
    tier Tribunal decision, which dismissed the appeal, it  was  implicitly
    accepted that the first child had only known life in the United Kingdom
    and was settled at school and in line with ZH (Tanzania)  v SSHD [2011]
    UKSC 4, the children's best interests were to stay in the  family  unit
    but that it would be reasonable for the children  to  return  to  Ghana
    albeit that the elder child had been in the  United  Kingdom  for  over
    seven years.

 3. The appellant claims that he came to the UK in 1988 at the  age  of  14
    years with his cousin who was some 25 years his senior.  There  was  no
    Home Office documentary evidence of the  claimant's  residency  in  the
    United Kingdom before 2003 when a  "no  time  limit"  (NTL)  stamp  was
    inserted in the claimant's passport.   An  investigation  in  2007  was
    commenced and it appeared that it was granted by a corrupt Home  Office
    official on payment of a fee.  The appellant was  arrested  on  5  July
    2010 on suspicion of entering the UK illegally and a removal notice was
    served.  There was no evidence that he was charged or convicted.

 4. The appellant applied for indefinite leave to  remain  on  19  November
    2010 which  was  refused  but  following  a  pre-action  protocol  that
    decision was withdrawn and a further decision was  issued  on  24  June
    2014 which is the subject of this appeal.

 5. It was conceded at the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  13
    November 2014 that the appellant was unable to meet the requirements of
    the Immigration  Rules.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  that  the
    claimant had established both family and private life in the UK and the
    parties agreed at the First-tier Tribunal that  the  issue  before  the
    Tribunal was focused on the fifth stage of Razgar v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2004]  UKHL  27.   The  extent  to  which  the
    decision  is  remade  is  therefore  confined  to  the  assessment   of
    proportionality outside the rules.

The First-tier Tribunal Decision

 6. The Tribunal before it had a bundle of documents from the appellant and
    respondent respectively and also had a report prepared by  a  qualified
    psychotherapist Miss Susan M   Pagella.   There  were  also  supportive
    statements from friends and from the appellant's church.

 7. The evidence recorded in that decision was that the  appellant  claimed
    that he arrived in the UK with a relative, in 1988 and did  not  attend
    school but eventually obtained work in a variety of roles principally a
    national minimum wage job such as cleaning.  Between 2002 and 2010  the
    appellant supported his partner Miss D S  and  his  children  providing
    them with accommodation until he was arrested in July 2010.  Since then
    he has relied on donations from the church where he  is  an  usher  and
    food and money offered by friends.

 8. DS  is the mother of his two children.  There was no evidence  that  DS
    had entered the UK legally in June 2002 and DS  had  not  worked  since
    arriving in the UK.  She was diagnosed with  HIV  positive  during  her
    pregnancy and takes medication for the condition.  The elder  child  is
    monitored for HIV but taking no medication.  The younger child  has  no
    medical conditions.   The  elder  child  speaks  English  fluently  and
    attends junior school while  the  younger  child  is  about  to  attend
    primary school.  It was stated that neither children could speak  their
    parents' native language Twi but had  some  basic  understanding.   The
    evidence put forward was the appellant's mother had passed away in 2011
    and Miss DS's father passed away when she was a child  and  her  mother
    and older siblings lived in Ghana but they had little contact.  By  the
    date of the hearing before me it was submitted that  Miss  DS's  mother
    had indeed died.  Miss DS had commenced training as a  hairdresser  but
    this had not been completed.  It was the appellant's case that  he  had
    not been aware that there was any impropriety in obtaining the visa  as
    alleged by the Home Office and was not present when his cousin obtained
    the NTL stamp.  He had submitted his passport in 2009 in order to apply
    for a passport for his son and it had been returned by the Home  Office
    without  comment.   Subsequently  that  British  citizenship  had  been
    revoked.

 9.  It  was  the  respondent's  case  that  although  the  appellant   had
    established family life there was nothing to suggest the  family  could
    not relocate to Ghana.  The claimant's objection was based  principally
    on him being used to the comfort of the UK and most of the reasons  for
    the appeal related to the anticipated difficulty in adjustment to Ghana
    a country with which both the appellant and Miss DS were familiar.   It
    was accepted that there would be a period of settlement  which  may  be
    difficult but returning as a family would enable the appellant and Miss
    DS to help their children adjust to a new school and environment.

Conclusions

10. I had  specifically  considered  the  evidence  with  relation  to  the
    appellant's entry into the UK and  I  clearly  find  that  he  has  not
    substantiated his claim that he entered as a minor in 1988 and prior to
    the year 2003 and I say so for these reasons.  Mr Hoshi invited  me  to
    consider the case of TK Burundi [2009] EWCA Civ 40 and to  be  cautious
    before making findings regarding credibility on  what  one  might  find
    inherently probable and that corroboration is not necessarily  required
    particularly if it can be difficult to obtain.  The fact that there was
    no documentary corroboration in the UK prior to 2000 could be explained
    by the fact that the appellant was exploited by family members and  was
    illiterate.  I find this difficult to accept,  not  least  because  the
    appellant was born in 1974 and by the year 2003 he would have  been  at
    least 28 years old.  He himself in his evidence before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal confirmed that he would go to work and undertake jobs such  as
    cleaning jobs and I am not persuaded that there would be no documentary
    footprint of this appellant in the UK between 1988 and 2003 either from
    an employer or from the NHS or from a landlord.  The  appellant  indeed
    gave evidence that he was working and needed to  produce  his  passport
    and that is why he obtained his passport from his relative in the UK.

11. Miss Isherwood suggested that the story of the appellant  was  unlikely
    because the story of the appellant and his partner were broadly similar
    and yet there was nothing done about the partner's  immigration  status
    and therefore he knew that his NTL  stamp  was  false  because  of  the
    hesitation in applying for status for his wife.  That said I do take Mr
    Hoshi's point that the appellant  did  produce  his  passport  for  the
    purposes of obtaining British citizenship for his son.

12. Mr Hoshi suggested that I should reject the global assertion  that  the
    oral evidence given to me was vague or that the discrepancy between the
    appellant's oral evidence and his witness statement that he  was  given
    the passport at different times and because it was  such  a  long  time
    ago.  However as Mr Hoshi did concede the appellant's  wife,  who  gave
    evidence before me, had stated that she had met the appellant at a time
    when she was not in the UK and this  does  not  persuade  me  that  her
    evidence was reliable as it was such a fundamental error.   There  were
    numerous questions to which she responded that she  did  not  know  the
    answer or was vague or could not give a time estimate.  She was  asked,
    did she remember the month when  she  entered  the  UK  and  she  said,
    "I don't remember dates like that".  She then stated that she met  her
    husband in January 2002 and then stated that she did  not  remember.  I
    can accept that she has suffered with depression and I take  this  into
    account but her evidence as to timings was so vague  about  significant
    matters that it was simply unbelievable.  When she met her husband is a
    matter of some significance and I  am  surprised  that  she  could  not
    remember even some years later.  When asked why she did  nothing  about
    her status she said "I didn't have anything".  I can accept that  money
    might be a problem but  that  has  not  prevented  the  appellant  from
    pursuing his own application or that of his child.

13. Mr G, who also gave evidence  before  me,  changed  his  evidence  from
    initially stating he had met the appellant in 2002  to  having  him  in
    2000.  He then on further examination  claimed  that  he  had  met  the
    appellant in 2000 and met him again in 2002.  Even though  the  witness
    had previously given evidence on behalf of the appellant he was clearly
    not clear as to what he should be saying.  I find his  evidence  to  be
    unreliable. I also found the letter from the church without the  author
    in court to support the contention that the appellant was in the United
    Kingdom from an earlier date than 2003  to  be  unreliable.   It  would
    appear that the church had changed its name.

14. I do not accept that the appellant did not know that the NTL stamp  was
    questionable.  The appellant was at least 28 years old when he obtained
    this stamp and if he had lived under the radar as he claims that he had
    done, he at the very least must have questioned why he had that  stamp.
    I do not accept that he entered the UK as a minor and that  he  had  no
    independent documentary evidence prior to that date.

15. Although I was referred to TK Burundi the  following  was  recorded  as
    part of the judgment in the Court of Appeal at paragraph 21:

    '[21] The circumstances of  this  case  in  my  view  demonstrate  that
    independent supporting evidence which is available from persons subject
    to this jurisdiction be provided wherever possible and the need for  an
    Immigration Judge to adopt a cautious approach to the  evidence  of  an
    appellant where independent supporting evidence,  as  it  was  in  this
    case, is readily available within this jurisdiction, but not  provided.
    It follows that where a Judge in assessing credibility  relies  on  the
    fact that there is  no  independent  supporting  evidence  where  there
    should be supporting evidence and there is no credible account for  its
    absence commits no error of  law  when  he  relies  on  that  fact  for
    rejecting the account of an appellant'.

16. I do not accept that it would  have  been  difficult  to  produce  some
    documentary evidence in relation to the claimed years prior to 2003 and
    none was produced.  I do not say that the  evidence  would  be  readily
    available but I find it not  credible  that  for  15  years  and  after
    reaching is majority the  appellant  could  locate,  even  taking  into
    account his immigration status,  no  independent  documentary  evidence
    prior to 2003. My findings do not rest fundamentally on the absence  of
    any documentary evidence but together with the rest of the evidence,  I
    do not accept that the appellant entered the UK prior to 2003.  Even if
    it was accepted that he entered in the year 2000 that does  not  accord
    him  the  sufficient  amount  of  time  to  bring  himself  within  the
    Immigration Rules which is the starting  point  for  an  assessment  of
    proportionality or moreover evidence his entry into the United  Kingdom
    as a minor which is his claim.  Even his witnesses do not  assert  that
    they knew him on entry as a minor.  I make  it  clear  that  I  do  not
    accept he came into the United Kingdom prior to 2003.

17. I therefore do not accept that the appellant can meet  the  Immigration
    Rule 276ADE and when considering proportionality and the last stage  of
    Razgar  I  must  consider  the  children's  interests  as   a   primary
    consideration but this is what has been  done  through  findings  which
    have been preserved.

18. The decision by a panel  of  the  First  tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal but an error of law was  found  on  the  basis  that
    there was no finding in respect of the number of  years  the  appellant
    had indeed been in the United Kingdom which may have an impact  on  the
    overall proportionality assessment.  However the findings with  respect
    to the children were preserved.  These were as follows:

         "39. We have considered as a primary consideration  the  effect  of
             removal to Ghana on both of the appellant's children, and with
             particular additional consideration of D, now 7 years  of  age
             who has known only life in the UK and is  settled  in  school,
             speaking fluent English.

         40.  It is an overriding requirement in this case that the children
             of these caring parents remain with their parents as a  family
             unit and that they are not separated from their parents.

         41.  We accept that there will be an  inevitable  upheaval  in  the
             life of the children by returning to Ghana.  However they  are
             both very young and within the loving care of a family unit, a
             wider family with a grandmother, aunts  and  uncles  and  also
             within their parents' Church, will be able to adjust to a  new
             environment. With regard to D, he is young enough to adapt  to
             a new school.  He has been attending primary school in the  UK
             for about 2 years.  He speaks English and  he  will  therefore
             have a significant advantage at school in Ghana.   DV  is  not
             yet four and has not started primary school.  They  have  some
             understanding of  their  parents'  native  language  and  will
             rapidly learn a new language once embedded  in  Ghanaian  life
             and school will readily adapt to it  within  a  loving  family
             unit.  Their private life in Ghana will be  developed  through
             the private life of their parents as they  are  too  young  to
             have private life of any  significance  as  an  individual  at
             their respective ages.  The  overriding  requirement  is  that
             both children remain with their parents.

         42.  It is understandable that the appellant wishes to  remain  for
             the sake of the  children's  education  in  the  UK,  but  the
             immigration rules cannot be displaced by  a  preference  alone
             for the socio-economic advantages that the UK may offer."

19. There was no error in the assessment by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    because of the further year that the children have been in  the  United
    Kingdom and the fact that the error of law was said  to  touch  on  the
    assessment of proportionality for completeness  I  have  revisited  the
    proportionality assessment.

20. These children are still at the primary stage of their education,  they
    have no health difficulties and clearly their  best  interests  are  to
    remain with their parents in one family unit.   The  children  are  all
    Ghanaian and they have extended family in  Ghana  albeit  that  it  was
    claimed by  the  parents  that  they  had  little  contact  with  those
    relatives.  It may  be  an  advantage  for  the  children  to  have  an
    education in the UK but at this young age albeit that the  older  child
    has been in the UK for seven years I find  no  reason  that  he  cannot
    relocate with the support of his parents.  Indeed this was the  finding
    made by the First tier Tribunal.

21. What was clear was that in the evidence before me  that  the  appellant
    stated his children could speak Twi and I find that  as  the  appellant
    and his wife needed interpreters that it is  most  unlikely  that  they
    would be able to only communicate with their children in  English.   It
    is encouraging that the older child can speak English fluently  and  no
    doubt the younger child can do so because they both attend  school  but
    at their tender age their best  interests  are  to  remain  with  their
    parents in one family unit.

22. I, like the  First-tier  Tribunal,  find  that  the  interests  of  the
    children are served in remaining with their parents in a stable  family
    unit.  There was no evidence that  the  children  had  any  significant
    educational or health needs and I consider that it is  reasonable  that
    parents return to Nigeria.  The appellant has not been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since being a minor and therefore has forged less of a  private
    life in the United Kingdom.   I  take  note  of  the  position  of  the
    Secretary of State regarding Article 8 and which  is  set  out  in  the
    Immigration Rules SS Congo v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 317.   The  appellant
    has not been in the United Kingdom  for  20  years  and  there  are  no
    significant obstacles to his return to Ghana.  The First-tier  Tribunal
    found it was reasonable for the children to return and this  was  after
    having considered the various  reports  in  relation  to  the  children
    including that of Ms Pagella.



23. I also take note of Section 117B:

         "117B    Article 8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in
         all cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."




24. The parents have limited English and it is in the public  interest  and
    particularly the interests of the  economic  wellbeing  of  the  United
    Kingdom that persons who seek to enter or remain in the UK are able  to
    speak English because they are less of a burden on taxpayers and better
    able to integrate in the society.  Secondly  it  is  clear  further  to
    Section 117(3) that the appellant and his family  are  burdens  on  the
    taxpayer because neither the appellant nor his wife are  able  to  work
    and they have two children at school and have relied on the NHS.  I  do
    find that  little  weight  should  be  given  to  their  private  lives
    established because they have been in the UK at a time when  they  have
    all been in the UK unlawfully.  I pay particular attention to paragraph
    117B(6) but have found  relying  on  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which was a panel, that it would be reasonable to expect  the
    older child to leave the United Kingdom.  It is clear  that  the  elder
    child has lived in the UK seven years, and this is an important factor.



25. Section 117B(6) identifies that the public interest  does  not  require
    the removal of a person where there is a genuine  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child and it would not be reasonable to expect that child to
    leave the United Kingdom.   First, the First-tier  Tribunal  found  the
    return of the children to be reasonable and that finding was preserved.
     Secondly, even if there had been a finding that the child's return was
    unreasonable Section 117B(6), although a significant factor,  does  not
    necessarily defeat the public interest.  It is a  factor  to  be  taken
    into account.

26. I take into consideration the submission that the  immigration  history
    of the parent should not be visited on the children and I  realise  the
    children in this case had been here longer  than  the  children  in  EV
    (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874, who had  not  been  here  for
    seven years but in this case, too, the whole family are here illegally.



27. That said I also note the best interests of the  child  are  a  primary
    consideration rather than the primary consideration and as stated in EV
    (Philippines) where the parent relies on the best interests of  his  or
    her child in order to "piggy back on their rights" those rights must be
    seen in the light of the facts of reality  that  the  parents  have  no
    right to remain in the country.  As stated in EV Philippines

    "60. That is a long way from the facts of our case. In our case none of
    the family is a British citizen. None has the right to remain  in  this
    country. If the mother is removed, the father has no independent  right
    to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is  entirely  reasonable
    to expect the children to go with them. As the immigration judge  found
    it is obviously in their best interests to remain with  their  parents.
    Although it is, of course a question of fact for the tribunal, I cannot
    see that the desirability of being educated at public expense in the UK
    can outweigh the benefit  to  the  children  of  remaining  with  their
    parents. Just as we cannot provide medical treatment for the world,  so
    we cannot educate the world."

28. I am not persuaded that the appellant and his partner would have a lack
    of access to sufficient resources or the ability to work or  access  to
    medical care (Mrs DS has HIV) to enable them to relocate.  It is  clear
    that the appellant has working experience as does his wife and there is
    access to medical care in Ghana (Country of Origin  Information  Report
    2012).  They have family in Ghana albeit that  they  have  made  little
    contact recently.  Both claim that their parents had  passed  away  but
    they have each other to turn to for support.   The  appellant  and  his
    wife have very poor immigration records both entered illegally and have
    remained in the United Kingdom illegally.

29. In view of my findings above I find the public  interest  consideration
    outweighs that of the appellant and his family to remain in the  United
    Kingdom  and  their  removal  is  proportionate.   The  appeal  of  the
    appellant is dismissed.

Direction regarding anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction is set because there are minors involved.





Signed                                  Date 29th January 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date 29th January 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


