

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/28340/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 16th June 2014                             |On 19th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                        AYYAPPAN THIRUGNANA SAMBANDAM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mrs J Moore, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

No anonymity order requested or made


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India, born  on  2nd  January  1988.   He
    applied for leave to remain as an Entrepreneur, along with his business
    colleague M F J Hussain.  Both appealed against refusal.   In  a  joint
    determination, promulgated on  26th  March  2014,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge A G M Baldwin allowed the appeal of Mr Hussain (IA/28339/2013) on
    the grounds that the  Respondent's  decision  was  unfair  and  not  in
    accordance with  the  law,  to  the  limited  extent  of  inviting  the
    Respondent to look  again  at  his  application.   However,  the  judge
    thought that the shortcomings in the  present  Appellant's  application
    were more numerous, and that the Respondent had not acted  unfairly  or
    unlawfully.  His appeal was dismissed.


 2. The Appellant appealed to the UT on the grounds that the items  missing
    from his application were such as should have  resulted  in  a  similar
    opportunity being extended to him.

 3. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 reply, dated 11th  April  2014,  to  the
    grant of permission.  This observes that  as  the  Appellant  had  been
    seeking to rely on his Entrepreneur partner's funds, and the funds were
    not held in a joint account, there  was  no  prospect  of  meeting  the
    requirements of the Rules  anyway,  and  so  any  error  could  not  be
    material.

 4. Mrs Moore acknowledged that the observation in the Rule  24  reply  has
    some force, although it is a point not noted by either side up to  that
    stage.  She sought to amend the Grounds of Appeal in  that  light,  and
    argued that this reflected  a  defect  in  the  application  which  the
    Appellant should have been invited to put right, and that  the  outcome
    in  the  present  proceedings  should  similarly  be  a  remit  to  the
    Respondent.  (The co-Appellant's case remains  outstanding  before  the
    Respondent for further decision.)

 5. Mr Mullen acknowledged that the original decision-maker looked  at  the
    case on an incorrect basis.  The Appellant's partner  is  not  a  third
    party source of funds.  Rather, this is an entrepreneurial team of  two
    directors of one limited  company.   He  agreed  that  the  appropriate
    outcome was for this case to be remitted to the Respondent for a  fresh
    decision.

 6. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal, for the above reasons and
    of consent, is set aside.  The appeal, as  originally  brought  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal,  is  allowed  to  the   following   extent:   the
    Respondent's decision was not in  accordance  with  the  law,  and  the
    original application remains outstanding, along with the co-Appellant's
    application, for a fresh decision by the Respondent.


                               [pic]
                                18 June 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
