
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/28511/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 April 2017                          |On 15 June 2017                   |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge conway

                                   Between

                              miss Noor Fatimah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Gajjar
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1986.   Her  immigration
    history is that on 11 October 2007 she was refused an  entry  clearance
    from abroad.  She entered the UK on a Tier 4 (General) Student visa  on
    23 June 2009 valid until 30 June  2011.   On  28 March  2011  she  was
    granted Tier 1 HS Post-Study leave until 4 May 2013.   On  14 December
    2012 she sought leave as an entrepreneur but  this  was  refused.   She
    overstayed.  On 2  March  2015  she  submitted  an  application  for  a
    residence card as a confirmation of a right to reside in the  UK.   The
    application was made under regulation 9 of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. The application was refused on 3 August 2015.

 3. The basis of the refusal was that the Appellant, who is the  sister  of
    the British citizen Sponsor, was  not  a  family  member  as  required.
    Rather, she is an extended family member.

    First tier hearing

 4. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 23 June 2016 Judge of the First-
    tier N M K Lawrence dismissed the appeal under  the  Regulations.   His
    findings are at paragraph [8] to [10] of his decision.

 5. At [8] he found that regulation 9 applies to 'partners' of the  British
    national who moved  to  another  EEA  State  and  not  to  the  British
    national's sibling.

 6. At [9] he found that as an extended family member under  regulation  8,
    she does not meet the requirements of regulation 9.   He  noted,  also,
    that regulation 7(3) provides that 'a person who is an extended  family
    member' be treated as a 'family member' if that person 'has been issued
    with an EEA family permit, a registration certificate  or  a  residence
    card ... as long as he continues to satisfy  conditions  in  regulation
    8(2) ...'.  The judge, however, found that there was no  evidence  that
    regulation 7(3) applied in this case: 'There is no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant  was  ever  issued  with  a  family  permit,  a  registration
    certificate or a residence card.'

 7. At [10] the judge noted that he had  been  referred  to  an  unreported
    Upper Tribunal decision Campelo  Cain  (IA/40868/2013)  promulgated  in
    October 2014.  In that case the  UT  considered  that  regulation  9(2)
    included not only the spouse or civil partner but also an applicant who
    is in a durable relationship.  Judge Lawrence distinguished  that  case
    as the Appellant in the instant case is in none  of  those  categories.
    Such was the same in respect of a European Court of Justice case  O & B
    C.456/12.

 8. Miss Fatimah sought permission  to  appeal  which  was  granted  on  27
    February 2017.

    Error of law hearing

 9. At the error of law hearing  before  me  Mr  Gajjar  made  two  points.
    First, the judge had been wrong to find that there had been no evidence
    that the Appellant was ever issued with a registration certificate.  In
    fact, there was evidence before him in the bundle  that  she  had  been
    issued with a registration certificate in the Republic of Ireland.  Had
    he been aware of that  and  applying  regulation  7(3)  he  would  have
    concluded that the Appellant satisfied regulations 7 and 9.

10. Second, in Campelo Cain it was found that regulation 9 also applies  to
    an unmarried partner, thus an 'extended family member'.  There was thus
    no reason why it should not also apply to a  sibling  who  is  also  an
    'extended family member.'

11. Further, the  Directive  2004/38/EC  makes  no  distinction  between  a
    'family member' and an 'extended family member' in the exercise  of  an
    EEA treaty right.

12. Mr Gajjar asked me to set aside the decision and remake it by  allowing
    the appeal.

13. In reply Mr Avery on the first point questioned whether a  registration
    certificate given by the Irish Authorities  had  validity  in  the  UK.
    Also, he noted that the registration certificate had expired.

14. On the second point, Mr Avery referred to the words 'in accordance with
    its national legislation' in the Directive in respect  of  facilitating
    entry and residence for other family  members.   The  way  an  extended
    family member is recognised is by regulation 17(4).

    Consideration

15. In considering this matter the issue is whether the Appellant satisfies
    regulation 9.

16. Regulation 9 resulted  from  the  Respondent's  interpretation  of  the
    effect of Surinder  Singh  (case  C-370/90)  [1992].   In  essence  the
    principle established by the Surinder Singh case is that the  right  in
    European Union law for a person moving from one Member State to another
    must include a right to return, otherwise a person  would  be  deterred
    from moving in the first place.  If a person is exercising a  right  of
    return to his home Member State he is therefore doing so under European
    Union law.  Therefore, it is European Union law and  not  the  domestic
    Rules of the person's Member State that  also  applies  to  any  family
    members.  In the judgment the court held that free movement laws:

         'Require a member State to grant leave to enter and reside  in  its
         territory to the spouse, of whatever nationality, of a national  of
         that State who has gone to work there  as  an  employed  person  as
         envisaged by Article 48 of the  treaty  and  returns  to  establish
         himself or herself as envisaged by Article 52 of the treaty in  the
         State of which he or she is a national.  A  spouse  must  enjoy  at
         least the same rights as would be  granted  to  him  or  her  under
         community law if his or her spouse entered and resided  in  another
         Member State.'

17. The Respondent's  interpretation  of  Surinder  Singh  is  set  out  in
    regulation 9, which is also set out in paragraph  [7]  of  the  judge's
    decision.  The crux is that a residence card will be issued to  a  non-
    EEA national who is the spouse or civil partner or other direct  family
    member of a British citizen if certain conditions are met.

18. There is no dispute that these  conditions  are  satisfied.   The  only
    issue taken by the Respondent was that the Appellant is  not  a  family
    member  of  the  British  citizen.   Family  members  are  defined   in
    Regulation  7.   In  summary,  the  spouse  or  civil  partner;  direct
    descendants of her, her spouse or civil partner who  are  under  21  or
    dependants of her,  her  spouse  or  civil  partner;  dependent  direct
    relatives in her ascending line or that of her spouse or civil partner.



19. In this appeal the Appellant is not a family member as defined  because
    she is a sibling.  She is an 'extended family member' who satisfies the
    conditions in regulation 8.

20. The judge found that the Appellant, being an extended family member and
    not  a  family  member,  specifically  a  partner,  could  not  satisfy
    Regulation 9.

21. As indicated, Mr Gajjar's first point was that the judge failed to have
    regard to regulation 7(3) which provides that

         '...a person who is an extended family member and has  been  issued
         with  an  EEA  family  permit,  a  registration  certificate  or  a
         residence card shall  be  treated  as  the  family  member  of  the
         relevant EEA national for as long as he continues  to  satisfy  the
         conditions in Regulation 8 ... in relation to that EEA national and
         the permit, certificate or card has not ceased to be valid or  been
         revoked.'

22. The judge states (at [9]) 'there is no evidence that the Appellant  was
    ever issued with "a family permit,  a  registration  certificate  or  a
    residence card."'   However, he failed to notice that there was in fact
    a copy of a registration certificate in the Appellant's bundle.  It was
    issued by the Government of the Republic of Ireland.

23. Whilst the failure to notice that there was a registration  certificate
    was  an  error  it  was  not  material.   In  'General  interpretation'
    (regulation 2) it states:

    "'registration certificate"  means  a  certificate  issued  to  an  EEA
    national, in accordance with regulation 16, as proof  of  the  holder's
    right of residence in the United Kingdom as at the date of issue.'

24. A registration certificate issued by the Irish Authorities is not proof
    of the holder's right of residence in the UK.

25. The second limb of Mr Gajjar's submission was that Directive 2004/38/EC
    makes no distinction between a family member  and  an  extended  family
    member in the exercise of an EEA treaty right.

26. Article 3 of the Directive provides:

         'Article 3 Beneficiaries

         1.   This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who  move  to
             or reside in a Member State other than that of which they  are
             a national, and to their family members as defined in point  2
             of Article 2 who accompany or join them.

         2.   Without prejudice to any right to free movement and  residence
             the persons concerned may have in their own  right,  the  host
             Member  State  shall,  in   accordance   with   its   national
             legislation, facilitate entry and residence for the  following
             persons:

             (a)   any  other  family  members,   irrespective   of   their
                  nationality, not falling under the definition in  point  2
                  of Article 2 who, in the  country  from  which  they  have
                  come, are dependants or members of the  household  of  the
                  Union citizen having the primary right of residence...'

             (b) the partner with whom the  Union  citizen  has  a  durable
                  relationship, duly attested.'

             The host Member State shall undertake an extensive examination
                  of the personal circumstances and shall justify any denial
                  of entry or residence to these people.'

27. There appears to be a tension between Article 3 of  the  Directive  and
    regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations.  From a plain reading of Article 3
    it does not require that only a family member may  move  to  or  reside
    with the Union citizen.  Rather it includes 'any other  family  members
    irrespective of their nationality'.

28. Such is not the position under the regulations.  However,  I  note  two
    other significant matters which qualify that position.   First,  as  Mr
    Avery noted, it is specifically stated in  Article  3  that  'the  host
    Member  State  shall,  in  accordance  with  its  national  legislation
    facilitate entry and residence ...'

29. Such indicates that the principle of subsidiarity applies.

30. Further, it provides that the host Member State '... shall undertake an
    extensive examination of the personal circumstances and  shall  justify
    any denial of entry or residence to these people'.   This  indicates  a
    margin of appreciation by the host Member State.  It  is  reflected  in
    regulation 17 (4).

31. I conclude that Ms Ayub being the EU citizen concerned  cannot  acquire
    from the Directive  a  requirement  that  the  third  country  national
    sibling, the Appellant, be granted a right to reside with her in the UK
    or that the Appellant can derive any such right from Ms Ayub.

32. Accordingly, I consider the judge's conclusion that the  Appellant,  as
    sibling and not the spouse or partner of Ms Ayub, could not succeed  in
    her appeal was correct.

33. There is a final matter which confirms in my mind that  the  judge  was
    correct to dismiss the appeal.  As Mr Avery indicated there is no right
    of appeal against a decision refusing to issue a residence  card  to  a
    person who is an extended family member (per  Sala  (EFMs -  Right  of
    Appeal) [2016] UKUT 411).

34. The Appellant is an extended family member.  Thus, in  any  event,  the
    appeal would have to be dismissed for want of jurisdiction.

Notice of Decision

The judge's  decision  shows  no  material  error  of  law.   That  decision
dismissing  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2016 stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 14/6/2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Mr D Conway

