
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28102/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25th October 2017                       |On 06th November 2017            |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                   ms E.A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Nnadi, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction is made on the basis that the Appellant has various
medical conditions. I consider that it appropriate to make such a
direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Ghana born 15th January 1965, appeals  with
    permission against the decision of a First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Majid)
    dismissing her appeal against the Respondent's  refusal  to  grant  her
    application  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK.   The  date  of   the
    Respondent's decision is 29th July 2015.

 2. The Appellant entered the UK in 2000 with leave valid until 2001.   She
    has remained unlawfully thereafter as an overstayer.  She  has  various
    health problems and is HIV positive.

 3. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application  to  remain  because
    she could not meet the Immigration Rules and  it  was  considered  that
    there were no exceptional circumstances in her case. It was  said  that
    her medical conditions could be dealt with and  treated  adequately  in
    Ghana.

 4. The Appellant appealed the Respondent's decision and  the  appeal  came
    before Judge Majid.  The issue before Judge Majid  centred  on  whether
    the Respondent's decision to refuse the application for leave to remain
    contravened the Appellant's Article 8, ECHR private  life  rights.   It
    was also claimed that to refuse her leave would contravene her  Article
    3 rights on account of a risk of being killed if her  condition  became
    known.  It was clear therefore that the  relevant  evidence  which  the
    judge would need to consider centred on the medical  reports  submitted
    by the Appellant.  This included reports from  Guy's  and  St  Thomas's
    Hospital dating back to 2009 through to 2011, together with a report in
    2012 showing the  Appellant  as  testing  HIV  positive.   More  recent
    reports dated October 2014 and March 2015 showed  appointments  at  the
    colposcopy unit at Guy's Hospital.

 5. In a short decision, Judge Majid set  out  the  proceedings  by  simply
    stating that the Appellant adopted her witness statement of  29th  June
    2016.   He  then  set  out  submissions   made   by   the   Appellant's
    representative and in a short paragraph [10] said the following:

         "In the absence of the Presenting Officer, I took into account  the
         reasons of the Respondent in the refusal letter of 29th  July  2015
         to see whether the refusal could be upheld".

 6. He continued in [11]:

         "Mr Nnadi again emphasised the fact that the Appellant  cannot  get
         HIV treatment in Ghana - she lacks resources to continue treatment
         which she has been receiving in the UK.  He submitted that she will
         be killed once her condition is discovered."

    He followed this in [12]:

         "Mr Nnadi submitted reports on the health facilities in Ghana.   On
         careful perusal of the reports it became clear that the NHS in  the
         UK certainly has good services for its HIV patients."

    At [13] he said:

         "I am unable to help this Appellant because the  reports  submitted
         by Mr Nnadi show that if one has the money then they can obtain the
         required medical treatment in Ghana - it should also be remembered
         that the lack of medical care in that country on its own cannot  be
         easily accepted as a sufficient ground for the grant of an appeal."



 7. Following two more short paragraphs of what appears to  be  comment  on
    the Immigration Rules, Judge Majid then said at [16]:

         "Accordingly,  in  view  of  my  deliberations  in  the   preceding
         paragraphs and having taken  into  account  all  of  the  oral  and
         documentary evidence as well as the submissions at my  disposal,  I
         am  persuaded  that  the  Appellant  comes  within   the   relevant
         immigration law, as amended."

    He then proceeded to make a Notice of Decision and under which he said,
    "Appeal dismissed."

 8. The Appellant sought permission to appeal.  The grounds in summary  say
    that the FtT judge failed:

       . to properly assess the medical evidence put before him on behalf of
         the Appellant; and

       . to properly apply Article 8, ECHR with regard to the  private  life
         established by the Appellant.

 9. Permission having been granted, the matter therefore comes before me to
    decide whether the decision of Judge Majid discloses an  error  of  law
    requiring it to be set aside and remade.

Error of Law Hearing

10. Before me Mr Nnadi appeared for the  Appellant  and  Mr  Nath  for  the
    Respondent.   Mr  Nnadi's  submissions  kept  to  the  grounds  seeking
    permission supported by the grant of permission itself.  He  emphasised
    that in particular there had been  no  proper  assessment  of  all  the
    medical evidence put before the FtT and  this  in  turn  impacted  upon
    whether a proper and reasoned Article 8, ECHR decision had  been  made.
    So far as the challenge mounted on Article 3, Mr Nnadi made no separate
    submissions on that point but relied simply on the grant of permission.



11. Mr Nath defended the decision to the  extent  that  he  submitted  that
    [11], [12] and [13] were sufficient to show that the judge  had  turned
    his mind to the medical evidence.  He said that although any  reasoning
    could be described as sparse, nevertheless there was just enough in the
    decision to render it sustainable.

12. At the end of submissions  I  indicated  to  the  parties  that  I  was
    satisfied that the decision of Judge Majid contained such error  as  to
    require it to be set aside and remade.  I now give my reasons for  that
    finding.

13. Despite Mr Nath's spirited attempt to save the decision  I  find  I  am
    satisfied that the judge has failed to engage with the evidence and has
    made very few and sparse findings of fact.  The findings  that  he  did
    make in [11], [12] and [13] were not fully  explained.   The  Appellant
    has medical problems in addition to being  HIV  positive,  although  of
    course the latter could be categorised  as  the  most  serious  of  her
    problems.  It is incumbent upon the trial judge to look at the  medical
    evidence presented as a whole, and to make a finding on whether or  not
    that evidence when looked  at  cumulatively  supports  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 claim.  This he has failed to do.  As  the  permission  grant
    points out it may well be that the outcome for this Appellant  will  be
    the same as the one reached by Judge Majid. Nevertheless the  Appellant
    is entitled to have proper consideration of all the evidence  that  she
    has presented, and to receive an  adequately  reasoned  decision  based
    upon a proper appreciation of the relevant law. This  Judge  Majid  has
    failed to do resulting in unfairness and that is a fundamental error.

14. Having announced my decision to the parties that Judge Majid's decision
    must be set aside for error, both were of the view that the appropriate
    course for this appeal would be to return it to the First-tier Tribunal
    for a fresh hearing.  I agree with that course.  The decision of  Judge
    Majid will be set aside in its entirety, with nothing preserved.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law.  I set aside that decision.  The decision is  to  be  remade
in the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Majid).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Dated    05 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

