
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28589/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th August 2015                   |On 18th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                          Mrs Vivian Aimiede Itoya
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal R  Sullivan  promulgated  on  24th  March  2015  in  which  he
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  respondent
    to refuse her human rights application  and  to  remove  her  from  the
    United Kingdom.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, date of birth 7th January  1979.
    She and her husband, who  was  dependent  on  her  application  to  the
    Respondent, as were her two children, entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
    2005 and overstayed their grant of entry clearance  as  visitors.   The
    oldest child was born on 27th March 2006 in  the  UK  and  the  younger
    child was born on 20th December 2010. Both are nationals of Nigeria. On
    3rd April  2013  a  human  rights  application  was  submitted  by  the
    appellant. This was accompanied by a letter from David A Grand, a  non-
    practising barrister, dated  28th  March  2013.  That  covering  letter
    indicated that the application was being made by the appellant and  her
    dependent family. I  am  grateful  to  Mr  Duffy,  who  represents  the
    Secretary of  State  today,  for  providing  me  with  a  copy  of  the
    application form. It is clear from that document that the appellant was
    the principal applicant but her family members were regarded  as  being
    dependent on her claim. By  reasons  of  impecuniosity,  the  appellant
    represents herself today.

3.   On 7th May 2013 the application was refused with no  right  of  appeal.
    Following a pre-action Protocol letter and a threat of judicial  review
    proceedings  a  further  decision  was  made  on  18th   January   2014
    maintaining the initial refusal. On 14th February  2014  forms  IS.151A
    and One-Stop Notices were served on  the  appellant,  her  husband  and
    their  two  children.  The  introduction  to  the  respondent's  bundle
    indicated that they were all served as overstayers  but  it  was  clear
    from discussions at the appeal hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that the two children had never overstayed.

4.   On 20th May 2014 the appellant was served with an  IS.151B  'notice  of
    immigration decision' which was a decision to remove her from  the  UK,
    and a reasons for refusal  letter.   The  IS.151B  indicated  that  the
    appellant had made a human rights claim  and  it  afforded  her  an  in
    country right of appeal.  On the same day the  appellant's  spouse  and
    two children were served with IS.151A Part 2 documents, which were also
    immigration decisions to remove them from the United Kingdom. The  only
    difference between the two decisions,  apart  from  the  title  of  the
    immigration decision documents, was that the decisions  served  on  the
    family members other than the  appellant  made  no  reference  to  them
    having made human rights claims and they were not  accorded,  according
    to the respondent, in country rights of appeal. The appellant exercised
    her right of appeal and a hearing before the First-tier Judge  occurred
    on 13th March 2015.

The First-tier Tribunal's decision

5.   In his determination the judge identified the  history  of  the  matter
    and the  issues  under  appeal.   The  judge  accurately  outlined  the
    relevant law, identified the basis of both  the  appellant's  case  and
    that of the respondent, made a note of the appellant's submissions  and
    then assessed the evidence before him. The judge considered the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules giving expression to  Article  8  and  then
    considered the appeal outside of the Immigration Rules giving  specific
    consideration to the position of the appellant's oldest child,  whom  I
    will refer to as GI. The judge found that the removal of the  appellant
    would not constitute a breach either of the  Immigration  Rules  or  of
    Article 8 and the appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds of Appeal

6.   The grounds of appeal indicate that  the  appellant's  spouse  and  her
    children ought to have been granted in country rights of  appeal.   The
    grounds contend that the  failure  to  do  so  gave  rise  to  material
    inconsistency and there was no rational explanation for the distinction
    between the appellant's application and the  dependence  on  that  same
    application of her family members. The grounds note that IS.151Bs  were
    not issued against the spouse and the children.  The grounds claim that
    the respondent failed to consider the position of GI under  the  Rules.
    This was said to be core to the claim and the grounds contend that  the
    judge was wrong to consider the  position  of  GI  as  he  was  not  an
    appellant.

7.   Leave to appeal was granted on the basis that  it  appeared  there  was
    confusion arising as to the actual nature of the decision taken by  the
    respondent in respect of her husband and children's rights  of  appeal.
    It was said to be arguable that the judge was wrong in his approach  to
    the application of the Immigration Rules and the proportionality of the
    removal of the appellant.

The appeal before the Upper Tribunal

8.   As indicated, the appellant was not represented at the  Upper  Tribunal
    hearing. A letter from David A Grand, dated 28th July  2015,  indicated
    that, due to the appellant's inability to afford representation,  there
    would be no-one to represent her at the hearing. The letter went on  to
    support and reinforce the grounds of appeal.  The letter states:

         "In the context of the  appellant's  dismissed  appeal  before  the
         First-tier Immigration and Asylum Tribunal  the  Immigration  Judge
         asserts that it would be reasonable to expect the family to  return
         together as a single family unit.  However such a finding does  not
         invest upon the respondent lawful authority to  indeed  remove  the
         family as a single unit.  The dismissed appeal is only relevant  to
         the appellant since the Tribunal has no jurisdiction  to  determine
         the lawfulness of the removal of other family members."

9.   At paragraph 4 of the letter it states:

         "The fact remains that the appellant's partner is adamant  that  he
         and his children will not voluntarily leave the United Kingdom.  In
         those circumstances - regardless of whether the Tribunal  considers
         it reasonable to expect the family to leave together  -  it  is  an
         outcome which the legal architecture will not secure on  the  basis
         that the respondent  failed  to  issue  an  in  country  appealable
         immigration decision for the appellant's other  family  members  to
         which they are entitled."

10.  Reference is made further in the letter to  the  Immigration  Act  2014
    and a copy is provided of a policy document issued by the Secretary  of
    State entitled  "Requests  for  reconsiderations  of  human  rights  or
    protection based claims refused without  right  of  appeal  before  6th
    April 2015".  I pause at this point  to  note  that  the  other  family
    members  were  accorded  a  right  of  appeal,  albeit  one  that   was
    purportedly out of  country.   The  policy  document  is  therefore  of
    limited utility in this appeal.

11.  The letter concludes by  inviting  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  allow  the
    appeal on human rights grounds.

12.  In the appellant's  submissions  before  me  she  concentrated  on  the
    position of her children.  She indicated to me that her  children  were
    all born here, this is the country that they know and they can speak no
    other languages other than English, they  have  made  friends  in  this
    country and are well-settled and there was no-one else back at home.

13.  In response Mr Duffy invited me to  find  that  the  determination  was
    properly made.  The remedy if the appellant's family members  were  not
    satisfied with the issuance of the IS.151A Part 2 decisions was by  way
    of judicial review.  Mr Duffy indicated that it was commonplace in  his
    experience for principal human rights applicants to be granted  an  in-
    country right of appeal but for any dependants  to  be  issued  with  a
    decision purportedly  giving  them  only  an  out-of-country  right  of
    appeal.

14.  Mr Duffy indicated that the judge was fully entitled  to  consider  the
    impact on GI and made reference to the well-known authority  of  Beoku-
    Betts.  Mr Duffy concluded by reference to the fact that the grounds of
    appeal took no issue with the substantive consideration by the judge of
    the position of GI and that any  further  in-country  right  of  appeal
    granted to the appellant's other family  members  would  in  effect  be
    academic given what he claimed to be unassailable findings of  fact  by
    the First-tier Judge.

Discussion

15.  The decision made against the appellant is one  that  she  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal. There was a valid appeal before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The judge was obliged to consider  that  appeal.   The  Upper
    Tribunal's jurisdiction to consider a right of appeal on any  point  of
    law arises from the First-tier Tribunal's decision. This is clear  from
    the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, Section  11(1).  I  can
    only interfere with the First-tier Tribunal's decision  if  the  First-
    tier Tribunal made an error on a point of law (Section 12 of  the  TCEA
    2007).  I am therefore restricted to  a  consideration  of  the  single
    appeal that was validly brought before the First-tier Tribunal.

16.  There is no jurisdiction for me to consider whether  rights  of  appeal
    were unlawfully denied to individuals who have  not  sought  to  appeal
    adverse  decisions.  If  the  appellant's  spouse  and  children   were
    aggrieved by the failure to grant them in-country rights of appeal they
    could, in any event, have sought to appeal those decisions to the First-
    tier Tribunal, asserting that the First-tier Tribunal had  jurisdiction
    to entertain the appeals regardless of  the  view  of  the  respondent.
    Alternatively, they could have  judicially  reviewed  the  respondent's
    decisions on the basis that they were unlawful in  purporting  to  give
    only out-of-country rights of appeal.

17.  With respect to the issuance of the IS.151As Part 2  decisions  to  the
    rest of the appellant's family, it is clear that these  decisions  were
    to remove them from the United Kingdom. Contrary to paragraph 5 of  the
    grounds of appeal, the respondent  had  decided  to  remove  the  whole
    family, albeit by  slightly  different  removal  decisions.  There  was
    therefore no likelihood of the family unit being broken up as there was
    nothing to indicate that the appellant and her family would not all  be
    removed  together.  This  is  especially  so  given  that  the  removal
    decisions were all made at the same time and  in  respect  of  all  the
    family members.

18.  The judge was fully entitled to consider the position of  GI,  in  fact
    it would have been a grievous error had he not done so. The  judge  had
    to consider whether there would be a breach of Article 8 in respect  of
    the removal of the appellant.  This would clearly impact on  the  child
    but there was no suggestion that the family unit would  be  broken  up.
    The judge was also obliged to  consider  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 with reference to  ZH  (Tanzania).
    The judge did so.  The  judge's  substantive  consideration  cannot  be
    faulted. The judge considered and identified the best interests of  the
    child as being a primary consideration (paragraph 10).

19.  The judge's findings at paragraphs 40 and 41,  with  reference  to  the
    appellant, again cannot be faulted.  The judge considered the length of
    time the appellant had resided in the United Kingdom. The judge noticed
    that there was evidence that the appellant's father and at least one of
    her siblings were still in Nigeria and that she had  telephone  contact
    with her father and one sister there. She and her sister speak  English
    to one another and the appellant was educated in Nigeria in the English
    language. Before coming to the United Kingdom the judge noted that  the
    appellant had worked in Nigeria as a petty trader. The judge noted that
    the appellant was in good health. The  judge  further  noted  that  the
    appellant's husband, before coming to the United Kingdom, had worked as
    a contractor in the petrochemical industry.

20.  The judge noted with particular reference  to  GI  that  he  had  spent
    almost nine years in the United Kingdom. The judge noted that the child
    was a Nigerian citizen and that nationality was one indication of where
    the child's future lay. The judge  made  reference  to  school  reports
    provided by GI's school charting his progress and  noted  that  GI  was
    regarded as a valued and well-liked member  of  the  school  with  many
    friends. The judge recorded the  appellant's  oral  evidence  that  her
    oldest child was healthy and had many friends.

21.  The judge then went on to consider the position of  the  appellant  and
    her family members outside of the Immigration Rules. The judge accepted
    that all four family members had established elements of  private  life
    in the  United  Kingdom.  The  judge  made  reference  to  the  factors
    contained in Section 117B of the 2002 Act. The judge concluded that the
    decision did interfere with rights to respect for  family  and  private
    life. The judge nevertheless went on to find that the appellant had not
    been candid about her sources of income in the United Kingdom and found
    that she was not financially independent and that  she  had  not  shown
    that she would not be a burden on taxpayers.

22.  The judge then went on to consider the  issue  of  proportionality  and
    the interests  of  the  two  children,  which  he  took  as  a  primary
    consideration. The judge noted that the children were  not  responsible
    for poor decisions taken by their parents.

23.  With respect to GI the judge, at paragraph 58, noted again that he  was
    in good health, that he had been in primary education in the  UK  since
    September 2009, that he had completed five full academic years and  had
    made many friends/ The judge accepted that GI and his friends would  be
    upset if he had to leave the school and return to  Nigeria.  The  judge
    accepted that it  was  not  in  GI's  best  interests  to  disrupt  his
    education. The judge concluded, however, that there  was  available  in
    Nigeria an educational system which would fulfil his needs.  The  judge
    recognised that children continue  to  make  friends  throughout  their
    education and that after a period of disruption  and  upsets  GI  might
    well find himself settled in a new school with new friends.  The  judge
    concluded that it was in GI's best interests to remain with his parents
    and younger brother and, given all the evidence concerning him and  his
    parents, and their  backgrounds  and  links  with  Nigeria,  the  judge
    concluded that it would be reasonable to expect GI to leave the  United
    Kingdom with his parents and sibling.

24.  This was  a  decision  the  judge  was  fully  entitled  to  make.  The
    substance of the judge's analysis was not, in any event, challenged  in
    the grounds of appeal.

Notice of Decision

For the reasons I have given I find there to be no merit in the  grounds  of
appeal and I dismiss the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]    10 August 2015
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
