
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28724/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 September 2015                  |On 18 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                gurmit singh
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss. E. Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. Pretzell, Counsel instructed by Haris Ali &
Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    Immigration  Judge  Bradshaw  promulgated  on  17  March  2015.   Judge
    Bradshaw allowed Mr. Singh's appeal  against  the  decision  to  refuse
    leave to remain outside the immigration rules under Article 8.

 2. For the purposes of  this  decision,  I  refer  to  Mr.  Singh  as  the
    Appellant and to the Secretary of State as the  Respondent,  reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. In the grounds of appeal the Respondent submitted first that the  judge
    had failed to have proper regard to section 117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Secondly,  the  judge  had  erred  by
    giving weight to the requirements and formalities necessary  to  enable
    the Appellant's partner and his child to travel to India.  The  grounds
    state that there was no evidence before the Tribunal to show that  they
    would be prevented from joining the Appellant in India  or  that  there
    would be undue delay in achieving this.

The First Ground

 4. At the hearing the Respondent's representative stated  that  the  judge
    had not referred to section 117B at all.   However  it  is  clear  from
    paragraph [9] of the decision that the judge had referred  to  sections
    117A to D of the 2002 Act.  The  Respondent's  representative  accepted
    this, but submitted that the consideration from paragraph [10]  onwards
    did not properly or adequately deal  with  the  factors  under  section
    117B.

 5. The Appellant's representative provided a skeleton argument, which sets
    out at paragraph [8] how and where the decision shows  that  the  judge
    had taken account of the issues identified  in  section  117B.   I  was
    referred  to  paragraph  [18]  of  the  decision  in  relation  to  the
    maintenance of immigration control (section 117B(1)), paragraph [13] in
    relation to the ability to speak English (section  117B(2)),  paragraph
    [11] in  relation  to  financial  independence  (section  117B(3))  and
    paragraphs [12] and [19] in relation to  the  Appellant's  relationship
    (section 117B(4)).

 6.  In  paragraph  [9]  of   the   skeleton   argument   the   Appellant's
    representative submitted that the only criticism that could be levelled
    at the decision was the fact that the findings were not married up with
    the relevant subsections.  I am mindful of the case of Dube [2015] UKUT
    00090 (IAC) where it was held that it is the  substance  not  the  form
    which is relevant in relation to consideration of section 117.  In that
    case section 117B had not been referred to at all.   I  find  that  the
    judge referred to sections 117A to D, and was aware of the need to take
    them into account.  His findings from paragraph [10] onwards show  that
    the issues set out in  section  117B  have  been  taken  into  account.
    Although the consideration of the issue is not directly  referenced  to
    the exact subsection, there is no material error of law as all  of  the
    factors set out in section 117B have been considered.  I therefore find
    that, as the judge has properly considered section 117B,  there  is  no
    merit in the ground that he failed to have  proper  regard  to  primary
    legislation.

The Second Ground

 7. The Respondent submitted that the judge had erred in giving  weight  to
    the fact that the Appellant's partner and child would have difficulties
    in accompanying the Appellant to India.  The Appellant's representative
    referred to the case of R (Agyarko & Others v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 440.
     The ECtHR stated that any national decision-making  body  should  take
    into account and  assess  evidence  in  respect  of  the  practicality,
    feasibility and  proportionality  of  any  removal  of  a  non-national
    parent.

 8. I was referred to paragraph  [15]  of  the  decision  where  the  judge
    referred to evidence provided by both the Appellant and the  Respondent
    on this issue.  "Neither the Appellant not (sic)  the  Respondent  have
    been able to be definitive in the matter" [15].  At paragraph [22]  the
    judge refers to the uncertainty about the ability  of  the  Appellant's
    partner and child to travel to India with him.

 9. Given that  evidence  was  provided  by  both  the  Appellant  and  the
    Respondent  relating  to  the  practicality  and  feasibility  of   the
    Appellant's partner and child accompanying the Appellant  to  India,  I
    find that the judge was entitled,  and  required,  to  take  this  into
    account.  It was clearly  a  matter  which  the  Respondent  considered
    relevant given that she provided evidence on this point to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

10. The grounds state that there was no evidence  before  the  Tribunal  to
    show that the Appellant's partner and child  would  be  prevented  from
    joining the Appellant in India.  I have referred above to the fact that
    evidence was provided by both the Respondent and  the  Appellant  which
    the judge found to be inconclusive.  I was  referred  to  the  evidence
    from the High Commission of India provided by the Appellant  (page  186
    of his bundle).  This states "If either of the parents hold  a  foreign
    nationality other than British nationality,  then  a  letter  from  the
    concerned Embassy or Mission of that country stating that the child has
    not acquired nationality of his/her parent would  be  required".   This
    evidence was before the First-tier Tribunal.  Evidence was also  before
    the First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant's  child  is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan.  This  is  acknowledged  by  the  Respondent.   The  identity
    documents issued to the Appellant's partner and child by the Respondent
    following the grant of asylum indicate that they are both  citizens  of
    Pakistan.  This evidence was before the judge.

11. It is therefore not correct to state that there was no evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal regarding the issue  of  the  practicality  and
    feasibility of the Appellant's partner and child  accompanying  him  to
    India.  The implication in the grounds that the decision had been taken
    in a vacuum is without merit.

12. The judge was  entitled  to  find  at  paragraph  [22]  that  there  is
    uncertainty about the ability of the Appellant's partner and  child  to
    travel to India, given the evidence before him.   He  was  entitled  to
    take this into account.  Given the circumstances of the  Appellant  and
    his family, this is a relevant factor  to  be  taken  into  account  in
    consideration of Article 8 outside the immigration rules, and the judge
    was entitled to consider this and to give weight to it.

Notice of Decision

There is no error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.    The
decision stands.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Date 17 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
