
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/28047/2013
                                                               ia/28036/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 21 July 2015                       |                   On 14 August 2015  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                           MR JUSTICE KNOWLES CBE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

             HRH Princess Sarah Bint Talal bin abdulaziz al saud
            hrh reem bint badr bin saud m. bin abdulaziz al saud
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Stephanie Harrison QC and Anthony Vaughan
For the Respondent:    Keith Norton, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The first appellant ("HRH Princess Sarah") is a  member  of  the  royal
    family of Saudi Arabia. The second appellant ("HRH Princess  Reem")  is
    her daughter.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal (The President,  Mr  M  A  Clements  and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Martin) by its  decision  promulgated  on  7  July  2014
    dismissed appeals by HRH Princess Sarah and HRH Princess  Reem  on  all
    grounds save asylum grounds. It is a feature of the system and  process
    that applied that the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  herself  made  a
    decision on asylum.

 3. HRH Princess Sarah and HRH Princess  Reem  appeal  with  permission  of
    Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton against  the  decision  to  dismiss  all
    their non-asylum grounds; the Secretary of State appeals  the  decision
    reached on asylum grounds  with  permission  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Kekic.

 4. An anonymity direction was made  but  we  do  not  consider  it  should
    continue for those parts of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to
    which it is necessary for us to refer in these reasons.

 5. We have heard argument first on the Secretary of State's appeal on  the
    decision reached on asylum grounds.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was as follows:

         "... we are mindful that the standard of proof in asylum  cases  is
         low and there is no doubt that [HRH Princess Sarah] is a very high-
         profile lady. She is a very senior member of the Saudi royal family
         who has been close to the centre throughout her  life  until  2007.
         She has clearly been a great  favourite  of  her  grandfather,  her
         uncle and indeed her father. The fact that she has made public that
         she is claiming asylum in the UK which by definition means  she  is
         suggesting she would come to harm in Saudi  Arabia  will  no  doubt
         cause considerable embarrassment to the Saudi authorities such that
         there is a reasonable likelihood that she would  face  difficulties
         if she returned. It is reasonably likely that at least she would be
         confined to her home and her freedom curtailed and  at  worst  face
         physical harm. Accordingly, it is solely by virtue of her status as
         a public figure on the international stage  and  the  embarrassment
         that that has caused to the Saudi authorities that leads us to find
         she succeeds in her asylum claim. Although it is normally the  case
         that disputes with family would not constitute a convention  reason
         for the purposes of  the  Refugee  Convention  in  this  case  [HRH
         Princess Sarah's] family is the state.

         [HRH Princess Reem] being a minor and dependent upon her mother, is
         clearly entitled to succeed along with her mother.  She  cannot  be
         expected to return to Saudi Arabia alone  and  indeed  as  a  young
         girl, if she did so, is likely to also face the  restrictions  that
         her mother may face if returned."

 6. The Secretary of State submits, by Mr Norton, that the longer of  these
    paragraphs is "based on perception and not on evidence". The conclusion
    reached, argues Mr Norton, does not show how there is a  real  risk  of
    persecution; the question why HRH Princess Sarah should be at  risk  is
    begged, it is submitted.

 7.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  has  expressed  itself  shortly.  We  shall
    ourselves limit what we say to what  is  necessary  to  reach,  and  to
    explain, a decision in this matter.

 8. In the context of asylum, in some cases  the  making  of  a  claim  for
    asylum may itself put a claimant at risk. That point lies at the  heart
    of the First-tier Tribunal's decision. The question is whether there is
    material to support the conclusion that the present is such a case.

 9. There are cases, and this  is  one,  where  the  available  sources  of
    material may be limited. All parties before us accept  that  the  lower
    standard of  proof  appropriate  to  international  protection  appeals
    applies.

10. A report dated 28 April 2014 of Dr Alan George was  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. This contained reference to a passage within  a  Reasons
    for Refusal letter written by  the  respondent  to  a  different  Saudi
    Arabian claimant, for whose appeal he also  prepared  expert  evidence.
    We are not aware with what authority Dr George made  reference  to  the
    letter, which he had come across when instructed in the other case,  in
    the present case, nor have we seen the full  refusal  letter  for  that
    individual.

11. However the passage in question was before the First-tier Tribunal  and
    is before us, and the Secretary of State has not suggested it cannot be
    taken into account. The passage reads:

         "Although no information could be found on the treatment of  failed
         asylum seekers on return to Saudi Arabia, it is acknowledged that a
         claim for asylum abroad may be  interpreted  as  opposition  to  or
         criticism of the Saudi government."

12. Mr Norton emphasises that the passage concerned a case where asylum was
    refused. However the Secretary of State did not throw further light  on
    the passage, or on what material the acknowledgement in the passage was
    based, and how  far  it  addressed  the  question  of  consequences  of
    opposition or criticism. The Secretary of State has not  disavowed  the
    passage. Through Mr Norton, the Secretary of State has informed us that
    there is no operational guidance for Saudi Arabia: the only evidence of
    the Secretary of State's position  on  the  risk  to  returning  asylum
    seekers is the passage above.

13. What of the degree and nature of risk? It is  arguable  here  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal has expressed itself in a way that is  understated.
    The same may be arguable for the passage from the letter referred to by
    Dr George. The First-tier Tribunal  referred  to  confinement  "to  her
    home" and the curtailment of freedom. It was entitled to do so  on  the
    material before it. What it did not say in express terms  is  that  the
    material before it referenced indefinite or enduring confinement.

14. It is important that the conclusion is not taken for more than it is  -
    a conclusion reached applying the lower standard and  by  reference  to
    limited material put before this First-tier Tribunal on this  occasion;
    but nonetheless a conclusion  to  which  HRH  Princess  Sarah  and  HRH
    Princess Reem are entitled.

15. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  on  all  grounds  other  than
    asylum grounds showed that the First-tier Tribunal did not accept  some
    of the material that had been put before it on behalf of  HRH  Princess
    Sarah. That material has, in one way or another, been  the  subject  of
    press articles that we were shown. Those are matters  that  it  is  not
    useful, or relevant, to attempt to address in this decision.

16. In the very rare circumstances of the present case, we are not prepared
    to hold that the conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal was not open  to
    it as  a  matter  of  law,  or  that  it  was  perverse  or  Wednesbury
    unreasonable, as set out at paragraph 90(2) of  the  judgment  of  Lord
    Justice Brooke in R (Iran) & Ors v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982.  This is not a case where there was  no
    evidence to support the First-tier  Tribunal's  conclusion.  There  was
    limited evidence and it was for the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  reach  a
    conclusion by reference to that evidence.

17. Since we have upheld the asylum decision in their favour, it appears to
    us unnecessary to hear argument on the  cross-appeal  of  HRH  Princess
    Sarah and HRH Princess  Reem.  However  any  further  or  consequential
    matters may be referred to us in writing.

Notice of Decision

The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  appeal  of  the
Appellants' on asylum grounds is upheld.

The  anonymity  direction  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal   is   hereby
discharged and we make no anonymity direction.


Signed                                  Date:  5 August 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


