

IAC-BFD- MD

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28676/2014
                                                               IA/28687/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th September 2015                |On 23rd October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     rev sang po park - first respondent
                    mrs bo kyoung lee - second respondent
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clark, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr M Mullins, of Counsel instructed by Gillman-Smith
                    Lee Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeals of
    Sang Po Park and his wife Bo Kyoung Lee, against her decision to remove
    them from the UK, following the refusal of their applications for leave
    to remain on account of their private/family life.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I shall refer  to  the  Secretary  of
    State as "the Respondent" and to Sang Po Park and Bo Kyoung Lee as "the
    Appellants".

 3. The Appellants are  citizens  of  the  Republic  of  South  Korea  born
    respectively on 28th June 1963 and 10th December 1968.  They  have  two
    sons both of whom are also present in the United Kingdom; the eldest In
    Ha Park born 31st March 1994 and the youngest Seong Ha  Park  born  2nd
    November 1995. It will be seen from those dates of birth that they  are
    now adults, but their history features in this decision.

Background

 4. The first Appellant Sang Po Park entered the UK on 17th October 2003 as
    a student with a visa valid for twelve months. His wife  and  two  sons
    entered as his dependants. His sons at that point were  aged  9  and  7
    years respectively.

 5. Suffice to say for the purposes of this  decision,  the  Appellant  his
    wife and sons have remained in the UK since 2003, having  been  granted
    various extensions of leave, certainly up to 31st October 2009. On 31st
    October 2009 the first Appellant applied  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    minister of religion. This was refused and by May 2010 that application
    was appeal rights exhausted. He remained in the UK with his family.

 6. In July 2010 the  family  requested  the  Respondent  to  exercise  her
    discretion outside the rules  and  grant  them  leave  to  remain.  She
    refused this request and on March 2011 further  refused  to  reconsider
    her refusal.

 7.  On 28th July 2012 the Appellants, once  again,  made  application  for
    leave to remain on account of the private/family life they had built up
    since 2003. They included  their  youngest  son  Seong  Ha  Park  as  a
    dependant upon their applications. Their eldest son,  In  Ha  Park,  by
    this time had attained the  age  of  18  years.  He  therefore  made  a
    separate application for leave under paragraph 276ADE.

 8.  On 2nd January 2014 In Ha Park was granted leave to remain  under  276
    ADE, for 30 months that leave expires in June 2016.

 9. The applications of the Appellants and their youngest son were  refused
    once more on the grounds that none of  them  could  meet  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules. The date of refusal was 24th August  2013,  that  is
    the relevant date of refusal of the matter now before me.

10. Following a Judicial Review claim lodged on 21st November  2013  and  a
    consent order in which the Respondent agreed to review  her  decisions,
    the Appellants' applications of 28th July 2012 were considered again by
    the  Respondent  and  refused  once  more  on  24th  August  2014.  The
    Respondent applied  the  Immigration  Rules  in  force  at  that  time,
    maintained the refusal and found there to be nothing of an  exceptional
    nature  resulting  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  should   the
    Appellants be removed. At the same time the  Appellants'  youngest  son
    Seong Ha Park was granted limited leave  to  remain  -  that  leave  to
    expire on 25th December 2016.

11. The Appellants' appealed the Respondent's latest refusal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

FtT Hearing

12. When the Appellants appeared in the FtT, their appeal came before Judge
    Aziz.

13. In a detailed decision promulgated on 19th March 2015 the  Judge  noted
    the competing arguments before him. The main argument  put  before  him
    was on this basis.  The Appellants' appeals ought to be allowed because
    through an historic injustice owing to a failure on  the  part  of  the
    Respondent, timorously to consider the circumstances of their sons  who
    had been in the UK for well over 7 years, the Appellants had  lost  the
    'opportunity' to apply for indefinite leave to remain, at a  time  when
    the requirements to be  met  under  the  Rules  would  have  been  more
    favourable to them. A full note of this proposition is set out in  [57]
    to [61] of the Judge's decision and is reproduced here.

         "Although the appellants had been over-stayers, they had only  ever
         over-stayed for one month and that was the  result  of  poor  legal
         advice. Apart from this error  they  had  permission  or  leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom either through their visas or  through
         awaiting the outcome of their immigration applications.

         If the respondent had properly considered their applications  under
         the seven years long residence  rules,  all  four  members  of  the
         family would have been granted indefinite leave. The appellants had
         arrived in the United Kingdom  in  October  2003.  There  were  two
         occasions when leave on this basis should have been granted.

         Firstly, on 31 October 2009, the first appellant had made his  ill-
         fated Tier  2  application.  The  application  was  refused  on  20
         November 2010. However, if the Respondent had  properly  considered
         all of the circumstances of this family on  that  date,  then  they
         ought to have realised  that  as  of  the  date  of  decision,  the
         appellants' two children had now accrued seven years  residence  in
         the United Kingdom.

         A second opportunity occurred when their  current  application  was
         made on 15 June 2012(sic). When the new rules were introduced on  9
         July 2012, it merely required that a child had lived in the  United
         Kingdom  for  at  least  7  years  at  the  date   of   application
         (discounting any period of  imprisonment).  But  from  13  December
         2012, a reasonableness requirement was added  by  HC  760.  HC  760
         contains transitional provisions which state:

         "In respect of the other changes set out in this Statement,  if  an
         applicant has made an application  for  entry  clearance  or  leave
         before 13 December 2012 and the application has  not  been  decided
         before that date, it will be decided in accordance with  the  Rules
         in force on 12 December 2012."

         In this particular case the appellants had  two  children  who  had
         accrued in excess of 7 years residence when the  applications  were
         submitted in June  2012(sic).  Their  applications  should  not  be
         subject to any reasonableness requirement. They ought to have  been
         granted leave under  the  Rules  if  their  applications  had  been
         properly  considered  by  the  respondent.  Given   this   material
         oversight  by  the  respondent,  a  decision  to  remove  would  be
         disproportionate."

14. The Judge went on to state clearly, that it was accepted  that  neither
    of the Appellants could not meet the Immigration Rules  which  were  in
    force at the date of decision [79]. He then asked himself  whether  the
    circumstances of the Appellants history permitted him to consider their
    appeals outside the Rules, under Article 8.

15. He said this at [82];

         "Even taking into account all of the factors raised at paragraph 78
         above, I would still find that there is no good reason to  consider
         Article 8 outside of the Rules. However, the main ground upon which
         Mr Mullins argues that this application can been  (sic)  considered
         outside of  the  Rules,  is  on  the  basis  that  there  has  been
         'conspicuous unfairness' arising from the respondent's  failure  to
         properly consider the  appellants'  June  2012  application  (which
         eventually led to Judicial Review [proceedings and in turn, a  High
         Court Consent Order requesting that the respondent  reconsider  the
         appellants' applications, the refusal of which is  the  subject  of
         these appeals)."

16. Further at [87] and [88],

         "I find in the appellants favour  that  when  the  new  Immigration
         Rules were introduced on 9 July 2012, it did merely require that  a
         child had lived in the United Kingdom for at least 7 years  at  the
         date of application (discounting any period of imprisonment) for it
         to succeed under the long residence rules.  This  changed  from  13
         December 2012, when a reasonableness requirement was  added  by  HC
         760. HC 760 contains transitional provisions which state:

         "In respect of the other changes set out in this Statement,  if  an
         applicant has made an application  for  entry  clearance  or  leave
         before 13 December 2012 and the application has  not  been  decided
         before that date, it will be decided in accordance with  the  Rules
         in force on 12 December 2012."

         I am prepared to accept that in this case the appellants'  youngest
         child has accrued well in excess of  7  years  residence  when  his
         family's human rights application was submitted in June  2012(sic).
         He was still a minor at the date of the application. The respondent
          accepts that; i) there is a  genuine  parental  relationship  with
         their youngest child, ii) that he had resided in the United Kingdom
         continuously for over seven years with his parents and iii) he  was
         still a  minor  when  the  June  2012  application  was  made  (and
         therefore still under the care of his parents). On the  findings  I
         have made, there was a real possibility that this application would
         have  succeeded  and  resulted  in  the  appellants  being  granted
         indefinite leave."

17. Finally he allowed the appeals at [97],

         "This has not been an easy decision for the Tribunal to arrive  at.
         However, I find that looking at all the matters in the  round,  the
         factors which I take into account on behalf of the appellants carry
         greater probative weight. The appellants are  a  couple  who  have,
         apart from a short two month period, sought to  ensure  that  their
         residency in the United  Kingdom  has  been  lawful  and  with  the
         permission of the Home Office. They have now been residing  in  the
         United Kingdom for almost 12 years. Most importantly, I  find  that
         they had been unfairly  disadvantaged  by  the  respondents'  (sic)
         failure to properly consider a June 2012(sic)  application  on  the
         basis that their children had been  continuously  resident  in  the
         United Kingdom for over seven years. Their failure did result in  a
         real lost opportunity for the appellants to claim indefinite  leave
         to remain through a recognisable route. I am  just  persuaded  that
         proportionality should be exercised in the appellants' favour."

18. The  Respondent  sought  permission  to  appeal  the  decision  on  the
    following grounds;

       . the FtT failed to give any or adequate reasons for its finding that
         the Appellants had "lost a real opportunity"  to  claim  indefinite
         leave to remain, and

       . misdirected itself under  Article  8;  (i)  by  finding  an  unfair
         disadvantage had been  caused  to  the  Appellants  by  the  SSHD's
         failure to properly consider their application was such  that  when
         weighed in the balance it weighed in their favour; (ii) failing  to
         recognise that an entitlement to live in the UK  on  the  basis  of
         private life does not of itself establish that it would be contrary
         to the best interests of a child to remain in the family unit  with
         their parents outside the UK; (iii) the weight to  be  afforded  to
         the public interest was not properly engaged.

Error of Law/Consideration

19. It was argued in the First-tier Tribunal that the youngest son has lost
    an opportunity of obtaining leave to remain under paragraph 276 ADE  as
    a child,  without  having  to  satisfy  the  test  of  whether  it  was
    reasonable for him to leave the United Kingdom having resided here  for
    7 years. That test was introduced on the 13th December 2012 by HC 760.

20. It appears now to be accepted by the Respondent that this was so.

21. The argument now is that the Judge  failed  to  explain  why,  had  the
    youngest child's application been dealt with  properly  in  2012,  that
    would have led to the Appellants  being  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain under the Rules.

22. Mr Mullins accepts that the Judge did not explain this, but argues that
    it is immaterial because in fact there was a recognised  route  -  that
    route was under Section Ex.1 of Appendix FM of the Rules; namely,  they
    were parents with a genuine parental relationship with a child who  was
    and had been in the United Kingdom for at least 7 years  and  it  would
    not be reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK.

23. He further argues that it would have been bizarre to  suggest  that  it
    could be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  UK,  having  just
    granted him leave to remain under paragraph 276 ADE, and therefore  the
    Appellants would have had a recognized route to a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain under the Rules.

24. This 'historic injustice' was an important factor that  the  judge  was
    entitled to take into account when conducting the Article  8  balancing
    exercise. In any event the respondent could not say on  one  hand  that
    she accepted that there were circumstances showing that the Appellant's
    youngest son merited a grant of leave, and on the other say as she  did
    in the her RFRL that it was 'possible' for him to leave  the  UK  along
    with his parents. sons especially the youngest.

25. I find force in this argument. I agree that whilst it is true that  the
    Judge did not  explain  why  the  failure  to  deal  with  the  child's
    application gave rise to a  'lost  opportunity',  this  was  immaterial
    given the fact that there was in fact  a  recognized  route  under  the
    Rules for the Appellants to have acquired indefinite leave to remain.

26. In those circumstances, the error of law identified by the Secretary of
    State does not warrant the setting aside of the  Judge's  decision  and
    this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

27. The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made


Signature     Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



Fee Award

The F-t Tribunal made no fee award. That decision stands.


Signature     Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
