
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/28903/2013
     IA/29141/2013
     ia/29142/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 October 2014                             |On 20 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                                mohammad ali
                                zulfiqar ali
                                shaheen bibi
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms S Rafiq instructed by Bukhari Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent has been granted permission to appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge De Haney who allowed  the  first  appellant's
    appeal against his administrative removal  for  reasons  given  in  his
    determination dated 21 March 2014.  The second and third appellants had
    been granted permission to appeal the judge's decision dismissing their
    appeals against the respondent's decisions to remove them to  Pakistan.
    The appellants are all nationals of that country.

 2. To avoid confusion I shall continue to refer to  the  parties  as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal (the appellants) and for  the  same
    reason preserve the title to the action as it was before the First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. Ms Rafiq was hampered by not having a copy of the grounds of appeal  by
    the second and third appellants.  Although I  refused  her  application
    for adjournment I nevertheless  gave  time  for  her  to  consider  the
    paperwork.   In  the  course  of  that  exercise  the   representatives
    conferred.  The upshot was that Ms Rafiq conceded error by the judge in
    his decision regarding the first appellant and  Ms  Johnstone  conceded
    error by the judge in his reasons for dismissing  the  appeals  by  the
    second and third appellants.  Ms Johnstone also conceded  that  if  the
    first appellant establishes in the re-making of the  decision  that  he
    has been in the United Kingdom since 1997 he will be entitled to  leave
    to remain pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(v) of the Immigration Rules.

 4. Ms Rafiq clarified that the first appellant had sought  to  rely  on  a
    religious marriage to an EEA national that had taken  place  after  the
    immigration decision.  She accepted that no evidence had been  provided
    to the exercise of treaty rights by his partner Maria Syed.

 5. The concessions by  the  representatives  were  based  on  acknowledged
    failure by the First-tier Tribunal Judge to give adequate  reasons  for
    his finding that the first appellant had been here since  1997  and  an
    absence of reasons  regarding  the  impact  on  the  second  and  third
    appellants of their removal. This included an absence of a finding  and
    the impact proportionality of the medical evidence regarding the  third
    appellant and her ability to care for  the  second  appellant  who  has
    dementia.

 6. Accordingly, the appeals will be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    pursuant to s.12 of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007.
    The  representatives  sought  such  an  outcome  and  I  consider  this
    appropriate in the light of the extent of  judicial  fact-finding  that
    will be necessary.  None of the findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge is preserved.



Signed

[pic]                                        Date 20 October 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
