

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28729/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 5th May 2015                               |On 6th May 2015              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                SUMAN GODARA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance.
For the Respondent:    Mr Smart - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against  a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge J S Pacey promulgated on the 18th November 2014  in  which  the
       Judge dismissed the Appellants appeal  against  the  refusal  of  her
       application for leave to remain as a spouse.

    2. Permisison to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 7th January
       2015.

    3. The Appellant failed to attend the  hearing.  Mr  Smart  advised  the
       Tribunal that following the making of a fresh application in  January
       2015 leave has been granted. The Respondents case  management  screen
       print reveals a data entry "Applicant has made a new FLM application,
       on this application she states she wished to withdraw the appeal  she
       has outstanding" although no request to withdraw  has  been  received
       from the Applicant by the Tribunal.

    4. As the Appellant failed to attend to pursue her  appeal  against  the
       decision of Judge Pacey and as there is no obvious basis for  finding
       the Judge made an error of law material to her  decision  to  dismiss
       the appeal, this appeal is dismissed.

Decision

    5. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity

    6. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005. I make no such order.



Signed.......................................................

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 6th May 2015
