
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/28381/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House           |Decision Promulgated            |
|On: 21 November 2014            |On: 24 November 2014            |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                       KEMISHA CHANTELLE SHENA PLUMMER
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms B Poynor, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Respondent against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Traynor in which  he  allowed  the  appeal  of  the
    Appellant, a citizen of Jamaica, against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to leave to remain on the basis  of  long  residence  and  human
    rights.

 2. The application under appeal was made  on  19  December  2012  and  was
    refused by reference to paragraphs 276B and 276ADE of  the  Immigration
    Rules (HC395) on 24 June 2013.  The Appellant exercised  her  right  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. Her appeal was heard on  14  January
    2014 and dismissed and her application for leave to appeal against this
    decision was granted and on 25 April 2014 the  Upper  Tribunal  allowed
    her appeal against the First-tier Tribunal decision  and  remitted  her
    appeal for rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal. This is the appeal
    which came before Judge Traynor on 31 July 2014 and  was  allowed.  The
    Judge found that the Appellant had  no  ties  with  Jamaica  being  the
    country to which she would have to go if required to leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. The Respondent applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    The application was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen  on  7
    October 2014 in the following terms

       The grounds on which permission to appeal is sought submit  that  in
       finding that  the  Appellant  had  no  ties  to  Jamaica  the  Judge
       misdirected himself as to the application of Ogundimu and  neglected
       to consider the Appellant's continuing familiarity with that country
       and its customs and culture. These grounds are arguable.



 4. At the hearing before me the Appellant was represented by Ms Poynor and
    Mr Tufan appeared for the Respondent.


SUBMISSIONS

 5. On behalf the Respondent Mr Tufan relied on the grounds  of  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal and added that the  Judge  had  failed  to  consider
    section  117B  Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   This
    provision came into force on 28 July 2014 and with the  hearing  taking
    place on 31 July 2014 the Judge was bound by statute to consider it. Mr
    Tufan submitted a copy of the decision in R (Bailey) v SSHD [2014] EWHC
    1078 (Admin) and, referring to paragraphs 13  and  14  said  that  this
    established the criteria that the Judge should have taken into  account
    when dealing with the issue of 'ties'.  The  Appellant  speaks  perfect
    English and this is the language of Jamaica. She  spent  her  formative
    years in that country and went back there  on  holiday  in  2010.  This
    shows that she has ties to that country and  that  the  Judge  has  not
    properly applied the ratio  in  Ogundimu  [2013]  UKUT  60  (IAC).  His
    findings are irrational.

 6. For the Appellant Ms Poynor said that the Judge had applied the correct
    test. The issue of ties and  their  nature  was  very  clearly  in  the
    Judge's mind. He found the Appellant's evidence credible and  he  found
    that she had no ties to Jamaica.  The  authority  put  forward  in  the
    grounds of appeal, Balogun v UK 60286/09 [2012] ECHR was a  deportation
    case concerning a person who had spent  just  4  years  in  the  United
    Kingdom and involved very different circumstances to  those  pertaining
    here. In Balogun the Court had not found the Appellant to be  credible.
    Dealing with section 117B any error of law was  not  material.  If  the
    Judge had considered section 117B it would have made no  difference  to
    the  decision.  The  Appellant  speaks  English,  she  is   financially
    independent, her relationship with her partner was established when she
    was lawfully present in the United Kingdom and her  immigration  status
    was not precarious when her private life was established.

 7. I reserved my decision but indicated that I did not require  Ms  Poynor
    to address me on remaking the decision were I to find an error of law.


Error of law

 8. In my judgement the First-tier Tribunal made no material error of  law.
    The primary issue  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  whether  the
    Appellant had ties to Jamaica within the meaning of  paragraph  276ADE.
    This is clear from the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge King  remitting
    the matter back for hearing to the First-tier Tribunal  (paragraphs  21
    and 22). First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor notes this at paragraph 7 of
    his determination.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal determination shows  that  Judge  Traynor  very
    carefully heard evidence directed to the issue of ties (paragraphs  19-
    40). In making his findings Judge Traynor very clearly had the issue of
    ties in mind and in this respect refers to Ogundimu no less  than  four
    times. The findings cover paragraphs 41 to  53  and  it  is  abundantly
    clear from reading these  paragraphs  that  the  Judge  went  to  great
    lengths to consider the Appellant's evidence and circumstances  against
    the Ogundimu criteria. The authority put forward  by  Mr  Tufan  simply
    repeats these criteria. The Judge makes clear and reasoned findings. He
    finds the Appellant's evidence to be credible. He  finds  significantly
    that "there is no likelihood of the Appellant's  mother  welcoming  her
    back".

10. There is nothing irrational in these findings.  The  substance  of  the
    Respondent's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal is no more than  a
    disagreement with these finding. In my judgment these  are  finding  of
    fact that were properly open to the Judge and which are based on  clear
    and detailed reasoning. There is no error of law.


11. Turning to section 117B there is no doubt that the Judge,  hearing  the
    case on 31 July 2014, should have taken this into  account  if  he  was
    considering  whether  the  Respondent's   decision   made   under   the
    Immigration Acts breached the Appellant's right to respect for  private
    and family life under Article 8 ECHR (section 117A(1)).  In  the  first
    place having allowed the appeal under  the  terms  of  the  Immigration
    Rules the Judge did not go on to consider  Article  8  separately  (see
    paragraph 54). Further and in any event, and as correctly submitted  by
    Ms Poynor, all public interest  questions  specified  in  section  117B
    would have worked in the Appellant's favour so even if section 117B had
    been considered it could not have made a  material  difference  to  the
    Judge's decision.

12. There is no error of law material to the decision to allow  the  appeal
    and the Respondent's appeal is therefore dismissed.


Summary

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law.



Signed:     Date: 21 November 2014

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
