
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29009/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Belfast                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 January 2015                            |On 16 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              TOUFIK TISMELANE
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S McTaggart, Counsel, instructed by Andrew
Russell & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The claimant is a national of Algeria born on 26 January 1972.

2.   He had been granted a residence card from 14 March  2007  to  14  March
    2012 on the basis that he was a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national,
    namely his wife, Mrs Sheila McEvoy. They married on 19  June  2006  and
    divorced on 2 March 2012.

3.   On 23 April 2012 an application was made for  the  grant  of  permanent
    residence on the basis that his  former  spouse  had  exercised  treaty
    rights up until the point of divorce so as to make him qualified person
    under the Regulations.

4.   The Judge considered a number  of  financial  documents  and  concluded
    that indeed the appellant's wife had  been  exercising  treaty  rights,
    certainly shortly before the divorce and most likely at the time of the
    divorce, so by virtue of the Regulations she would still be treated  as
    a worker. The Judge found the evidence of the claimant to  be  credible
    and accordingly allowed the appeal under the EEA Regulations.

5.   Challenge was made to that decision by the Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department, essentially on the basis that there was no documentary
    evidence to establish that which the Judge purported to find  and  that
    essentially it was a matter of speculation. It was argued that on  that
    basis the claimant did not  retain  a  right  of  the  residence  under
    Regulation 10(5) and could not qualify  for  permanent  residence  with
    reference to Regulation 15 of the EEA Regulations.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted on that  basis  and  thus  the  matter
    comes before me in pursuance of that grant.

7.   There was some uncertainty as between the parties initially as to  what
    documents had been seen by the Judge. Those documents which are  within
    my file were disclosed to the parties for them to consider.

8.   I note at paragraph 15 of the determination that the P60 forms for  the
    two years  to 5 April 2006, to 5  April  2007  to  5  April  2008  were
    produced.  Those P60 forms together with other materials indicated that
    the appellant's wife worked full-time.

9.   It was the evidence of the claimant, which was accepted by  the  Judge,
    that although he had no other documentation, because it  was  difficult
    to obtain that from her, she  had  nevertheless  worked  until  shortly
    before the  divorce.   She  had  then  stopped  working  in  order  for
    remarriage.

10.  The first issue, which was most  helpfully  clarified  as  between  the
    parties, was that the Judge perhaps had  rather  adopted  a  cumbersome
    route to the grant of permanent residence.  Under the  Regulations  the
    claimant could  claim  permanent  residence  if  his  spouse  had  been
    exercising treaty rights as at the time of the divorce  and  that  they
    had lived together for at least three years in any period prior to that
    divorce. Alternatively, that  right  would  accrue  if  the  claimant's
    spouse had previously gained a permanent night of residence because she
    had been exercising treaty rights for five years or more.

11.  As Mr  Shilliday  most  fairly  pointed  out,  the  evidence  that  was
    presented was that she had been working certainly  from  5  April  2006
    until shortly before the divorce in 2012. If that evidence was  correct
    and reliable it would mean that she had  exercised  treaty  rights  for
    more five years and  accordingly  under  the  Regulations  particularly
    Regulation 15 of  the  EEA  Regulations  she  qualified  for  permanent
    residence and so would her spouse, the claimant.

12.  Nevertheless  Mr  Shiliday,  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,
    submitted that even on that basis it was quite wrong for the  Judge  to
    dispense with the requirement  of  documentary  evidence  to  establish
    those important facts.  The only  documents  that  were  produced  were
    those up until 2008.  There  was  a  paucity  of  any  other  documents
    relating to later employment up until the date of  divorce  or  shortly
    before.  He invited me to find that it was simply not  acceptable  that
    findings based on speculation should be made.  Although he most  fairly
    conceded  that  the  appropriate  Regulations  did  not   specify   the
    documentation, whereas others did, nevertheless the burden of proof and
    the balance of probabilities demanded some material and not  just  oral
    evidence.

13.  Mr Taggart,  who  represents  the  claimant,  submitted  that  was  not
    correct.  Evidence given by an appellant if accepted and  found  to  be
    credible  is  as  much  evidence  as  documentation.    The   lack   of
    documentation may be a factor which influences what weight can be given
    to the evidence but that is a matter for the Judge.  In this case there
    had been a sound basis for employment  set out in  documentation  which
    was carried forward by oral evidence.  He invited me to  find  that  in
    all the circumstances it was open to the Judge to accept that  evidence
    and make the findings which were made.

14.  I agree.  Judges of course have to be careful as to the nature  of  the
    evidence that is received.  There may be occasions where the absence of
    documentation gives rise in commonsense to  real  concerns  as  to  the
    truthfulness of the evidence.  There may be occasions,  however,  where
    the testimony of a witness can be accepted,  the  witness  being  found
    both to be reliable and a witness of truth.  This was clearly the  case
    as can be seen in this case at paragraph 17.  It seems to me and  I  so
    find that the Judge was entitled to rely on part documentation and part
    oral evidence in coming to the  conclusion  that  certainly  from  2006
    until 2012 the sponsor had worked for  at  least  five  years,  thereby
    entitling the claimant to the relief that is sought.

15.  In those circumstances I find no error  of  law.   The  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  is  dismissed  before  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The original decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    stands, namely that the appeal under the EEA Regulations is allowed.



Signed        Date 13 January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

