
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29880/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th September 2015                |On 18th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                        EBERECHUKWU ONYINYE OGWUEGBU
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant is a female  Nigerian  citizen  born  4th  May  1979  who
    appeals against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Kaler
    promulgated on 27th March 2015.

 2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 8th October 2009 with leave
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student valid until 12th February 2012.  She  was
    subsequently granted leave as the dependant of  a  points-based  system
    migrant on 23rd January 2012, this leave was renewed on  25th  February
    2013 until 31st May 2014.  This leave was granted on the basis that the
    Appellant's partner, Innocent Nwalozie Amadi, was a points-based system
    migrant.

 3. On 6th May 2014 the Appellant  applied  for  further  leave  to  remain
    submitting form FLR(FP).  She indicated in her application that she had
    entered the United Kingdom as a student in 2009 and that she  currently
    had employment.  She confirmed at section  7.8  that  her  relationship
    with her partner began in January  2011,  and  that  he  was  currently
    awaiting a decision on his application for indefinite leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant indicated that she was  pregnant,
    and that she and her partner had no plans to live  outside  the  United
    Kingdom.

 4. The application was refused by letter dated  17th  July  2014  and  the
    Respondent issued a Notice of Immigration Decision  of  the  same  date
    refusing to vary leave to remain, and deciding to remove the  Appellant
    from the United Kingdom.

 5. The Appellant appealed and requested that her appeal be decided on  the
    papers.

 6. Judge Kaler  (the  judge)  considered  the  appeal  on  the  papers  as
    requested and dismissed the appeal on human rights  grounds  and  under
    the Immigration Rules.

 7. The Appellant then applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was contended that the judge had erred in  law
    in making reference to the Appellant having  previously  been  married,
    but that her marriage was no longer subsisting, and that she was now in
    another relationship.  The Appellant explained that she had never  been
    previously married, and contended that  Mr  Amadi  had  been  her  only
    partner from 2009 and that she had been granted leave to remain as  his
    partner from 23rd January 2012.  She  pointed  out  that  she  and  her
    partner are traditionally married.

 8. The Appellant also contended that the judge had not properly taken into
    account that her partner had an application pending as his  appeal  had
    been allowed to the extent that his  application  remained  outstanding
    before the Secretary of State for a lawful decision to  be  made.   The
    Appellant also pointed out that she and her partner have a son born  on
    9th January 2015.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    White who found that the judge had arguably made a significant error of
    fact in stating that the Appellant had been previously married.

10. Also there had been some confusion in the Respondent's recital  of  the
    Appellant's immigration history which  may  have  tainted  the  judge's
    findings, and it was arguable that the judge  should  have  given  more
    adequate consideration to the best interests of the Appellant's child.

11. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  contending  in  summary  that  the  judge  had  directed  herself
    appropriately.  It  was  submitted  that  any  factual  error  was  not
    material and there was in fact no evidence before the  judge  that  the
    Appellant had given birth.

12. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

13. The Appellant attended the hearing and indicated that she  was  content
    to proceed without legal representation.

14. Mr Melvin provided the  Appellant  with  the  rule  24  response.   The
    Appellant was given an opportunity to consider this.

15. I explained to the  Appellant  the  procedure  that  would  be  adopted
    throughout the hearing, and that the purpose  of  the  hearing  was  to
    decide whether the First-tier Tribunal had made a mistake of law.

16. A copy of the Appellant's letter to the Tribunal dated 14th July  2015,
    together with a letter from the Home Office dated 7th July  2015  which
    informed the Appellant's partner that he been granted leave to  remain,
    was supplied to Mr Melvin.

17. I then heard from the Appellant as to why she believed  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law.   She  relied  upon  the  grounds  contained
    within the application for permission  to  appeal,  and  the  grant  of
    permission.

18. The Appellant pointed  out  that  the  judge  had  made  a  mistake  in
    recording that she had been previously married.  She also  pointed  out
    that her partner had now been granted leave  to  remain.   I  explained
    that this evidence was not relevant to the error of law issue,  as  her
    partner had not been granted leave to remain when the  judge  made  her
    decision.

19. The Appellant confirmed that she  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    student on 8th October 2009 and that  she  had  a  student  visa  until
    February 2012.  In January 2012 she was granted a visa as  a  dependant
    of her partner, which was further extended in February 2013  until  May
    2014.

20. The Appellant also advised that she and her  partner  had  a  customary
    marriage which took place in Nigeria on 1st November 2014.  Members  of
    their family were present but they were not as  they  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The Appellant also confirmed that she and her  partner
    have a son who was born on 9th January 2015.

21. The Appellant stated that the judge should have taken into account that
    her partner's application for leave to remain was still outstanding.

22. I asked the Appellant what evidence was before  the  judge  to  confirm
    that she had a child, and the  Appellant  acknowledged  that  the  only
    medical evidence was a letter from her GP which  was  attached  to  the
    Notice of Appeal, and which stated that she was pregnant and  expecting
    a baby on 4th January 2015.

23. I then heard submissions from Mr Melvin who relied  upon  the  rule  24
    response and his written submissions.  Mr Melvin pointed  out  that  it
    was accepted that the Appellant could not meet the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules and contended that although  the  judge  had  made  a
    mistake of fact in recording that the  Appellant  had  been  previously
    married, this was not material to the application.

24. Mr Melvin pointed out that  the  judge  had  taken  into  account  that
    neither the Appellant nor her partner had ever had anything other  than
    limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom and I was asked  to  find
    that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  sustainable  and
    disclosed no error of law.

25. By way of response the Appellant  reiterated  that  she  had  been  her
    partner's dependant since January 2012, and he was currently in Nigeria
    and had not yet been able to return as he had  contracted  malaria  and
    was receiving treatment.  The Appellant stated that she was  a  support
    worker, and that she did voluntary work for the church and that she and
    her partner had never received benefits in the United Kingdom and  they
    had paid tax and national insurance.

26. At the conclusion of submissions I indicated that I  would  reserve  my
    decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

27. I find that the judge erred in paragraphs 4 and 6 of  her  decision  by
    describing the Appellant as having previously been married.   This  was
    factually incorrect.  I believe the error was caused by a misreading of
    section 7.17 of the application form.  The Appellant  in  that  section
    indicated that her partner had previously been  married  but  that  his
    marriage was no longer subsisting.  She  indicated  that  she  had  not
    previously been married.

28. I find that the judge also erred in paragraph 6 in recording  that  the
    Appellant had  not  stated  how  long  she  had  been  in  her  present
    relationship.  The Appellant had in fact indicated this at 7.8  of  her
    application form, indicating that her  relationship  with  her  partner
    began in January 2011.  The judge found that the relationship could not
    have been in existence any longer than four years, whereas according to
    the Appellant, the relationship had been in force just over four  years
    at the date that the judge considered the appeal.

29. The judge correctly recorded that the Appellant's  immigration  history
    was that she entered the UK on 8th October 2009 as a  Tier  4  Student,
    with leave until February 2012, and then recorded that she was  granted
    leave as a dependent spouse on 23rd January 2012 until 31st  May  2014.
    That is not absolutely correct, as the leave granted  on  23rd  January
    2012 was as the partner of a points-based system migrant  although  the
    dates are correct.

30. I have to decide whether these mistakes amount to an error of law which
    is material.  In my view they do not for the following reasons.

31. It is not disputed that the requirements of  E-LTRP.1.2  could  not  be
    satisfied and therefore the application for leave to remain  could  not
    succeed with reference to Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  in
    relation to family life.

32. It was not suggested that the appeal should succeed with  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1) in relation to private life.  The Appellant had not
    been in the UK for twenty years, and had not suggested that there would
    be very significant obstacles to her  integration  back  into  Nigeria.
    The burden of proof and the burden of providing evidence in a case such
    as this rests on the Appellant.

33. Therefore, the judge did not err in finding that the appeal  could  not
    succeed with reference to Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE(1).

34. The judge went on to consider Article 8 outside the rules  taking  into
    account the guidance  given  in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.   The  judge
    recognised, and accepted that the Appellant had established family life
    with her partner, describing it of short duration.  I do not find  this
    to be a material error.  The relationship had been in  force  for  just
    over four years.  There was no  evidence  before  the  judge  that  the
    parties were married, and in fact they do not have a marriage  that  is
    recognised in the UK.  The Appellant stated that a  customary  marriage
    was undertaken in Nigeria in November 2014 but there was no evidence of
    that before the judge.

35. The judge granting permission to appeal found it  arguable  that  Judge
    Kaler should  have  given  more  adequate  consideration  to  the  best
    interests of the child.  One must consider what evidence was before the
    judge in relation to the child.  There was in fact no evidence that the
    child had been  born.   The  Appellant  has  confirmed  that  the  only
    information in relation to  the  child  was  a  letter  from  Dr  Ahmed
    submitted with the Notice of Appeal which indicated that the  Appellant
    was pregnant and due to give birth in January 2015.

36. The Appellant requested that her appeal be decided on the papers.  That
    was her choice, and it is therefore her responsibility to  ensure  that
    any evidence to support her appeal is submitted to the Tribunal.  In my
    view, the Appellant did not submit adequate or comprehensive  evidence.
    In view of the scarcity of information before the judge in relation  to
    the child, I find no error of law in the judge recording  simply,  that
    the best interests of an infant child lie in being with his parents.

37. The judge was aware, and recorded  that  the  Appellant's  partner  had
    applied to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of long  residence
    and his application had been refused.  The judge also recorded that the
    partner had appealed that decision and that his appeal had been allowed
    to a limited extent.  In my view, the judge was  therefore  aware  that
    the decision remained outstanding before the Respondent.

38. In considering Article 8 outside the rules, the  judge  correctly  took
    into account the  considerations  contained  in  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Having found that family
    life existed, the judge went on to consider proportionality.

39. The judge did not err in paragraph 12 in attaching  significant  weight
    to the wish of the Secretary of State to maintain immigration  control.
    Section 117B(1) of the  2002  Act  confirms  that  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration controls is in the public interest.

40. The judge took into account that the Appellant is highly qualified, and
    that she and her partner are both Nigerian citizens.

41. The judge  was  entitled  to  conclude,  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    demonstrated any adequate reason, why  her  appeal  should  be  allowed
    outside the Immigration Rules.  The starting point  of  the  judge  was
    clearly to place weight upon the fact that the Immigration Rules  could
    not be satisfied.

42. The judge went on to consider whether  there  were  any  factors  which
    would justify allowing the appeal outside  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    found none.

43. It is clear that the Appellant's  partner  has  now  been  granted  two
    years' leave to remain, but this grant took place  in  July  2015,  and
    therefore is not relevant to my consideration as to whether  the  judge
    erred in law in considering the appeal in March 2015 as  at  that  time
    the partner had not been granted leave to remain.

44. In my view, the factual mistakes by the judge are not material, and the
    judge did not materially err in law in dismissing this appeal under the
    Immigration Rules or on human rights grounds.  It is of course open  to
    the Appellant to make a further application to the Secretary  of  State
    now that her partner has been granted further leave to remain.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law such that  the  decision  must  be  set
aside.  I do not set aside the decision and the appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no
request for anonymity, and the Upper Tribunal makes no anonymity order.


Signed        Date 10th September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and  therefore  so  does  the
decision not to make a fee award.


Signed        Date 10th September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

