
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29585/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th January 2015                          |On 27th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                          Mr Mohammed Mehedi Hasan
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kabir, Solicitor of SEB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, Mr Mohammed Mehedi Hasan, date of birth 1st August 1984,
    is a citizen of Bangladesh.

 2. I have considered whether any of the parties to the present proceedings
    requires the protection of an anonymity direction.  Taking  account  of
    all the circumstances I  do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Sangha promulgated on 27th October 2014.  The judge
    dismissed the appeal  of  the  Appellant  against  a  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 10th July 2014 to refuse  the  Appellant  a  residence
    card as evidence that he was entitled to reside in the  United  Kingdom
    as a family member of  an  EEA  national  under  Regulation  8  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 4. By permission granted on 10th December 2014 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Garro granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 5. On 11th September 2009 the Appellant was granted entry clearance to the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 4 Student under the points-based system.  That
    leave was to run from 28th October 2012.  On 26th  September  2011  the
    Appellant applied for an extension of his leave which was granted.   On
    30th April 2013 the Appellant applied for  an  EEA  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom as an  extended
    family member of an EEA citizen exercising treaty rights in the UK.

 6. The Appellant was seeking to assert that  he  was  an  extended  family
    member of a Mr Aminul Islam Begum as he was  dependent  upon  and/or  a
    member of the household of Mr Aminul Islam Begum whilst  in  Bangladesh
    in the past and was presently dependent and a member of  the  household
    of Mr Aminul Islam Begum in the United Kingdom.

 7. As set out above the Appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2012.   Mr
    Aminul Islam Begum did not become a citizen of the EEA until 2013.   It
    is noted within the determination at paragraph 17 that Mr Begum  became
    a Spanish citizen at the beginning of 2013.  Accordingly there  was  no
    point in time when the Appellant was resident or dependent upon an  EEA
    citizen whilst he was in Bangladesh.

 8. I draw attention to the case of Dauhoo [2012] UKUT 79 and the  case  of
    Moneke [2012] UKUT 341 in  which  the  Upper  Tribunal  summarised  the
    requirements of Regulation 8.  The case law  emphasises  that  the  EEA
    national has to be an EEA national at the time that the  applicant  was
    dependant or a member of the household in his home country and prior to
    coming to the United Kingdom.  In the  present  circumstances  the  EEA
    national only became an EEA national after the Appellant  came  to  the
    United Kingdom.  Accordingly the Appellant  cannot  succeed  under  the
    Regulations in respect of his application for an EEA residence permit.

 9. The Grounds of Appeal continue by arguing that the judge has failed  to
    consider Article 8.  The first point to be made in respect  thereof  is
    that there is no decision  currently  to  remove  the  Appellant.   The
    decision refusing to issue a residence card  specifically  states  that
    the Appellant is required to leave the United Kingdom failing  which  a
    separate decision may be made to  enforce  removal  at  a  later  date.
    Until such time as there is a decision to remove the Appellant it  does
    not appear that the present arrangements with regard to  the  Appellant
    are to be altered.  What is required on the Appellant's  part  is  that
    the Appellant should make a proper application to remain  either  under
    the Immigration Rules or on the basis of his  Article  8  rights.   The
    Appellant has made no such application.

10. There can be no reason why  the  Appellant  should  not  make  such  an
    application and have a proper consideration  of  whether  he  would  be
    entitled to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the
    immigration rules and Article 8.  In such circumstances until such time
    as the Appellant has made a proper application I see no reason why  the
    Secretary of State should consider in detail the Article  8  rights  of
    the Appellant.  All that is required is for the  Appellant  to  make  a
    proper application which he has not done.

11. I would also note that on the basis of the evidence presented the  only
    evidence of any family or private life relates to  the  two  statements
    submitted by the Appellant and Mr Begum, his Sponsor and  cousin.   The
    extent of any family life is a period of one year  when  the  Appellant
    has been living with Mr Begum and a period when it is suggested he  has
    been dependent on Mr Begum for financial support.

12. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom as a  student  and  was  given
    further leave as a student.  Once the purpose for which  the  Appellant
    was given leave  is  complete  in  the  normal  course  of  events  the
    Appellant would return to his home country.  He  is  in  the  UK  on  a
    temporary basis without any expectation of being  able  to  stay.   The
    Appellant has the opportunity of remaining provided he can comply  with
    the Immigration Rules or can assert any substance to an Article 8 right
    to private or family life.

13. Other than the aspects outlined of dependency of a financial nature  or
    living with Mr Begum for a period of a year the Appellant has  not  put
    forward any other aspects other than the  education  that  he  came  to
    enjoy in the United Kingdom.

14. In accordance with the cases of CDS Brazil [2010] UKUT 305 [see also LL
    (China) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 617 education in the United  Kingdom  is
    an aspect of private life but there  is  no  right  to  education.  The
    development of other aspects of private life need to be present to give
    substance to such private life. Once  that  purpose  of  the  leave  is
    complete and the Immigration Rules give an  opportunity  to  stay,  the
    continuation of that private life aspect is more than amply covered  by
    the Rules themselves.

15. The Appellant has family in Bangladesh, his home country.  His  parents
    are there.  His siblings are there.  In the United Kingdom  he  has  Mr
    Begum.  He has asserted that he has  a  financial  dependency  upon  Mr
    Begum.  However, as is evident from paragraphs 17, 18  and  19  of  the
    determination the judge did not accept  the  evidence  with  regard  to
    financial  dependency.   The  judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to  make
    findings in respect thereof and to reject such financial dependency.

16. That being the extent of family life and private life, the family  life
    would have to meet the requirements with regard to Kugathas [2003] EWCA
    Civ 31 and on the facts as  presented  I  would  not  have  found  that
    Article 8 family life existed in respect of  the  facts  as  presented.
    With regard to private life the Appellant has not  asserted  any  other
    material aspect and his right to education is limited by the fact  that
    he could succeed under the Immigration Rules provided he met the  Rules
    himself.  If the Appellant wishes to pursue his studies then he  should
    make a proper application to remain as a student.

17. Taking all the  circumstances  into  account  the  requirement  of  the
    Appellant to make a proper application to have proper consideration  of
    his private life I find is not such an interference in  any  Article  8
    right as to make a breach of  the  Article  engaged  on  the  facts  as
    presented.

18. Taking account of the circumstances I do not find that  the  judge  has
    made a material error of law in failing to  consider  Article  8.   The
    fact of family life has not been proved in  accordance  with  Kugathas.
    The fact of private life has not been proved.  In all the circumstances
    I find that the judge was entitled to  deal  with  the  matter  in  the
    manner that he did.  Even if the judge has made an error of  law,  such
    error of law is not material  as  all  that  is  required  is  for  the
    Appellant to make appropriate application to be  entitled  to  stay  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules.

19. Accordingly for the reasons set out I find that there  is  no  arguable
    material error of law in the determination and I uphold the decision to
    dismiss this matter on all grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 27th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 27th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
