
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29782/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|on 19 August 2015                    |On 21 December 2015                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                NABILA KOUSER
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tufan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Reid instructed by Hilcrest Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against  a  determination  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Majid, promulgated on the 24 March 2015 following a hearing  at
       Taylor House on the 18 March 2015, in which  the  judge  allowed  the
       appeal against the Secretary of States refusal of the application for
       leave to remain in the UK under the Immigration Rules.




Discussion

    2. Miss Kouser was represented before the Upper Tribunal  by  Miss  Reid
       who sought an adjournment on the basis Mr Singer had been  instructed
       to represent Miss Kouser but he had to return home as a result  of  a
       family issue meaning she only saw the papers at 1.00 pm. The case was
       listed for 2.00pm. It was claimed not all the papers  were  available
       as some were with Mr Singer. Papers had been handed to  her  but  she
       had only had them for about 25 minutes.

    3. The challenge by the Secretary of State  refers  to  the  fact  Judge
       Majid allowed the appeal under what is described in the determination
       as 'the relevant Immigration Rules'  and  Article  ECHR.   The  Judge
       failed, however, to specify which rule was relevant or how or why  it
       was satisfied. In relation to Article 8 ECHR there is  no  indication
       the  Judge  had  any  regard  to  section  117  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration  and Asylum Act 2002 making the assessment  fundamentally
       flawed - Dube [2015] UKUT 00090 refers.

    4. It was indicated to Miss Reid that the Tribunals preliminary view was
       that the determination was infected by material legal  error  of  the
       type  identified  in  the  grounds  of   challenge   and   that   the
       determination should be set aside and the appeal remitted  to  enable
       both parties to receive a proper hearing which they had not  received
       to date.

    5. Miss Reid was granted further  time  to  take  instruction  from  her
       client after which she accepted that the determination was  poor  and
       agreed with the proposal to remit.

Decision

    6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law for the reasons
       set out in the respondent's grounds of challenge.  I  set  aside  the
       decision of the original Judge. I remit the appeal to be re-heard  by
       a salaried judge of the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Taylor  House
       other than Judge Majid.

  Anonymity.

    7. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 10 December 2015
