
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29682/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 25th October 2017                         |On 06th November 2017          |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                        mr Harishbhai Manilal Gajjar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of India born 13th February 1968, appeals with
    permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of  a  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Majid) dismissing his appeal against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 13th August 2015 refusing him leave to remain in the UK  as
    the spouse of his Sponsor, Monika Varma.

 2. The Appellant's case is that he entered the UK on 3rd  August  2012  in
    possession of a business visa valid until 16th July 2014.  Four  months
    after entry, in December 2012,  he  married  Monika  Varma,  a  British
    citizen.  There are no children of the marriage.

 3. Once the Appellant's  visa  expired,  he  remained  in  the  UK  as  an
    overstayer and only applied for leave to remain on 11th June 2015.

 4. The Respondent refused the application on the basis  that  firstly  she
    was not satisfied that the  marriage  between  the  Appellant  and  his
    Sponsor was a genuine and subsisting one, and secondly that there would
    be no interference with the Appellant's family/private life  engendered
    by a decision to refuse the application.

 5. The Appellant appealed the Respondent's refusal under Section 82 of the
    Nationality, Asylum and Immigration Act 2002  and  the  appeal  hearing
    came before Judge Majid. In a decision promulgated  on  20th  September
    2016, he dismissed the appeal.

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal  Judge  Majid's  decision  to
    this Tribunal on two grounds:

       . there was insufficient reasoning and analysis in  relation  to  the
         credibility finding concerning the Appellant; and

       . there  was  insufficient  analysis  and  reasoning  concerning  the
         application of the Immigration Rules to the factual content of  the
         case.

 7. Permission having been granted, the matter comes before  me  to  decide
    whether the decision of Judge Majid contains such error of law that  it
    must be set aside and remade.

Error of Law Hearing

 8. Before me, Ms Jones on behalf of the Appellant argued  that  the  judge
    had erred in coming to his conclusions to dismiss the appeal,  in  that
    he had failed to engage fully with the case  and  the  evidence  before
    him.  She referred to [14] and said that the judge had implied that  he
    did not find the Appellant to be a credible witness but had not set out
    any reasoning as to what had led to that conclusion.  In  addition  the
    decision was devoid of any analysis  of  one  of  the  central  issues,
    namely the question of whether the Appellant and his spouse  are  in  a
    genuine and subsisting marriage.  The appellant is entitled to  have  a
    finding made on this  issue,  because  such  a  finding  would  be  the
    starting point for the whole case.

 9. Further, she submitted, the decision includes paragraph upon  paragraph
    of irrelevant information. By way of example this approach is shown  in
    [14] where the judge says:

         "Bearing in mind that we are going  through  a  fiscal  crisis  and
         everyone is expected to make  a  contribution  to  alleviate  it  I
         cannot be too generous in  the  case  of  this  Appellant  who  was
         supposed to leave this country after completing his assignment  for
         which he had satisfied the Entry Clearance Officer in Delhi. He had
         not come here to work and to find "work" in this situation  is  not
         allowed under the present Rules; everyone in the immigration  field
         is conscious of the fact  that  "jobs"  are  needed  by  the  local
         people."

10. Finally she submitted that there had been no meaningful reference  made
    to the relevant legal framework which was set out in Appendix FM to the
    Rules. The judge had failed to  understand  that  this  was  the  issue
    before him. These errors meant that the decision  was  unsafe  and  the
    appeal should be set aside and reheard.

11. Mr Nath on behalf of the Respondent served a Rule 24 response,  but  at
    the outset of his submissions he sensibly accepted that the decision of
    Judge Majid was fundamentally flawed for the  reasons  set  out  in  Ms
    Jones's submissions. He invited me to set aside Judge Majid's  decision
    and direct that the matter be heard afresh.

12. Accordingly I find force in Ms Jones's submissions and based  on  those
    submissions I find that there is error of law in the decision of Judge
    Majid, to the extent that the decision must be set  aside  and  remade.
    As said by Ms Jones, the judge failed to engage with the  evidence  and
    made very few findings of fact.  Those he did make  were  not  properly
    explained.  Having canvassed with the parties the appropriate forum for
    this appeal to be reheard, I find it is necessary to remit this  matter
    to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  the  decision  to  be  remade  there.
    Nothing can be preserved from Judge Majid's decision. It is  set  aside
    in its entirety.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law.  I set aside the decision.  The decision is to be remade in the  First-
tier Tribunal (not Judge Majid).

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so and find no reason therefore to make such an order.






Signed   C E Roberts                    Dated    05 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts







