
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29623/2014
                                                               IA/29628/2014
                                                               IA/29615/2014
                                                               IA/29625/2014
                                                               IA/29626/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 July 2015                       |On 17 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                           BOLANIE MUINAT OLAJADE
                           ALEX OMOTYOSO AJAYI OLA
                   ITUNOULUWA OLUWATAMILORE AJAYI DEBORAH
                     OKFEOLUWA OLUWATOFUNMI AJAYI SHARON
                            NOEL OKIKIOLUWA AJAYI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms R Akther of Counsel instructed by Owens
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  The first two  Appellants  are
    the parents of the other three Appellants born in 2005, 2008 and  2009.
    The first Appellant arrived with leave to enter as a  student  in  2004
    which expired on 31 March 2009.  Three days before  her  leave  expired
    the first Appellant applied for further leave as a  student  which  was
    rejected for non-payment of fees.  A further application  out  of  time
    was made which was refused.  The effect is that since 31 March 2009 the
    first Appellant has been an overstayer.  Her  partner  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom in 2002.  There is no documentary evidence  relating  to
    his arrival and it would appear he entered illegally.

 2. On 28 March 2012 the first Appellant made an application for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of her private and family life with her partner and
    her children.  On 10 June 2013  this  was  refused  with  no  right  of
    appeal.  The first Appellant issued an application for judicial  review
    which was settled on the basis that the  Respondent  would  re-consider
    her application and if refused, give her an in-country right of appeal.



 3. On 9 July 2014 the Respondent refused  the  application  of  the  first
    Appellant with her partner and their three children as her  dependants.
    The Respondent in her reasons letter noted the  eldest  child  met  the
    requirements of paragraph  276ADE(iv)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  but
    considered the Appellant, her partner and their children  could  return
    to Nigeria as a family unit.  She went on to consider  her  duty  under
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and her
    obligations under Article 8 of the European Convention.  She  concluded
    that it was not disproportionate to remove  the  first  Appellant,  her
    partner and their children to Nigeria.

 4. The Appellants sought to appeal the  decision  of  9  July  2014  under
    Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  as
    amended  (the  2002  Act).   The  grounds  refer  to  the  Respondent's
    obligations under Section 55 of the 2009 Act and the Respondent's  Code
    of Practice "Every Child Matters".  Reference  was  made  to  the  best
    interests of the child and case law cited.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 5. By a decision promulgated on 31 March  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Ruth dismissed  the  appeals  of  all  the  Appellants.   They
    applied for permission to appeal which on 4  June  2015  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Reid granted on the grounds that  it  was  arguable
    the Judge had erred in law by not considering  whether  the  Respondent
    had discharged her duties under Section 55 of the 2009 Act and that his
    proportionality assessment in his consideration of the Article 8  claim
    was flawed for lack of reference to the provisions of  Sections  117A-D
    of the 2002 Act.  Additionally at the date of the  hearing  before  the
    Judge two of the children had been in the United Kingdom for more  than
    seven years and he had not taken into account the length  of  time  the
    second child had been in the United Kingdom.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 6. The first Appellant and her partner attended.  Ms Akther submitted that
    the Respondent in her reasons letter had failed to  take  into  account
    her Section 55 of the 2009 Act and in particular her Code of  Practice.
    No copy of the code was produced to the Tribunal.  Additionally, he had
    failed to consider the factors referred to in Section 117B of the  2002
    Act and to note that by the time of the  hearing  before  him  the  two
    older children had been in the  United  Kingdom  for  more  than  seven
    years, albeit the second child by only one day.

 7. The Judge had failed to take account of  the  jurisprudence  of  Azimi-
    Moayed and Others (Decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013]
    UKUT 00197 (IAC).  He had not assessed the reasonableness of  requiring
    the children to return to Nigeria.  All of them had been  born  in  the
    United Kingdom which the Judge had not acknowledged.

 8. The Judge had failed to apply the  reasonableness  test  identified  in
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act and to have taken into account that  by
    the date of the hearing the two older children had been in  the  United
    Kingdom for more than seven years.  He had focused on the  requirements
    of para 276ADE of the Immigration Rules which required the applicant or
    required the child to have been in the United Kingdom for  seven  years
    at the date of application.  He had correctly noted that  none  of  the
    three children met this requirement but had failed to  appreciate  that
    by the time of the hearing for purposes of  Section  117B  two  of  the
    children had been in the United Kingdom for seven years or  more.   The
    Judge had generally failed to take account  of  the  Code  of  Practice
    issued by the respondent in relation to Section 55  of  the  2009  Act.
    The decision contained material errors of law and should be set aside.

 9. The Judge had not adequately considered the first Appellant's  position
    and why and how she had become an overstayer, referred to in para 17 of
    his decision.  There was a "Basnet" issue which he had not  taken  into
    account.

10. In response Ms Savage for the Respondent  submitted  that  the  reasons
    letter had dealt adequately with the Section 55 issue and the Judge had
    also dealt with it at para 28 of his decision noting that there was  no
    real dispute about the history and circumstances of the Appellants  and
    at paras 53 following  when  he  had  considered  what  were  the  best
    interests of the children and that they were a  primary  consideration.
    He had taken account at paras 40 and 41  of  the  length  of  time  the
    children had been in the United Kingdom and that there was  nothing  in
    the decision which was contrary to the learning in  Azimi-Moayed.   The
    Judge had made a careful assessment of the children's position and  the
    Respondent's duties under Section 55 of the 2009 Act.

11. It was accepted the Judge had not referred expressly to Section 117B of
    the 2002 Act but he had considered the length of time the children  had
    been in the United Kingdom and found there  was  no  dispute  that  the
    Appellants formed a family unit.  At paras 40,  54-62  and  66  of  his
    decision he had taken all relative factors into  account  in  assessing
    the reasonableness of the Respondent's decision.   He  had  effectively
    considered all the relevant factors identified in Section 117A-D of the
    2002 Act and there was  no  need  for  any  express  reference  to  the
    statutory authority: see Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90.  The Judge
    had considered the reasonableness of return in relation to each of  the
    children.

12. The Judge's findings that the "Basnet"point about the rejection of  the
    first Appellant's application for further leave in 2009  could  not  be
    criticised on the basis of the little evidence there was before him and
    that the subsequent application had been refused.   If  there  was  any
    error in this respect it was not material.  The decision should  stand.



13. In response Ms Akhter re-iterated that the Judge had not considered the
    Code of Practice "Every Child Matters".  He had not dealt  with  issues
    arising out of the factors required to be considered  by  Section  117B
    and had made no findings that the second child at the date  of  hearing
    was a qualifying child for purposes of Section 117B.  He had  erred  in
    not looking beyond the scope of para 276ADE or taking into account  the
    jurisprudence of EV (Philippines) and Others v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    874.  He had failed to make a reasonableness assessment individually in
    respect of each of the children and the decision was flawed.

Findings and Consideration

14. I am satisfied that the Judge  has  taken  into  account  the  relevant
    factors identified in Section 117B.  English language was not an issue.
     There were no details of the first Appellant's partner's earnings,  if
    any. The Judge noted at paragraph 47 the  Appellants  were  reliant  on
    financial support from members of their church. The  evidence  is  that
    they are not self-sufficient.  He took  into  account  the  immigration
    histories of the first Appellant and her partner, giving little  weight
    to them as required by Sections 117B(4) and (5).

15. He had taken into account that at least  one  of  the  children  was  a
    "qualifying child" within the meaning of Section 117D(1).  That he  did
    not expressly deal with the second child whose seventh birthday was the
    day before the First-tier Tribunal hearing is not of great materiality.
     The Judge had taken account of the length of time the eldest child had
    been in the United Kingdom (more than  seven  years)  for  purposes  of
    para.276ADE of the Immigration Rules and I find that having done so his
    failure to distinguish the different date for the  relevant  assessment
    of the child's age for the purposes of para.276ADE and Section 117B  is
    not of great substance.  The important point being that  he  was  aware
    that the eldest child had been in the  United  Kingdom  for  more  than
    seven years: see para 55 of his decision.

16. He took into account the difficulties the family and in particular  the
    children would face on removal at paragraphs 57-60 and noted  that  the
    best interests of the children  were  "not  a  trump  card".   Further,
    Section 117B(6) states the public interest does not require a  person's
    removal  where  the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child and it would not be reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.  That the public interest
    as a matter  of  law  and  policy  may  not  require  removal  in  such
    circumstances is not the same as  the  public  interest  requiring  the
    person and the  qualifying  child  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    effectively as of right.  Section 117B simply lists the factors  to  be
    taken into account by a Tribunal when assessing a claim under Article 8
    and the proportionality of removal.  Section 117A(3) explains  this  in
    more detail by defining "the public interest  question"  doing  so  "by
    reference to the legitimate  public  objectives  contained  in  Article
    8(2)".  The Judge assessed the proportionality of the proposed  removal
    of the Appellants, including the children, at paragraphs 63-66.

17. There was little, if  any,  evidence  about  the  situation  which  the
    Appellants would face on return to  Nigeria  there  was  only  a  short
    statement from the first Appellant complaining about what had  happened
    to her application for further leave as  a  student  in  2009  and  the
    existence of her three children.  There was  evidence  referred  to  in
    paragraph 37 of the Judge's decision that the first Appellant's  mother
    is in Nigeria with whom she is in contact and that her  partner  has  a
    sister there.

18. The circumstances of the Appellants are very different  from  those  of
    the Appellants in JO and Others (Section 55 duty) Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT
    00517 (IAC), particularly since the eldest child in JO and Others could
    have met the minimum seven year residence requirement  of  Appendix  FM
    para.EX1.  Additionally there appears to have  been  considerably  more
    information available about what would have been the family's  position
    on return to their country of origin. The Upper Tribunal stated:

         "... the question of whether the duties imposed by Section 55  have
         been duly performed  in  any  given  case  will  invariably  be  an
         intensely fact-sensitive and contextual one.  In the real world  of
         litigation,  the  tools  available  to  the   court   or   Tribunal
         considering this question will frequently, as in the present  case,
         be confined to the application or submission made to the  SSHD  and
         the ultimate letter of decision ..."

19. I have taken account of what was said in EV (Philippines) and Others  v
    SSHD [2014] EWA Civ 874 at paragraphs 36 and 37.  The latter states:-

         "In the balance on the other side there  falls  to  be  taken  into
         account the strong weight to be  given  to  the  need  to  maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of  the
         country and the fact that, ex-hypothesi,  the  applicants  have  no
         entitlement to remain.  The immigration history of the parents  may
         also be relevant e.g.  if  they  are  overstayers,  or  have  acted
         deceitfully."

20. While the decision might be criticised for  its  failure  expressly  to
    refer to Section 117B or indeed Section 55, such matters do not  amount
    to material errors of law.  The Judge adequately assessed the  relevant
    factors and in particular those relating to the children and found that
    in all the circumstances it was reasonable to  expect  them  to  return
    with  their  parents  to  Nigeria  and  that  such  a  conclusion   was
    proportionate to  the  State's  need  to  maintain  proper  immigration
    control.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain material errors
    of law such that it should be set aside.  Accordingly, it shall  stand.



    The appeal of the Appellants is dismissed.

    No anonymity direction is made.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 17. vii. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

