
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29133/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23 April 2014                                |On 28 May 2014             |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                 ABDUL Hasan
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bashir, Bashir Consultancy
For the Respondent:    Mr Spence, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Abdul Hasan, was born on 20 May 1985 and is a citizen of
    Bangladesh.  On 1  July  2013,  a  decision  was  made  to  refuse  the
    appellant's application for leave to remain on  the  grounds  that  the
    removal would not place the United Kingdom in breach of its obligations
    under the Human  Rights  Act  1998  and  to  give  directions  for  the
    appellant's removal from the United Kingdom pursuant to Section  10  of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The  appellant  appealed  against
    that decision to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hillis),  which,  in  a
    determination  dated  6  February  2014,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. On 6 August 2007, the appellant was issued with a working holiday maker
    visa valid until 6 August 2009.  The appellant remained in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully following the expiry of his visa and entered into an
    Islamic marriage with a settled person, Rahena Begum on 29 August 2012.
     He made no attempt to regularise his  status  in  the  United  Kingdom
    until he was arrested and detained on 13 June 2013  as  an  immigration
    offender.   The  appellant  was  served  with  an  enforcement   notice
    (IS151A).

 3.  Judge  Hillis  considered  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules
    (paragraph 276ADE) and found that the appellant could not  qualify  for
    leave.  That decision is not challenged in the grounds of appeal.

 4. The judge went on  to  consider  Article  8  ECHR.   As  part  of  that
    analysis, he  considered  the  best  interests  of  the  child  of  the
    appellant and his partner (who was born on 29  September  2013).   Some
    doubt had been cast upon the appellant's relationship  with  the  child
    [28] but a subsequent DNA test  has  proved  parentage  and  there  was
    nothing in the judge's analysis under Article 8 to suggest that he  did
    not accept that the appellant is the father of  the  child.   Both  the
    appellant's partner and child are British citizens.

 5. The judge [39] noted that the child was only 4 months  of  age  at  the
    date of the hearing and  had  "no  knowledge  of  life  in  the  UK  or
    Bangladesh and his parents were both born and  spent  the  majority  of
    their lives  in  Bangladesh  and  his  parental  grandparents  live  in
    Bangladesh."  The judge found that there was "no persuasive reason  why
    [the  child]  cannot  relocate  in  that  country  with   his   parents
    particularly once his mother has had her  gall  bladder  operation  and
    recovered."  The judge  also  recorded  [40]  that  the  "sponsor  [the
    appellant's partner] was completely aware of her  husband's  precarious
    presence in the UK and that he was here illegally when they married [by
    an Islamic marriage] on 29 August 2011.  She nonetheless married him as
    she liked him."

 6. I shall deal first with  the  question  of  the  appellant's  partner's
    medical condition.  At the time of the hearing (and at the time of  the
    Upper Tribunal hearing also) she was awaiting a gall bladder operation.
     I reject the submission that her medical condition should prevent  her
    travelling  to  Bangladesh  to  continue  her  family  life  with   the
    appellant.  The fact that the partner needed an operation  was  one  of
    the circumstances of the case considered as  at  the  date  of  hearing
    under the Article  8  appeal  by  Judge  Hillis.   The  fact  that  the
    operation had not taken place is immaterial.

 7. However, I find that Judge Hillis has erred in law in finding  that  it
    reasonable that the appellant's partner and the child  should  relocate
    with the  appellant  to  Bangladesh.   Save  for  one  circumstance,  I
    consider that would be a reasonable course of action.  The  appellant's
    immigration history is appalling; he came to this country  as   working
    holidaymaker and made no attempt to leave when his visa expired.   Both
    the appellant and his partner have entered into a relationship  in  the
    full knowledge the appellant had no legal status in the United Kingdom.
     However,  the  judge  accepted  (as  does  the  respondent)  that  the
    appellant, his partner and  the  child  are  engaged  in  a  subsisting
    relationship and enjoy family life in the  United  Kingdom.   That  the
    appellant is the father of the child is not in doubt.  The grounds cite
    Sanade 2012] UKUT 00048(IAC):


   1. Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 provides that where a person  is
      sentenced to imprisonment of 12 months or more, he  must  be  deported
      unless he falls within one of the statutory exceptions.

   2. Article 8 provides one such exception but there  is  no  justification
      for saying that it will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that
      removal will violate the family's protected Article 8 rights  or  that
      the claim itself must be exceptional: the issue is whether  the  State
      can justify the interference as necessary, that is say a proportionate
      and fair balance in pursuit of a legitimate aim.

   3. The  more  serious  the  offending,  the  stronger  is  the  case  for
      deportation, but Parliament has not stated that every offence  serious
      enough to merit a penalty of twelve months or more imprisonment  makes
      interference with human rights proportionate.

   4.  ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 considered in  what  circumstances
      it was permissible to remove or deport a non-citizen parent where  the
      effect would be that a child who is a citizen of  the  United  Kingdom
      would also have to leave.  The fact the children  are  British  was  a
      strong pointer to the fact  that  their  future  lies  in  the  United
      Kingdom.

   5. Case C-34/09 Ruiz Zambrano now makes it clear that where the child  or
      indeed the remaining spouse is  a  British  citizen  and  therefore  a
      citizen of the European Union, as  a  matter  of  EU  law  it  is  not
      possible to require the family as a unit to relocate  outside  of  the
      European Union or for the Secretary of State to submit that  it  would
      be reasonable for them to do so.

   6. Where in the context of Article 8 one parent ("the remaining  parent")
      of a British citizen child is also a British  citizen  (or  cannot  be
      removed as a family member or in their own right), the removal of  the
      other parent does not mean that either  the  child  or  the  remaining
      parent will be required to  leave,  thereby  infringing  the  Zambrano
      principle, see C-256/11 Murat Dereci. The critical question is whether
      the child is dependent on the parent being removed for the exercise of
      his Union right of residence and whether removal of that  parent  will
      deprive the child of the effective exercise of residence in the United
      Kingdom or elsewhere in the Union.

   7.  Where  the  claimant's  conduct  is  persistent  and/or  serious  the
      interference with family life may be justified even  it  involves  the
      separation of the claimant from his  family  who  reasonably  wish  to
      continue living in the United Kingdom, Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348.



   8. The principles for evaluating Article 8 claims in criminal deportation
      cases are to be found in the Strasbourg  jurisprudence  of  Boultif  v
      Switzerland (no.54273/00) [2001] ECHR  479;  Uner  v  Netherlands  (no
      46410/99) [2006] ECHR 873 and Maslov v Austria  (no. 1638/03)   [2008]
      ECHR 546.

   9. In cases of the importation and supply of  significant  quantities  of
      Class A  drugs,  Strasbourg  has  recognised  why  states  show  great
      severity to such foreign offenders but there is no  special  principle
      in cases of importation or supply of drugs.  Deportation  must  always
      be proportionate.




 8. Sanade was a deportation case, the Upper Tribunal observing at [106]:

    Further as British citizens, Mrs Sanade and her children  are  citizens
    of the European Union and as such entitled to reside in the Union.  The
    respondent properly accepts that they cannot be required to  leave  the
    Union  as  a  matter  of  law,  and  that  as  a  matter  of   relevant
    consideration they cannot reasonably be expected to relocate outside of
    the European Union. Accordingly, the question  is whether  Mr  Sanade's
    conduct is so serious as to make it proportionate to the legitimate aim
    in his case to require him to leave his wife and young children for  an
    indefinite period  unless  and  until  the  deportation  order  can  be
    revoked?

 9. Notwithstanding the appellant's appalling immigration history,  he  has
    not committed any criminal offence whilst in the United Kingdom and  is
    nothing more or less than an illegal overstayer.  Sanade makes it clear
    that the appellant's partner and the  child  cannot,  as  a  matter  of
    European Union Law, be  required  to  leave  the  European  Union.   To
    require them to relocate to Bangladesh would infringe  that  principle.
    It follows that Judge Hillis erred in law by finding that there was "no
    persuasive reason" why the appellant's partner and the child could  not
    relocate to Bangladesh; the "persuasive reason" lies in  the  ratio  of
    Sanade (and, in turn, Zambrano Case 34/09).

10.  In  the  circumstances,  I  set  aside   the   First-tier   Tribunal's
    determination and have remade the decision.  This appeal is allowed  on
    human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

DECISION

11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which is dated 6  February
    2014 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  This appeal is allowed
    on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).






Signed                              Date 22 May 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

