
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29477/2014
                                                               IA/29520/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th September 2015                |On 9th October 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

             mrs Parulben Bipenkumar Prajapati (FIRST APPELLANT)
            MR Bipinkumar Kanaiyalal Prajapati (SECOND APPELLANT)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Coleman - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are appeals  by  Parulben  Bipenkumar  Prajapati  and  Bipinkumar
    Kanaiyalal Prajapati, citizens of India.  They are  spouses  and  their
    dates of birth are 19th July 1980  and  24th  June  1976  respectively.
    They appeal against the decision of the Respondent made on 7th November
    2013 to refuse their applications for leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. The Appellants' original appeal against  that  decision  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on 31st October 2014. He dismissed the
    appeals.  The reasons for that refusal were set out in a  determination
    which was issued on 13th November 2014.  The  Appellants  were  granted
    permission to appeal against that determination and on 28th March 2015,
    having heard submissions, I found that there was a  material  error  of
    law in the determination of Judge Parkes and I set that decision  aside
    with no preserved findings of fact.  The error that Judge  Parkes  made
    was that he appeared to base his decision  on  an  arithmetical  error,
    assuming that the couple had lived in India for eighteen years  between
    their marriage and their entry to the UK when they had  in  fact  spent
    only eight years there.  The position of the Respondent was  that  this
    was simply a typographical error but I did not  accept  that  and  felt
    that the Appellants should be given the benefit of the doubt  and  that
    such an error may have clouded the Judge's judgment on the issue of the
    problems the Appellants claimed to have had in India due  to  the  fact
    that theirs was a marriage between two different castes.

 3. The Appellants married in February 1998.  They have two children  aged,
    according to the Appellants' evidence, around 10 and  15  who  live  in
    India with the Second Appellant's parents.  They arrived in the  UK  in
    October 2006 with visit visas  and  overstayed.   They  claim  to  have
    suffered discrimination on account of  the  fact  that  they  are  from
    different castes  and  were  partially  disowned  by  their  respective
    families who never approved of the marriage.

 4. I have statements from both Appellants.

 5. Mrs Prajapati, the First Appellant, says that she and her husband  have
    been in the UK for over seven years.  They have established  lives  for
    themselves.  They feel they  could  not  re-establish  these  lives  if
    returned to India.  They have a wide range of friends.  She goes on  to
    say that her husband is from the Lewa-Patel caste and she is  from  the
    Dalit caste.  The Dalit caste is considered to be  the  "untouchables".
    When she was growing up people from her caste were  always  treated  as
    outsiders.  They were not allowed to pray in the same temple as  others
    and they are considered to be a curse.  She first met  her  husband  in
    May 1995 at the local temple in Padra where she worked  as  a  cleaner.
    She only worked outside the  temple  not  inside.   Her  husband  would
    worship there.  At first he did not know she  was  a  Dalit.   He  once
    asked her why she was just cleaning outside and was  never  inside  and
    she told him that because she was a Dalit she was not  allowed  inside.
    They began talking to each other and he would come to the temple  every
    day so that they could meet and talk.  She wanted to marry him  because
    she felt so protected by him.  She felt safe with him.  They married on
    7th February 1998 but there were no guests there as  no-one  knew  they
    were getting married.  A friend helped them.  After  three  weeks  they
    informed their parents that they had married and both sets  of  parents
    disowned them immediately.  She was not  surprised  at  this  reaction.
    She had expected it.  Since then  neither  she  nor  her  husband  have
    contacted their parents apart from before coming to the UK.  They  were
    told that their parents wanted nothing to do with them and did not care
    where they lived.  There is  no  mention  of  their  children  in  this
    statement.

 6. In Mr Prajapati's statement he confirms that he and his  wife  came  to
    the UK  on  visit  visas  on  1st  October  2006  and  have  been  here
    continuously since then.  He confirms  that  they  are  from  different
    Hindu castes.  They could not continue to live  in  India  as  marriage
    outside the caste is not accepted in any  circumstances.   He  confirms
    his wife's account of  how  they  met  and  decided  to  marry.   Their
    statements are actually virtually the same.  There  is  no  mention  of
    their children in his statement.

 7. The position of the Secretary of State is that  the  Appellants  cannot
    meet the eligibility requirements of Appendix FM because  they  entered
    the  UK  on  visit  visas.   The  Secretary  of  State  considered  the
    Appellant's private life in the UK  but  concluded  that  none  of  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE are met.  She considered whether there
    are exceptional circumstances but concluded that there are none.

 8. I heard oral evidence  firstly  from  Mrs  Prajapati  who  adopted  her
    statement.  Mr Coleman asked her what happened to her children and she
    said that her in-laws had taken them.  When he asked her  what  exactly
    had happened she said that due to the differences  of  the  castes  her
    husband's whole family came over to their house and took the  children.
    He asked if this has been  done  through  the  courts  or  whether  the
    children had just been physically taken.   She  responded  "I  gave  my
    children".  He then asked her what day-to-day difficulties she and  her
    husband had endured in the eight years they lived in India as a married
    couple.  She said they had a lot of difficulties because they could not
    get jobs.  People would ask more and more questions  and  no-one  would
    give her a job because of her caste.  If her husband was  given  a  job
    and then his employer found out about their marriage he would  then  be
    sacked.  The news of the caste difference had spread and they could not
    get jobs or a good house.

 9. She was the cross-examined by Mr Nath.  She said that she had told  her
    husband about her caste prior to them getting married.  Her parents are
    both Dalit.  They have not had problems.  Neither she nor  her  husband
    has had contact with anyone in their home town.  She confirmed that she
    had no police reports or evidence of any kind of any  of  the  problems
    they had in India.   She confirmed  that  her  in-laws  had  taken  the
    children.  When Mr Nath asked her if the children are still  with  them
    she responded "as far as I know".  When she was asked how old they  are
    she said they are 16 and 12 but she did hesitate and said that that was
    their approximate ages.  She could not say in response  to  a  question
    from me how old they were when they were taken  away,  explaining  that
    she was not educated.  I did put it to her that I found it strange that
    she did not know the ages of her children when they were  removed  from
    her care by her in-laws.  She then said that one was 9  and  the  other
    would have been 3 or 4.  She had said to Mr Nath that they just  wanted
    to forget everything.  Mr Nath then put it to Mrs  Prajapati  that  she
    had never told the Home Office about her children.  She confirmed  that
    to be so.  When she was asked why she did not mention her children  she
    said she does not know.  They were trying to  forget  about  India.   I
    asked her if she wants to speak to and see her children.  She said  she
    does.  She said that because of her caste she has lost everything.  She
    confirmed that she has not spoken to her children for seven years.  She
    was asked whether she would like them to come here  and  said  she  can
    only decide that with her husband.

10. I then heard evidence from Mr Prajapati who adopted his statement.   He
    said that his children are 16 and 9 or 10.  They live with his  father.
    When he was asked why they live with his father he said it  is  because
    he married into a different caste.  He  married  his  wife  because  he
    loves her.  His family took the children.  Seven or  eight  members  of
    the family came over and took them away.  They brought a piece of paper
    for him to sign agreeing that he would have nothing to  do  with  their
    business or his inheritance.  He signed it.  He was unable to  remember
    how old the children were when they were taken away from them.  He said
    it was when they were coming to London.  He  then  said  it  was  about
    eight months before  they  came  to  London,  probably  in  early  2006
    although he was not sure.  When he was asked what  day-to-day  problems
    he had in India because of his mixed marriage he said  they  could  not
    find a house or jobs.  He would be kicked out of jobs.  He was asked if
    he told the Home Office that he has children and said that he did.   He
    said he and his wife can live happily in the  UK.   They  support  each
    other.  They have friends.

11. In cross-examination he was asked when he last spoke  to  his  children
    and said he could not remember.  He then said  it  was  when  they  got
    here.  They phoned to say they had arrived.   When  he  was  asked  for
    clarification of this he said they phoned his father.  There  has  been
    no communication since.  He was asked if his children  are  still  with
    his father and he said he does not know.  Mr Nath put it to him that he
    did not find it credible that he had not spoken to  his  children.   He
    said he is living here happily with his wife and his  family  will  not
    allow them to speak to the children.  Mr Nath asked him if it  is  the
    case that they are not trying to speak to the children and he responded
    that they are happy here.  He insisted that he had told the Home Office
    about his children when he was arrested at Leytonstone Police  Station.



12. I asked Mr Prajapati if he could tell me why his parents did  not  take
    the children from them sooner.  He responded that they did not want the
    children to have Dalit influences.  I pointed out  that  that  did  not
    really answer the question and asked why they did not  take  them  when
    they were born for example.  He said he and his wife  were looking  for
    a house and a job.  I asked him if it was the case that he and his wife
    consented to the children going to their parents and he said that  they
    did consent.

13. In his submissions Mr Nath said  he  would  rely  on  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter.  He  submitted  that  neither  Appellant  is  credible.
    There is no evidence that they had  any  difficulties  because  of  the
    differences in their castes.  The Home Office were not told  about  the
    children.  The Appellants could not with any  accuracy  or  consistency
    give the ages of their children.  He questioned why they would say that
    they spoke to them when they arrived here when they said that they  had
    not spoken to them at all.  It is not clear whether their  evidence  is
    that the children  were  taken  by  force  or  whether  the  Appellants
    consented to Mr Prajapati's parents bringing the children up.  He  said
    there are serious credibility issues and very little evidence.

14. In his submissions  Mr  Coleman  submitted  that  paragraph  276ADE(vi)
    applies in this case because there are very  significant  obstacles  to
    the Appellants integrating into India if they were returned.   He  said
    there would not be any police evidence of the treatment to  which  they
    were subjected because it was simply discrimination and the  stigma  of
    Mrs Prajapati being Dalit.  They were socially  not  acceptable.   They
    have been disowned by their families and  cast  aside.   It  is  highly
    likely that they let the children go simply acceding to the demands  of
    Mr Prajapati's parents.  They did this because their life was hard  and
    they could not provide for their children.  They are happier here.  The
    background evidence shows that Dalit women are  discriminated  against.
    He submitted that the appeal should be allowed under 276ADE.

15. In this case the burden of proof is on the Appellants and the  standard
    of proof is the balance of probabilities.

16. I have given careful consideration to all the evidence put before me in
    this case.  There is not a jot of evidence apart from the oral evidence
    of the Appellants to support the basic claim  in  this  case  that  the
    Appellants are of different castes.  I have one article from the  Times
    of India reporting that an inter-caste marriage had claimed the life of
    a 21 year old woman, apparently  an  honour  killing  because  she  had
    fallen in love  with  a  Dalit  boy.   There  is  evidence  in  the  US
    Department of State Human Rights Report submitted  by  the  Appellants'
    representatives that there is discrimination against Dalits,  including
    extra judicial killings and sexual violence against Dalit  women.   Mrs
    Prajapati said that her parents, both Dalits had  had  no  problems.  I
    accept that the Appellants say that their  problems  arose  from  their
    mixed marriage but there is no evidence at all of persecution. Even  if
    I take this case at its highest and accept  that  Mrs  Prajapati  is  a
    Dalit the accounts that they gave do not indicate  anything  more  than
    discrimination and the fact is that they spent eight years as a married
    couple  in  India  and  brought  up  their  two  children  without  any
    significant problems that they were able to evidence or  even  tell  me
    about in court.

17. I do not find either Appellant to be credible.  I quite simply  do  not
    understand what the situation is with their children.   They  were  not
    clear as to whether the children were handed  over  voluntarily  or  if
    they were taken by Mr Prajapati's parents.  What the Appellants said in
    their statements was that they had been  instantly  disowned  by  their
    parents as soon as their parents found out about  the  marriage.   This
    does not sit well with a decision to hand the children  over  to  their
    parents voluntarily.  The account given by  both  of  them  about  "the
    whole family"/seven or eight members of the family"  having  come  over
    and taken the children away would indicate  that  they  were  taken  by
    force.  If they were taken by force  why  would  the  Appellants  phone
    India to let Mr Prajapati's parents know that they had arrived  in  the
    UK.  Mr Nath was right in saying that neither appeared to  be  able  to
    say with any certainty or consistency what the  ages  of  the  children
    are.  It seems that they have had no contact with  the  children  since
    they came here according to their evidence.  I do  not  know  what  the
    truth of the matter is  because  both  accounts  are  so  confused  and
    lacking in clarity or consistency but I do not  accept  that  they  are
    estranged permanently from their parents or that they  would  not  have
    any support if they returned to India. They gave differing accounts  of
    contact with the children and their grandparents. They did not  mention
    the children at all in their statements. Their account  is  simply  not
    plausible. I do not accept that they do not know the ages of their  own
    children. I do not accept that they would  not  remember  how  old  the
    children were when they  were  forcibly  removed  from  their  care  by
    several family members.  This it seems  to  me  would  be  a  traumatic
    experience that would be imprinted on one's mind.   It is the  case  of
    course that their evidence was not  even  consistent  as  to  what  had
    actually happened. Frankly they  gave  the  impression  that  they  had
    decided to play down the fact that they have two children and concocted
    a very ill-thought out story to explain why they had  not  referred  to
    them in earlier dealings with the Home Office.

18. It is submitted that the Appellants meet the requirements of  paragraph
    276ADE(vi). Paragraph 276ADE sets out the criteria for leave to  remain
    in the UK on private  life  grounds.  The  only  provision  that  could
    conceivably assist the Appellants is  276ADE(vi) which  applies  to  an
    applicant who,

         '(vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in  the  UK
         for less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but
         there would be   very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
         integration into the country to  which  he  would  have  to  go  if
         required to leave the UK.'

19. I have dismissed the Appellants' account of family  problems  in  India
    but even if I had not I would find that they have not established  that
    there very significant obstacles to integration there.  I  am  able  to
    give only very limited weight to their oral evidence as I do  not  find
    either of them to be credible. They lived  and  survived  together  and
    brought up two children apparently without family help for nearly eight
    years and there seems to be no reason why they cannot do that again.

20. I have considered Article 8 ECHR.  The Appellants have  a  family  life
    but that family life is with each  other  and  they  would  be  removed
    together so there would be no interference with that. It is  irrelevant
    that they ''are happier here'.

21.  I accept that in the  seven  years  they  have  been  here  they  have
    developed a private life.  I  accept  that  they  have  friends.   That
    private life however  was  formed  while  they  were  in  this  country
    illegally.  They overstayed visit visas.  They have had no right to  be
    here.   I  bear  in  mind  Section  117B  of  the  of  the  Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which is clear that in considering  the
    public interest in removal  little weight should be given to a  private
    life established in the UK  while  a  person's  immigration  status  is
    either unlawful or precarious. I find therefore that there will  be  no
    interference with their family lives and any  interference  with  their
    private lives would in all the circumstances be  proportionate  to  the
    need for effective immigration control in the UK.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been set  aside  is  replaced
with this decision.

The appeals are dismissed under the Immigration Rules and  on  human  rights
grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Date: 5th October 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
