
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29448/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 July 2014                               |On 12 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN



                                   Between

                             ABDUL KARIM CHABOUR

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Miss E King, Counsel, instructed by Gulbenkian
Andonian Solicitors
For the Respondent:   Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant has been granted permission to appeal  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Oxlade  dismissing  his  appeal  against
    refusal of the application which he made on 5 July 2012  for  leave  to
    remain on grounds of long residence, pursuant to paragraph 276B of  the
    Immigration Rules 395, as amended.  The respondent did not  accept  the
    appellant's claim that he entered the UK lawfully  in  1986.   Further,
    when he was arrested in  2008  he  told  the  police  that  he  entered
    unlawfully in 2000, using a forged French passport, and  without  going
    through immigration control.

2.   Further, as the appellant had an unspent conviction  for  possessing  a
    false identity, the respondent considered that it was  undesirable  for
    him to be granted leave to remain due to  his  character  and  conduct.
    The appellant had also failed to submit the certificate showing that he
    had passed the life in the  UK  test  or  to  obtain  a  relevant  ESOL
    qualification. Although the appellant had applied for limited leave  to
    sit the test, as he had not satisfied paragraph 276B(i) and (ii) he was
    not eligible for  limited  leave  to  sit  the  test.   The  respondent
    considered that as the appellant neither  met  the  partner  or  parent
    "routes" and as he failed to show that he had been in the UK for twenty
    years or that he had no ties, including  social,  cultural  or  family,
    with Algeria, his claim in respect of his private life under  paragraph
    276ADE of the Rules failed.

3.   At the commencement of the hearing before the  judge,  the  appellant's
    Counsel, Miss King, said that the appellant pursued a claim to have met
    the long residence requirements set out in paragraph 276B.   Whilst  he
    had not met the knowledge of English life test,  he  could  be  granted
    limited leave to do so for two years; this was provided by 276A2  where
    the only reason for the application's failure would be the  failure  to
    show that the test had been met.  In  the  alternative,  he  relied  on
    Article 8 ECHR in the "classic" Razgar sense,  the  application  having
    been made before the Statement of Changes on 9 July 2012.

4.   The appellant is a national of Algerian born on 3 January 1966.

5.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and five witnesses.

6.   The appellant said in evidence that he came to the UK in  1986  with  a
    valid passport, which was amongst his possessions.  When he moved  from
    his cousin's house in 2001, the briefcase  containing  his  possessions
    including his payslips was left behind.  He did not report the loss  of
    his passport to the Algerian Embassy, as he was without any proof.   It
    did not cross his mind to report this  to  the  respondent  as  he  was
    living in the UK illegally and working on the black market.  He  agreed
    that when the police stopped him in 2008, he had said that  he  entered
    in 2000.  This was because he had a false  French  identification  with
    him, which was made in 2000.  The document was not in  his  name.    He
    knew it was fake.  It had his picture on it but a different  name.  The
    appellant agreed that the police report accurately  reflected  what  he
    said to the officer and that it was untrue.  He chose the year 2000  as
    opposed to 1986 as he was worried.

7.   Since 1986 he had worked for many  employers  and  had  used  the  name
    Michel Gacob. He used the same name  throughout.   The  first  identity
    card was issued to him in 1987 in the name of Michel Gacob.  It expired
    in 1997.  The second one ran from 2000.  He had  a  national  insurance
    number in that false name.  The national insurance number was given  to
    him by the National Centre when he took three payslips to them.  He did
    not have any tenancy agreements, and when he had  health  problems,  he
    went to a hospital and not a GP.

8.   The appellant gave evidence about how he met Dr Alex Khot  (not  a  GP)
    who had written a letter in 2009 in  support  of  his  application  and
    Tracey Tarrant who said in her witness statement written in  2009  that
    she had known him for eleven years at that point.

9.   The appellant said his previous partner was Siohban Clifford-Walsh  who
    was not attending as a witness.  He denied that Silvia Palermo had been
    his previous partner, although this was stated in  his  statement.   He
    said this was mistakenly  written.   He  would  rely  on  his  cousin's
    evidence, Khelaf Chabour, who came to the UK in 1987, having  completed
    military service.  It was this cousin with whom he lived and  who  lost
    his briefcase.

10.  The appellant said in evidence that he was not  currently  living  with
    anyone, but he had a new girlfriend called Dawn Buckley  and  they  had
    been together a year but were not living together.  She was born in the
    UK.  He last went to see her in Hove a while ago.   He  does  not  work
    100% of the time, and cleans gardens for cash.  No tax is paid.

11.  He said that when he was served with a notice of  removal  in  2008  he
    did not go to Algeria, as England was his home.  He would, now  at  the
    age of 50, have to start his  life  all  over  again.   He  has  eleven
    siblings with his parents, a younger sister and brother  looking  after
    his parents.  There are also aunts and uncles in Algeria.

12.  The second witness to  give  oral  evidence  was  Khelaf  Chabour.   He
    produced a photograph showing the appellant in a group of people  which
    was taken in the witness's house in Wood Green  1987.   Khelaf  Chabour
    said that the appellant had lived in the UK since 1981, apart from  the
    two years when he did military service in Algeria from 1986 to the  end
    of 1987, which was for almost two years.  Khelaf Chabour said  he  went
    to Algeria in January 1986.  In May the appellant  had  asked  him  for
    advice about going to London as  he  wanted  to  visit.   He  gave  the
    appellant some addresses and he thought  it  was  June  1986  that  the
    appellant left for the UK.  To his knowledge the appellant has not left
    the UK since then.  They never discussed  why  the  appellant  had  not
    returned to Algeria.  He had no reason to think that the appellant  was
    in the UK lawfully.

13.  Khelaf Chabour said the appellant is known to  people  as  "Bekim"  and
    also goes by the name of Michel.  The appellant lived with him in  1999
    to 2001 and during this time, he never saw  the  appellant's  passport.
    He would not have had any reason to do so. There was a  briefcase  with
    documents in it.  He denied there  were  any  clothes  in  it,  as  the
    statement suggested.  He did have other stuff, clothes, a clock and he,
    the witness, put the briefcase in  the  loft.   He  did  not  take  the
    briefcase with him when he moved, as his marriage was  patchy  and  his
    wife and children left for Newcastle in 1999 and he was busy trying  to
    repair his marriage.  He assumed  that  the  appellant  had  taken  the
    briefcase.  It was only afterwards that the appellant asked for it, and
    it became an issue.  He did not visit the appellant in  prison,  as  he
    was in Newcastle and the appellant was in Lewis Prison.   They  do  not
    see one another often.

14.  The third witness to give evidence was  Madjoudi  Sajid.   He  said  he
    knew the appellant from Algeria as they were born in the same town  and
    so had known each other since childhood.  The witness came to the UK in
    1990.  He thought the appellant left Algeria in 1986 when  the  witness
    was 16 years old.  He had heard the appellant went  to  England.   They
    made contact in 2000/1, as  the  appellant  heard  the  witness  had  a
    restaurant and came to visit  him.   As  to  the  suggestion  that  the
    appellant had come to the UK in 2000, he believed  that  the  appellant
    came long before that in 1986.  If someone leaves the village  you  get
    to hear about it, he said.  He said the appellant is known as Bekim. He
    heard the appellant  was  in  prison  in  2000,  he  thought  on  false
    identity.  Since meeting with the appellant, he told the  appellant  to
    return to Algeria but he refused.

15.  The fourth witness to give evidence was Mary Buckley.   She had  worked
    in the city and her  favourite  restaurant  was  "Tatsuso",  which  she
    believed was closed in the late 1990s. She had spoken to the  appellant
    about this restaurant and was convinced from the details  that  he  had
    given, that he had worked there.  She said she  met  the  appellant  in
    2013. She was in court to confirm  his  employment  and  offer  support
    generally.  She knows his official name but he is known to everyone  as
    Bekim.   Very soon after they first met she knew he had  problems.   He
    has not told her exactly how long he has been here.

16.  The fifth witness was Sabir Chabour.  He said he and the appellant  are
    cousins.   Their  fathers  are  brothers.   They  knew  each  other  as
    children. He knows the appellant came to the UK in 1986 and the witness
    came in 2001.  He also knew that the appellant had not left since then.
    He was unsure but said he saw the appellant in  the  UK  in  2000.   He
    assumed that the appellant was in the UK in 1986 as there were  letters
    from the appellant  and  phone  calls,  which  the  family  would  have
    received.  He also spoke to the appellant at the time.

17.  The sixth witness was Karim Dellalli who said he met the  appellant  in
    the UK in 2000 or 2001.  He did not know that the appellant had used  a
    false identity  and  only  recently  heard  through  friends  that  the
    appellant went to prison for working illegally.

18.  The judge said the first issue she had to  determine  was  whether  the
    appellant had been in the UK for a continuous period of fourteen  years
    prior to the service of notice of liability of removal, which was first
    served on 12 August 2008; so continuously would be from 13 August  1994
    to 12 August 2008.  No issue was raised by  the  appellant  as  to  the
    service of the notice of liability for removal on 12 August 2008.

19.  The judge found that the appellant had  not  produced  any  documentary
    evidence in support of his claim that he lost  his  briefcase  in  July
    2001 which contained valuable possessions.  Accordingly  he  relied  on
    his oral evidence, the oral evidence of the witnesses who attended  the
    hearing and the letters of support from friends  in  the  UK,  most  of
    which were written in 2009.  The judge noted that none of the witnesses
    claimed to have been in continuous contact with him throughout the time
    that he claims to have been  in the UK, or the time necessary  to  meet
    the fourteen year rule.

20.   The  judge  treated  the  appellant's  evidence  with  circumspection,
    because his case is that (i) he lied to the police when  questioned  in
    2008 about the date of his entry to the UK which  he  said  was  August
    2000, (ii) he adopted an identity which was not his from  1986  onwards
    and had false documents  made  to  substantiate  those  from  which  he
    obtained employment and a bank  account,  (iii)  he  was  convicted  of
    possessing a false instrument.

21.  The judge noted that in his witness statement the appellant provided  a
    chronology of where he worked and lived  but  did  not  deal  with  the
    period 2000 onwards as to where he was living or  what  he  was  doing,
    save to say that he had a five year relationship from 2004 to 2009.  He
    said that from 1994 to 2000 he lived with a cousin, but his cousin  put
    the period when they lived together as 1999 to 2001.  She did not  find
    that this is so particularised that it lends weight to the claim.   The
    judge also found it inconceivable that  as  the  appellant  and  Khelaf
    Chabour claimed to have lived together that Khelaf Chabour could   have
    been oblivious to the appellant using a false name in which he would at
    the time have  received  tax  documents  and  bank  statements.   Samir
    Chabour relied on hearsay evidence of his cousin having arrived in  the
    UK but gave no evidence as to how he recalled that it was exactly 1986.
    Sajid Madjoudi's letter written in 2009 referred  to  his  knowing  the
    appellant for fourteen years, but which changed  in  oral  evidence  to
    saying that they grew up in the same area in Algeria, and he knew  that
    the appellant had left for the UK in 1986.

22.  The judge found  that  the  difference  was  irreconcilable.   In  oral
    evidence the witness said he did not know how the appellant financially
    supported himself, but this conflicted with  his  letter  in  which  he
    referred to the appellant as someone  whom  he  had  been   financially
    supporting for many years.  In his letter he referred to the  appellant
    as a "member of his family", but did  not  elaborate  on  this  at  the
    hearing.

23.  The judge  also  considered  that  the  appellant  placed  reliance  on
    letters in the bundle from people whom he claimed he knew through Sajid
    Madjoudi yet the chronology did not fit.  She gave the  example  of  Dr
    Khot's letter written on 10 March 2009 which said that he had known the
    appellant for roughly ten years which would have meant that he met  the
    appellant in approximately March 1999, but as  the  appellant  did  not
    first meet up with Sajid Madjoudi until 2000/1 (who introduced  him  to
    Dr Khot) or moved to that  area  until  then,  that  evidence  was  not
    reliable.  The same could be said of the witness statements  of  Tracey
    Tarrant, Fethi Chiki, and Kamal Behtejdal.

24.  The judge found taken as a whole that the  evidence  presented  by  the
    appellant as to when he arrived in the UK was unreliable.  Although  he
    said that he first entered illegally, he did not say the basis  of  his
    entry.  Whilst he said that his passport was lost by virtue of  missing
    briefcase, he did not obtain anything from the Algerian Embassy to show
    from their records when he first applied for a passport and when it was
    issued.   The  implication  of  the  witness'  evidence  was  that  the
    briefcase was left by accident when the house was sold, but  there  was
    no evidence that anybody returned to the hose to see if the new  owners
    still had it.  He was not satisfied  that this account was  a  reliable
    explanation for the absence of documentation for this relevant period.

25.  The judge was not satisfied on the  evidence  that  the  appellant  has
    been continuously living in the UK for the period claimed by him.   The
    burden rests on the appellant to show that he  was  in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous period from 1994 onwards.   She was not satisfied  that  the
    appellant has discharged the burden of proof upon him of  showing  that
    he has been in the UK continuously throughout that period, 1994 - 2008.



26.  The grounds of appeal relied by Counsel, Miss  King,  argued  that  the
    judge failed to properly consider the  evidence  of  the  key  witness,
    Khelaf Chabour, who had said that he did know of the appellant's  false
    name.  Indeed at paragraph  28  the  judge  recorded  Khelaf  Chabour's
    evidence that the appellant also went by the name of Michel.  Therefore
    the judge's finding at paragraph 60 that it is  inconceivable  that  as
    they claimed to have lived together that he could  have been  oblivious
    to the appellant using a false name was founded on a mistake as to  the
    evidence given and undermined  the  judge's  conclusion  regarding  the
    reliability of the evidence.

27.  I do not accept Miss  King's  argument  as  I  find  that  the  judge's
    finding at paragraph 60 was in reference to Khelaf Chabour's claim that
    he had no reason to think that the appellant was in the  UK  illegally.
    The implication of the finding  is  that  as  Khelaf  Chabour  and  the
    appellant claimed to have lived together and  he  had  known  that  the
    appellant was using a false name in which he would  have  received  tax
    documents and bank statements, then it stands to reason that  he  would
    have known that the appellant was in the UK  illegally.   I  find  that
    this was a finding that was reasonably open to the judge.

28.  The second argument made by Miss  King  was  that  the  appellant  gave
    evidence that he had lost  all  proof  of  the  identity  that  he  had
    adopted.  Therefore it was irrational and unreasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant to seek to obtain a record from any official source  when  he
    has no proof that those records relate to him.

29.  I find no error of law committed by  the  judge  on  this  issue.   The
    appellant was seeking to establish that he had entered the UK  in  1986
    and had remained here ever since.  He claimed that the briefcase  which
    contained his valuables and papers had been left behind when his cousin
    sold his house in 2001. Therefore the  brief  case  was  lost.  In  the
    circumstances it was reasonable for the judge to find that  given  that
    the briefcase contained valuables and important  papers  including  the
    appellant's passport, he would seek to return to the house  to  see  if
    the new owners still had it.  In  any  event,  the  appellant  had  not
    reported the loss of the briefcase, his valuables and his  passport  to
    the police in the UK or to the Algerian Embassy. Had  he  done  so,  it
    would have given him the much needed proof to support  his  claim  that
    the briefcase had been lost and therefore he had lost all proof of  the
    identity that he had adopted. Accordingly,  I  find  that  the  judge's
    decision on this issue was not irrational or unreasonable.

30.  Miss King's third argument was  in  respect  of  paragraph  66  of  the
    judge's decision.  The judge held as follows:

         "I am not satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  without  the  means
         absence of a passport in his name would Miss King's submission  was
         that the respondent's opposition to the appellant's claim  to  have
         been  in the UK since 1968 was his statement  to  police  that  had
         arrived in 2000; therefore, the respondent was relying on  2000  as
         being true.  In her view it had to be one or the other.  I  am  not
         satisfied that is the proper approach. In essence the burden  rests
         on the appellant to show that he was in the  UK  for  a  continuous
         period from 1994 onwards."

31.  Miss King argued that this paragraph was  unintelligible  and  that  it
    was not possible to establish what the judge meant, even by context.  I
    do not accept that paragraph 66 is unintelligible as Miss King  appears
    to suggest.  The first line is certainly  muddled  but  I  gather  from
    paragraph 66 that the judge was referring to a submission made by  Miss
    King  in  respect  of  the  respondent's  reasons  for  rejecting   the
    appellant's claim that he has been in the  UK  since  1986;  which  was
    because of his statement to the police that he arrived  here  in  2000.
    Consequently the respondent was relying on 2000  as  being  the  truth.
    The respondent could not have it both ways.  In her view it had  to  be
    either 1986 or 2000.  The judge was not satisfied  with  that  approach
    and quite rightly in my view found that the burden was on the appellant
    to show that he was in  the  UK  for  a  continuous  period  from  1994
    onwards, and had failed to discharge that burden of proof upon him.

32.  I find for the reasons given that the judge did not make  an  error  of
    law in her decision.

33.  The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
