
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/29685/2014
                                                               IA/29929/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 March 2015                              |On 29 May 2015               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                            MR JIJU RAVINDRANATH
                            MR OMKAR VISHNU JIJU
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Marion Cleghorn of Counsel, instructed by Alex
                    Bell
      Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1) The appellants are a father and son.  They are both nationals of India.
     They appeal against a decision by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Duff dismissing their appeals under the  Immigration  Rules  and  under
    Article 8.

 2) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal records that the  first  appellant
    came to the UK in September 2006 with entry clearance as a work  permit
    holder.  This leave was extended and in February 2011  he  was  granted
    leave to remain as a Tier  2  (General)  Migrant.   Leave  was  further
    extended from August 2013 until January 2016.   On  12  December  2013,
    however, the respondent wrote to the first appellant at his  employer's
    address stating that because the sponsor licence of  his  employer  had
    been revoked, his leave was curtailed so as to expire  on  10  February
    2014.  Shortly prior to the expiry  the  first  appellant  applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain as a Tier  2  (General)  Migrant,  with  the
    second appellant as his dependant.  This application was refused  in  a
    decision dated 12 July 2014 because the sponsor in respect of the first
    appellant's most recent grant of leave no longer held a Tier 2  sponsor
    licence, this having been revoked.

 3) The first appellant's argument before the First-tier  Tribunal  appears
    to have been essentially that as he was continuing to do the  same  job
    in the same restaurant his  employment  had  not  changed  -  only  the
    identity of his employer had changed.  However that would not avail the
    first appellant as in terms of paragraph 245HF(d)(i) of the Immigration
    Rules, the first appellant had to show that  the  sponsor  issuing  the
    Certificate of Sponsorship in respect of his last grant of leave  still
    held, or had applied for a renewal of, a Tier 2 sponsor licence in  the
    relevant category.  The  first  appellant  could  not  show  this.   An
    attempt was made to argue on behalf of  the  first  appellant  that  he
    would  benefit  from  the  Transfer  of  Undertakings  (Protection   of
    Employment)  Regulations  2006  but  at  the  hearing  itself  it   was
    acknowledged that as all the  companies  who  had  employed  the  first
    appellant had gone into liquidation or had their licences revoked,  the
    first appellant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules  and  the
    argument was therefore restricted to Article 8.

 4) In his evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  first  appellant
    stated that he had never seen the letter of 12 December 2013  from  the
    respondent curtailing his leave.  The judge expressed some doubt  about
    this in view of the timing of the application of  30  January  2014  to
    extend leave  but  the  judge  nevertheless  accepted  that  the  first
    appellant was unaware of the curtailment of his leave.

 5) At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal it  was  acknowledged  on
    behalf of the appellants that their appeals  would  not  succeed  under
    Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.  The judge looked at  the  application
    of Article 8 outwith the Rules, having regard to section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  and  found  that  their
    removal would not be disproportionate.

 6) The application for permission to appeal pointed  out  that  the  first
    appellant had without his  knowledge  been  working  illegally  between
    January 2014 and July 2014 under the misapprehension that his  employer
    had the correct authorisation for him.  When he realised on receipt  of
    the respondent's refusal decision that his  employer  did  not  have  a
    valid  licence  to  sponsor  him,  he  immediately  resigned.   It   is
    acknowledged that the employer had gone to various lengths to avoid its
    immigration responsibilities but  this  was  not  known  to  the  first
    appellant.

 7) It is further stated in the application that the letter of 12  December
    2013 was addressed to the first appellant  but  sent  to  the  business
    address of his previous employer, which was a company  which  had  gone
    into liquidation.  All other correspondence had been sent to the  first
    appellant at his home address.  The first  appellant  did  not  receive
    this letter and was unaware that his leave had been curtailed.

 8) It is then submitted that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred by
    not engaging with the curtailment letter of  12  December  2013.   This
    letter informs the first appellant of his situation and allows  him  60
    days to obtain other employment with an employer holding the  necessary
    sponsorship.  If the first appellant was  unable  to  find  alternative
    employment within this period he would lose his right to a Tier 2 visa.
     It was argued for the first appellant that as he did not receive  this
    letter he was deprived of the opportunity of  finding  a  new  employer
    holding a certificate of sponsorship.  This was  the  issue  which  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal should have addressed but failed to do
    so.  Although the respondent's refusal decision was  made  in  reliance
    upon paragraph 245HF(d)(i) of the Immigration Rules, it was clear  from
    the Tier 2 Policy Guidance that a change  in  employer  was  permitted.
    This was provided for at paragraph 229 of the guidance where leave  was
    curtailed.  In addition, it is pointed out that the  letter  curtailing
    leave was unsigned.  Not only did the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    fail to deal adequately with the issue of curtailment of leave but  his
    assessment of proportionality was flawed by  a  failure  to  take  into
    account the way in which leave had been curtailed without the knowledge
    of the first appellant.

 9) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the  judge  arguably
    erred in failing to deal with the lack  of  effective  service  of  the
    notice of curtailment upon the appellant.

10) A rule 24 notice was lodged on behalf of the  respondent  stating  that
    the rule authorising curtailment placed no obligation on the respondent
    to provide any period of time before leave was curtailed.  In any event
    this issue was not material as the first appellant was not working  for
    an employer with a valid sponsor licence so the  relevant  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules could not be met.

11) At the hearing Ms Cleghorn referred me to the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Thakur (PBS decision  -  common  law  fairness)  Bangladesh
    [2011] UKUT 151.  This concerned a Tier 4  applicant  who  was  unaware
    that his college had lost its sponsor's licence and the  applicant  had
    no adequate opportunity of finding an alternative place to  study.   He
    had difficulty obtaining another  place  because  of  uncertainty  over
    whether he had leave.  This applied mutatis mutandis  to  a  person  in
    employment.  Ms Cleghorn also referred to the case of Patel (revocation
    of sponsor licence - fairness) [2011] UKUT 00211.

12) Reference was made to  the  curtailment  letter  of  12  December  2013
    addressed to the first appellant at the office of his  former  employer
    and sponsor, Seama Group Ltd, whose address was given as  India  House,
    Church Street, Gateshead, NE8 2AT.   Ms  Cleghorn  submitted  that  the
    requirements for service of  this  notice  were  to  be  found  in  the
    Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) Order 2000, SI 2000/1161.  This
    set out at article 8ZA the manner of giving notice of a grant,  refusal
    or variation of leave.  Reference was  also  made  to  the  Immigration
    (Notices) Regulations 2003, SI 2003/658.

13) Ms Cleghorn submitted that the first appellant's former employer, Seama
    Group Ltd had gone into liquidation from 1 March 2014.   The  Secretary
    of State should have sent  the  letter  of  curtailment  to  the  usual
    address the appellant used for correspondence.

Discussion

14) The first issue for me to decide in this appeal is  whether  there  was
    service of the letter of curtailment upon the appellant  in  accordance
    with the relevant legislative requirements.  I note that  in  terms  of
    article 8ZA.(2) of the Immigration (Leave to Enter  and  Remain)  Order
    2000 notice may be -

          a) given by hand;

          b) sent by fax;

          c) sent by postal  service  to  a  postal  address  provided  for
             correspondence by the person or the person's representative;

          d)  sent  electronically  to  an  e-mail  address  provided   for
             correspondence by the person or the person's representative;

          e) sent by document exchange to a  document  exchange  number  or
             address; or

          f) sent by courier.

    The article then continues as follows:

          3) Where no postal or e-mail address for correspondence has  been
             provided, the notice may be sent -

             (a) by postal service to -

                   i) the last-known or usual  place  of  abode,  place  of
                      study or place of business of the person; or

                  ii) the last-known or usual  place  of  business  of  the
                      person's representative; or

               a) electronically to -

                   i)  the  last-known  e-mail  address  for   the   person
                      (including at the person's last-known place of  study
                      or place of business); or

                  ii)  the  last-known  e-mail  address  of  the   person's
                      representative.

15) Article 8ZA then further provides at (4) that where attempts have  been
    made to give notice in accordance with sub-paragraphs (2) and  (3)  but
    this was either not possible or the attempts have failed, then when the
    decision maker records the reasons for this and places  the  notice  on
    file the notice shall be  deemed  to  have  been  given.   It  is  then
    provided by sub-paragraph (5) that where a notice  is  deemed  to  have
    been given in accordance with paragraph (4) and then  subsequently  the
    person is located, the person shall as soon as practicable be  given  a
    copy of the notice and details of when and how it was given.

16) Article 8ZB then contains provisions about deemed receipt.   Where  the
    notice is sent by post it is deemed to have been given  to  the  person
    affected on the second day after it was sent by postal service in which
    delivery or receipt is recorded if sent to a place  within  the  United
    Kingdom unless the contrary is proved.

17) I accept the submission by Ms Cleghorn that it is article  8ZA  of  the
    Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) Order  2000  which  applies  to
    service  of  this  notice  rather  than   the   Immigration   (Notices)
    Regulations 2003.  This is because the Notices Regulations apply  where
    the decision being served carries a right of appeal, which this  notice
    of curtailment did not.  I am satisfied that the notice was  served  in
    accordance with Article 8ZA.(3) because the notice was sent  by  postal
    service to the last-known place of business  of  the  first  appellant.
    Although subsequent correspondence was sent to the first  appellant  at
    the address given by him in his application for indefinite leave,  this
    correspondence appears all to post-date the notice  of  curtailment  of
    leave dated 12 December 2013.

18) Matters do not rest there, however, because the Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal made a specific finding at paragraph 19 of  the  determination
    that the first appellant did not know about the notice  of  curtailment
    of leave.  In other words he never received it.  Article 8ZB  raises  a
    presumption that a notice sent in accordance with article 8ZA is deemed
    to have been given to  the  person  affected  unless  the  contrary  is
    proved.  In this instance the first appellant has proved  that  he  was
    never given the notice.

19) This issue, however, is not determinative of the appeal.  The fact that
    the first appellant was not given notice of the  curtailment  of  leave
    may be relevant to the issue  of  fairness  and  perhaps  also  to  any
    assessment under Article 8 but it will not assist the  first  appellant
    under the Immigration Rules.  In January 2014 the first appellant  made
    an application for leave to remain but this  was  refused  because  the
    appellant's employer did not hold a Tier 2 sponsor licence as  required
    by paragraph 245HF(d)(i).  The application made by the first  appellant
    could not succeed under the Immigration Rules.   The  finding  to  this
    effect was made by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph  6
    of his determination and it appears to have been accepted on behalf  of
    the appellants by Ms Cleghorn at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

20) The first appellant sought to argue in the application  for  permission
    to appeal that in terms of the respondent's policy in respect of Tier 2
    the first appellant should have  had  the  opportunity  to  change  his
    employer.  The first appellant was unable  to  avail  himself  of  this
    opportunity, of course, because he was unaware of  the  curtailment  of
    leave.  The possibility that  had  the  appellant  been  aware  of  the
    curtailment of leave he might have sought and obtained a  new  employer
    with Tier 2 sponsorship is only hypothetical.  The  actual  application
    made by the  first  appellant  in  January  2014  was  refused  by  the
    respondent in terms of the Immigration Rules because it  did  not  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 245HF(d)(i).

21) It is understandable that the first appellant should feel that  he  has
    been let down in these circumstances.  This, however, is not the  fault
    of the respondent.  The first appellant's former employer, Seama  Group
    Ltd, omitted to inform him of the loss of its Tier  2  sponsor  licence
    and appear to have closed its office without  making  any  arrangements
    for the  forwarding  of  mail,  including  the  notice  of  curtailment
    addressed  to  the  appellant  at  its  office.   The  appellant's  new
    employer, who had taken over the business where he worked, then  failed
    to inform him that they did not have a sponsor licence and allowed  him
    to carry on working for them seemingly in the knowledge that  not  only
    were they misleading the first appellant but they were allowing him  to
    work illegally without his knowledge.  The  first  appellant  may  well
    feel aggrieved by this combination of circumstances  but  it  does  not
    follow from this that the respondent has a duty to the first  appellant
    to put matters right.

22) Ms Cleghorn argued before me that in terms of Thakur fairness  required
    that the first appellant be given the opportunity to obtain alternative
    employment from an employer with a proper sponsor licence.  However  on
    the facts of this appeal it is difficult to see any unfairness  on  the
    part of the respondent.  The notice of curtailment of 12 December  2013
    informed the first appellant that his leave would not expire  until  10
    February 2014, which  gave  him  the  opportunity  to  make  a  further
    application.  This notice was sent to the appellant in accordance  with
    article 8ZA.(3) and the respondent had no way of knowing prior  to  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal that the  notice  had  not  been
    received.  This was not the situation envisaged in article 8ZA.(4)  and
    (5) where service has taken place on the file.  To the extent that  the
    first appellant has been treated unfairly he has been treated  unfairly
    by his two  previous  employers,  who  failed  to  inform  him  of  his
    situation following the loss  of  the  sponsor  licence  by  the  first
    employer and the transfer of  the  first  employer's  business  to  the
    second employer, who held no licence, but failed to  inform  the  first
    appellant of this.  Accordingly I find no breach of a duty of  fairness
    on the part of the respondent.

23) This leaves the claim to private or family life.  Before the First-tier
    Tribunal it was acknowledged that neither appellant would succeed under
    Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.  Before me it was contended on  behalf
    of the appellants that the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    properly consider Article 8 outside the Rules because he failed to have
    regard to the circumstances regarding the curtailment of leave and  the
    transfer of the first appellant's employment.

24) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal set out the circumstances  of  the
    appellants' private and family life.  The first appellant has a wife in
    India from whom he is estranged.  He has two daughters  who  live  with
    his wife and whom he supports.  His wife will not consent to a  divorce
    because she fears social stigma.  The first appellant has a  girlfriend
    in the UK but she does not meet  the  definition  of  a  partner  under
    Appendix FM.  The first appellant was not aware that he was working for
    his employer in breach of his leave and as soon as he ascertained  this
    he resigned, which is very creditable.

25) The second appellant has been unable to attend  university  in  the  UK
    because he was told he would have to return to India  and  apply  as  a
    foreign student and pay fees accordingly.  He  has,  however,  received
    the benefit of a secondary education in the UK.   He  appears  also  to
    have commenced an apprenticeship here.  He claims that he would find it
    difficult to study at university in India, in part because of  language
    difficulties, although the  judge  expressed  reservations  about  this
    contention.  The judge accepted, however, that the second appellant was
    integrated into his school and into society in the  UK  and  there  was
    nothing  which  made  the  presence  of  either  appellant  in  the  UK
    undesirable.  At the same time  the  judge  found  there  was  "nothing
    remarkable or especial about the position of either appellant  and  the
    relationship with the first appellant with Ms  Loughram  is  relatively
    short lived."  On the basis of the facts as found and having regard  to
    section 117B there is no other decision the judge could reasonably have
    reached under Article 8.

Conclusions

26) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

27) I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

28) No order for  anonymity  was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   No
    application for anonymity was made before me and in  the  circumstances
    of the appeal I see no reason for making such an order.



Signed      Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
