
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/29850/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On May 29, 2015                      |On June 01, 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                          MR MUHAMMAD SHAHID JAVED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Thornhill (Solicitor)
Respondent  Ms Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. He entered the  United  Kingdom
    on November 18, 2007 with a visit visa valid until May  14,  2008.  The
    appellant became an overstayer after that date. The appellant  and  his
    wife, Julie Anne Allen, met towards the end of 2007/beginning  of  2008
    and on January 25, 2009 they underwent  an  Islamic  wedding  ceremony.
    They later regularised their marriage with a formal ceremony on January
    27, 2011.

 2. On  November  6,  2008  the  appellant  submitted  an  application  for
    discretionary leave to remain. This was refused on April 18, 2009  with
    no right of appeal because he was here unlawfully as an overstayer.

 3. On February 24, 2011 he submitted an Article 8 application but this was
    refused  on  March  24,  2011.  On  May  12,  2011   he   requested   a
    reconsideration of this application and on July 1, 2014 the  respondent
    refused his application to remain on the basis removal would not  place
    the United Kingdom in breach of its obligations under the Human  Rights
    Act 1998 and directions were given for his removal under section 10  of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 4. The appellant appealed that decision on July  18,  2014  under  section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 5. The matter came before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Dickinson  on
    October 2, 2014 and in a decision promulgated on October  13,  2014  he
    dismissed the appellant's appeal finding there were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles that  brought  the  appellant  within  Section  EX.1  of  the
    Appendix FM. The FtTJ considered the appellant's claim under Article  8
    ECHR but found the interference with his family life was proportionate.



 6. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on October 16,  2014  submitting
    the FtTJ had erred in his approach to both issues and on  November  24,
    2014 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Shimmin  gave  permission  to
    appeal.

 7. The matter initially came before me on April 7, 2015 and  having  heard
    submissions I  issued  a  decision  on  April  11,  2015  refusing  the
    appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules but finding the FtTJ had
    erred in his approach to Article 8 ECHR because in considering  Article
    8 he had not had  any  regard  to  the  appellant's  partner's  medical
    condition and in particular whether that would make it unduly harsh for
    her to relocate to Pakistan with the appellant.

 8. The respondent filed an additional bundle on May 7, 2015 that  included
    the following documents:

      a. Application form dated December 13, 2006

      b. Refusal letter dated 28.12.2006

      c. Notice of Appeal received April 2, 2007

      d. ECM Review letter dated February 28, 2007

      e. Evidence submitted in that appeal.

      f. Determination of Immigration Judge Hall in the appeal  of  Muhammad
         Javed, date of birth March 3, 1977.

      g. Application for discretionary leave and letter from legal  advisors
         in support dated November 6, 2008.

      h. Refusal letter dated April 18, 2009

 9. Mr Thornhill had lodged three additional pieces of  evidence  namely  a
    letter from the  appellant's  partner's  doctor  dated  May  14,  2015,
    photographs of the family house and conditions and a  statement  signed
    by the appellant that addressed  the  earlier  visa  application  dated
    December 13, 2006.

10. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and I see no reason to alter that order.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUE

11. Mr Harrison agreed that  all  of  the  documents  concerning  the  2006
    application did not relate  to  this  appellant  and  no  reliance  was
    therefore placed on them.

12. It was accepted the appellant could not satisfy the  Immigration  Rules
    and in particular Section EX.1 of Appendix FM.

13. It was agreed that the appellant and Ms Allen would be called  to  give
    oral evidence.

    EVIDENCE

14. The appellant adopted his statements dated September 17, 2014  and  May
    28, 2015. He confirmed the photographs, now adduced, were of his family
    home in Pakistan and that the  people  photographed  therein  were  his
    sister-in-law and her children. The property was owned  by  his  father
    and was a six-bedroom property with  electric  albeit  the  supply  was
    intermittent. Currently living in that property were his  parents,  his
    brother, sister-in-law and their five children, all of whom were  under
    the age of ten years. The property was basic and was unsuitable for his
    wife because of its remoteness and lack of facilities.

15. Under cross-examination he accepted there was  nothing  preventing  him
    living elsewhere in Pakistan save his only skill/trade was as a tractor
    driver  and  farmer.  He  stated  that  there  was  an  ongoing  murder
    investigation as evidenced by the police report dated  April  22,  2008
    and this would prevent him returning  although  he  later  accepted  in
    answer to questions put to him by myself that the alleged incident  was
    reported on January 26, 2008 which  was  when  he  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom. His only other concern was a fear  of  terrorism  but  he  was
    unable to expand on that under questioning and it  transpired  that  he
    was referring to general crime. As far as his  wife  was  concerned  he
    indicated that he helped her in the night with her tablets and attended
    to the hoovering and cooking of meals and taking her, on occasions,  to
    the toilet. He was concerned that if they had to go and live in a  city
    in Pakistan his wife would know no one and would have no one to turn to
    when he was at work.

16. Ms Allen adopted her witness statement dated  September  17,  2014  and
    gave oral evidence. She confirmed she had impaired mobility and if  she
    had to go to her husband's home in Pakistan she would  be  unable  cook
    for herself or use the toilet facilities because of her disabilities.

17. Under cross-examination she stated that she did not take  any  specific
    medication for what her doctor referred to as her mental state but  she
    did take the  medication  referred  to  in  the  doctor's  report.  She
    received higher rate DLA and owned her own home and accepted there  was
    nothing to prevent her husband returning to apply to enter as a  spouse
    save she wanted him to stay here and she had serious concerns  that  if
    he returned the authorities would prevent him leaving. She agreed  that
    she knew his status was precarious and  that  they  had  been  together
    since late 2007/early 2008 but believed  that  because  they  had  been
    allowed to marry everything was okay.

18. In answer to questions posed by myself she  confirmed  she  spoke  some
    Urdu but would be unable to hold a proper conversation.

    SUBMISSIONS

19. Mr Harrison relied on the  refusal  letter  dated  June  28,  2014.  He
    accepted the appellant enjoyed a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    but this was entered into at a time when  the  appellant's  status  was
    precarious and was liable to be removed at any time. Ms Allen was fully
    aware of the situation but  they  chose  to  marry  in  spite  of  this
    knowledge. Mr Harrison submitted the appellant and Ms Allen should have
    considered the implications of the appellant's position  and  the  fact
    they would have  to  live  in  Pakistan  either  permanently  or  on  a
    temporary basis.  If the appellant's home village was  unsuitable  then
    it was open to them to live in the city where work would be  available.
    Alternatively, Ms Allen could remain here whilst the appellant returned
    to Pakistan and submitted an entry  clearance  application.  Whilst  Ms
    Allen had medical issues there was nothing  before  the  Tribunal  that
    suggested she would be unable to live in a city if she  was  unable  to
    live in the appellant's home village. The decision to refuse the appeal
    under Article 8 was proportionate.

20. Mr Thornhill submitted there are competing interest namely  immigration
    control and the personal facts of  the  case.  Whilst  the  appellant's
    immigration status was precarious the Tribunal had to recognise it  was
    dealing with real people and real emotions.  The  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440 indicated that a case could be  exceptional
    even if there were no insurmountable obstacles and  he  invited  me  to
    have regard to the fact Ms Allen could  not  live  in  the  appellant's
    village due to her personal circumstances and to require  her  to  live
    elsewhere was disproportionate because of her condition  and  the  fact
    she would have no one to help her when her husband  was  at  work.  The
    medical evidence was persuasive and tips the scales in the  appellant's
    favour. I was invited to allow the appeal.

    FINDINGS AND ANALYSIS OF EVIDENCE

21. I am only dealing with the Article 8 aspect of this claim. I previously
    found that the decision taken under the Immigration Rules  was  correct
    and in considering this appeal my starting point is that the  appellant
    does not meet the Rules and  there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles
    preventing family or private life continuing in Pakistan.

22. In considering the facts of this case I have followed the approach  set
    out in Razgar [2004]  UKHL  00027  and  by  agreement  the  first  four
    questions posed by Lord Bingham are answered in  the  affirmative.  The
    issue is one of proportionality.

23. I found there had been an error in law because the FtTJ  did  not  have
    regard to Ms Allen's medical circumstances  and  whilst  I  upheld  the
    FtTJ's decision there were no insurmountable  obstacles  the  Court  of
    Appeal has reminded us in Agyarko that in considering Article 8 appeals
    there is a gap between Section EX.1 of Appendix FM and what  Article  8
    might require in some cases. However, Sales LJ went on to say,

         "... In relation to precarious family life cases, as I observed  in
         Nagre  at  para.  [43],  the  gap  between  section  EX.1  and  the
         requirements of Article 8 is likely to be small."

24. Section 117B of the 2002 Act  sets  out  in  statute  those  matters  a
    Tribunal must have regard to when considering proportionality.

         '(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.

         (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4) Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.'

25. The appellant's immigration history is poor.  He  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor but failed to leave the United  Kingdom  when  his
    visa expired. His visa expired on May 14, 2008 and he took no steps  to
    regularise his stay until November 6, 2008. He submitted an application
    on form FLR(O) but there was no reference to his relationship in either
    the document or the covering letter provided by his legal advisors. His
    application was refused without a right of appeal because he  was  here
    illegally but in any event I find no merit in his claim that  he  would
    be at risk from the authorities. The police document produced refers to
    an incident reported on January 26, 2008 but he had evidence to show he
    had been in the United Kingdom since November  18,  2007.  Having  been
    refused a right of appeal he did nothing to regularise his  stay  until
    he submitted an application on February 24, 2011-almost two years after
    his last application had been refused on April 18, 2009.

26. According  to  the  evidence  presented  to  me  they  had  been  in  a
    relationship since late 2007/early 2008. They entered into a an Islamic
    marriage in January 2009 and I therefore find that  their  family  life
    has effectively been created at a time  when  he  was  here  unlawfully
    (Section 117B(4)(b) of the 2002 Act). I was invited by Mr  Harrison  to
    find that the appellant's family life was created when his  status  was
    precarious. Mr Mr Thornhill accepted  their  family  life  was  created
    whilst his immigration status was precarious and  of  course  Sales  LJ
    does refer to the term "precarious family life cases".

27. Section 117B(5) only applies to private life but this does not mean the
    appellant's family life cannot be said to have been created  while  his
    immigration status was precarious.

28. However,  in  considering  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    control is in the public interest I have to have  regard  to  not  only
    these factors but also:

      a. The appellant was able to conduct the hearing in English and  would
         therefore be less of a burden on the State and would be better able
         to integrate into society.

      b. He has never worked here and Ms Allen is reliant on benefits due to
         her medical circumstances.

      c. He has no skills and whether he would be well-placed to obtain work
         in the United Kingdom is questionable.

      d. There is nothing physically  preventing  either  Ms  Allen  or  the
         appellant living in Pakistan.

29. The medical evidence is not as persuasive as Mr Thornhill invited me to
    find. The first letter (page 23) is dated September 11, 2014 and simply
    states  Ms  Allen  suffers  from  ongoing  "chronic  medical  problems"
    requiring regular surveillance and review both in hospital and  at  the
    surgery. Her complaints are listed in the letter. There  is  no  letter
    from a consultant or from a hospital. The second letter dated  May  14,
    2015  confirms  her   ongoing   medical   problems   as   fibromyalgia,
    osteoarthritis and  raised  body  mass.  She  takes  various  types  of
    painkillers and amitriptyline.  The  doctor  referred  to  her  current
    medical and mental state but did not expand on the latter. Under cross-
    examination Ms Allen indicated she had good and bad days and  when  she
    had bad days she became depressed-this may explain the  prescribing  of
    amitriptyline. The medical report tells me about  Ms  Allen's  ailments
    but the doctor provides no  evidence  that  he  has  any  insight  into
    medical opportunities  in  Pakistan  and  he  failed  to  consider  the
    possibility of relocation to another part of Pakistan where there would
    be hospitals etc.

30. The rural conditions would be challenging for Ms Allen but I also  have
    to consider the possibility of them living elsewhere. The appellant  is
    fit and well and whilst he has no specific skills it was  not  disputed
    by Mr Thornhill that he would be able to find some work.  Whether  that
    would mean the appellant and Ms Allen had a comfortable life is another
    issue and not the test I am considering.

31. Both representative agreed that this case was about proportionality and
    having considered all of the available evidence I find as follows:

      a. The parties are in a genuine and subsisting relationship  but  this
         relationship was formed and continues  to  be  enjoyed  whilst  the
         appellant is here unlawfully.

      b. The appellant's immigration status is and has been precarious  from
         the day he arrived here. He came as a student and has been  subject
         to removal at any time. The only thing preventing his  removal  has
         been his ongoing appeal. Any family or private life has been formed
         whilst his immigration status was precarious.

      c. Both parties entered into their relationship in  the  knowledge  he
         was here unlawfully and his immigration status was precarious.

      d. The appellant speaks English and Ms Allen speaks a little Urdu. The
         appellant would be able to integrate in the United Kingdom  and  by
         implication would be less of a burden on taxpayers.  Ms  Allen  has
         demonstrated she would be able to speak Urdu but it would take some
         time before she would be able to hold a  proper  conversation  with
         someone (like her husband is able to in English).

      e. The appellant has no skills or job experience and finding  work  in
         the competitive UK market may place an undue burden on the taxpayer
         especially as Ms Allen is reliant on disability benefits herself.

      f. Ms Allen has medical  problems  which  would  make  living  in  the
         appellant's village difficult. However, she has had these  problems
         for sometime and was aware of the  appellant's  immigration  status
         when she began their relationship Internal  relocation  to  another
         part of Pakistan remains an option for them albeit  Ms  Allen  does
         not want to live in Pakistan at this time.

32. I have to have regard to all of the above  factors  and  I  remind  the
    parties that statute states, "The maintenance of effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest."

33. Sales LJ made clear in Agyarko that-

         "Thus it is possible that a case might be found to  be  exceptional
         for the purposes of the relevant test under Article 8  in  relation
         to precarious family life even where there  are  no  insurmountable
         obstacles to continuing family life overseas. This means that there
         is a gap between section EX.1 of Appendix FM  and  what  Article  8
         might require in some cases: see Nagre, paras. [41]-[48]. But  this
         does not  mean  that  the  issue  whether  there  are  or  are  not
         insurmountable obstacles to relocation drops  out  of  the  picture
         where there is reliance on Article 8. It is a material factor to be
         taken into account: see Nagre, paras. [41] and [47];  Rodrigues  da
         Silva and Hoogkamer v  Netherlands,  para.  [39];  and  Jeunesse  v
         Netherlands, paras. [107] and  [117].  In  relation  to  precarious
         family life cases, as I observed in Nagre at para.  [43],  the  gap
         between section EX.1 and the requirements of Article 8 is likely to
         be small."

34. There were no insurmountable obstacles under as defined by Section EX.2
    of Appendix FM and I have to have regard to that fact  but  this  is  a
    precarious  family  life  case  where  the  appellant  has  been   here
    unlawfully and the gap between Section EX.1  and  the  requirements  of
    Article 8 are small.

35. Mr Harrison has submitted that the appellant  can  return  to  Pakistan
    (with or without Ms Allen) and make an application for entry clearance.
    He would not have to meet the financial requirements and Ms Allen  owns
    her accommodation. However, Sales LJ made clear at  paragraph  [31]  of
    Agyarko that-

         "It is possible to envisage a Chikwamba type case arising in  which
         Article 8 might require that leave to remain be granted outside the
         Rules,  even  though  it  could  not  be  said  that   there   were
         insurmountable obstacles to  the  applicant  and  their  spouse  or
         partner continuing their  family  life  overseas.  But  in  a  case
         involving  precarious  family  life,  it  would  be  necessary   to
         establish that there were exceptional circumstances to warrant such
         a conclusion"

36.  None  of  the  evidence  placed  before  me  amounts  to   exceptional
    circumstances having regard to the full facts of the case.

37. In those circumstances and having considered all of the above factors I
    find it would not be disproportionate to require the appellant to leave
    the United Kingdom and the appellant's appeal therefore fails.

    DECISION

38. There was a material error in respect of the Article  8  ECHR  decision
    for the reasons previously found and I have remade that decision and  I
    dismiss the appeal under Article 8 ECHR. I have previously  upheld  the
    dismissal of the appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.



Signed:     Dated: 5 August 15

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award for the reasons given by the FtTJ.



Signed:     Dated: 5 August 15

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
