


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/29301/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Liverpool                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On:  1st February 2017                   |On: 3rd February 2017             |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                Bilawal Rais
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mrs Aboni ,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Atuegbe, R & A Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Pakistan  born  on  the  17th  November
    1992. On the 7th July 2016 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ince) allowed
    his appeal with reference to the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006, the Tribunal being satisfied that the respondent  had
    demonstrated a dependency on his aunt,  a  German  national  exercising
    treaty rights.  The Secretary of State now  has  permission  to  appeal
    against that decision.


 2. The Secretary of State's complaint is that the Tribunal  did  not  have
    the jurisdiction to 'allow' the appeal outright  since  the  matter  in
    issue was whether the then appellant  was  an  extended  family  member
    under Regulation 8. The unchallenged findings being that  he  was,  the
    most that the First-tier Tribunal could do would be to remit the matter
    to the Secretary of State so that she  could  exercise  her  discretion
    under Regulation 17(4). Mr Atuegbe did not dispute that this would have
    been the correct approach.

 3. A further matter now arises. The grounds were drafted,  and  permission
    given, before the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Sala v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC)  was  handed  down.
    The effect of that decision is that there is no right of appeal to  the
    Tribunal against a decision taken in  respect  of  Regulation  8.  That
    means that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in proceeding  to  hear
    the appeal at all. There was no  valid  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and its decision is therefore a nullity.

 4. I note that the findings of fact made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  are
    not challenged by the Secretary of State. Notwithstanding the  ultimate
    fate of this careful judicial decision the Secretary of State  will  no
    doubt  have  regard  to  those  findings  in  considering  any   future
    application or application for review.



    Decisions


 5. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is a nullity as there  was
    no appeal before the Tribunal.   It is therefore set aside.


 6. There is no appeal before the Upper Tribunal.


 7. There is no order for anonymity.








                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                   1st
                                February 2017






