
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29187/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination sent         |
|On 3 June 2013                                  |On  7 June 2013            |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                             Mr Bledar Selcetaj
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms O Taiwo, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms H Horsley, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born 4 November 1981.  On 16 July
    2012 he applied  for  a  EEA  permanent  residence  card,  pursuant  to
    Regulation 15 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.  By way of a decision dated the 5 December 2012 the Secretary of
    State refused to grant the appellant such a residence card, giving  the
    following reasons for doing so:

         "You have applied as the non European Economic Area (EEA)  national
         family member of a Portuguese national claiming to  have  exercised
         treaty rights for a continuous period of five years in  the  United
         Kingdom in accordance with the European Regulations 2006.

         In support of your application you submitted a number of  documents
         including your Albania (sic) passports, your EEA sponsor's Portugal
         (sic) passport, your Albania (sic) marriage  certificate,  evidence
         of your EEA sponsor exercising treaty rights  over  the  last  five
         years.

         According to Regulation 15(1)(b) a family member of an EEA national
         who is not himself an EEA national  but  who  has  resided  in  the
         United Kingdom with the  EEA  national  in  accordance  with  these
         Regulations for a continuous period of five years shall acquire the
         right to reside in the United Kingdom permanently.

         In your EEA4 application form section 6.1  and  6.3  regarding  the
         details of your EEA  sponsor  exercising  treaty  rights  for  five
         years, you state your EEA sponsor was employed with Barnes  Textile
         and Laundry Services from 2002 to 25 August 2007 and then you state
         your EEA sponsor has been employed by St James Dry Cleaners from 28
         August 2007 until your application date of 16 July 2012.

         With regard to each employer and the evidence you have provided  to
         support how long your EEA sponsor was employed by that employer, it
         is noted that no evidence has been provided for the employment with
         Barnes Textile and Laundry Services and as such this claimed  (sic)
         is not accepted.

         With regard to employment with  St  James  Dry  Cleaners  your  EEA
         sponsor has provided employment contracts dated 28 August 2007  and
         two payslips for October 2008 and November 2008.  Unfortunately the
         evidence provided is insufficient to establish employment for  your
         EEA sponsor for the period stated 28  August  2007  to  present  as
         there is no evidence at all for the years 2008 to the present.

         Based on  the  evidence  provided  this  department  is  unable  to
         establish whether your  EEA  sponsor  has  been  exercising  treaty
         rights in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of five  years
         as there is insufficient evidence to establish whether or not  your
         EEA sponsor was exercising  treaty  rights  continuously  over  the
         period before 28 August 2007 and from 2008 to the present time.  On
         that basis you have failed to provide evidence your EEA sponsor has
         resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with these  Regulations
         for a continuous of five years."

 2. The appellant appealed this decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    requested that his appeal be determined on the papers.  It came  before
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Powell,  sitting  at  the  Newport  Hearing
    Centre, on 13 February  2013  and  was  dismissed  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 14 February 2013.  The First-tier Tribunal's  concluding
    paragraphs read as follows:

        "22. The only evidence I have shows that Maria De  Rocha  has  been
             employed since 28 August 2007.  I accept this.

         23.  There is no evidence before me to show how  the  appellant  is
             related to Maria De Rocha and no evidence before  me  to  show
             that the appellant has resided with her for a period  of  five
             years.

         24.  It is the appellant's responsibility to show that he  met  all
             of the requirements of the relevant Immigration Rule  and  not
             limit his evidence in this appeal to the matters  specifically
             raised by the respondent against him.  I am not  permitted  to
             assume that the respondent accepts that the appellant met each
             and  every  requirement  of  the  relevant  Rule  unless   the
             respondent so concedes.  In this I follow RM  (Kwok  On  Tong:
             HC 395 at para 320) India [2006] UKIAT 0039.

         25.  Accordingly, the appellant has failed to show that he met  the
             requirements of Regulation 15(1)(b) of the Regulations.

         26.  I dismiss the appeal."

 3. On 24 April 2013 I granted the appellant permission to  appeal  in  the
    following terms:

         "It  is  arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  (i)   by
         misapplying the decision in RM (Kwok On Tong) and (ii)  by  finding
         against the appellant on matters  which  were  not  raised  without
         giving  the  appellant  any  proper  opportunity  to  address  such
         matters."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me.

 5. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal Ms Horsley conceded  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in law.  She was plainly  right  to  have
    done so.  The decision of the Secretary of State  of  5  December  2012
    takes one issue against the appellant that being that he had failed  to
    satisfy the Secretary of State that his sponsor Ms De  Rocha  had  been
    exercising her treaty rights for the requisite five  year  period.   No
    mention is made within that letter of the  Secretary  of  State  taking
    issue with the fact that the appellant  is  married  to  Ms  De  Rocha,
    neither is it suggested within that letter that  it  was  not  accepted
    that the appellant did not reside with Ms De Rocha  for  the  requisite
    period  of  time  (although  of  course,  contrary  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination this is in any event  entirely  irrelevant  to
    the  question  of  whether  the  appellant  is  entitled  to  permanent
    residence, as to which see the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  PM
    (EEA - spouse - "residing with") Turkey [2011] UKUT 89 (IAC)).

 6. Whilst the Tribunal noted in RM (Kwok  On  Tong)  that  an  Immigration
    Judge cannot allow an appeal on the ground that the decision was not in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules unless satisfied that all of  the
    requirements of the relevant Immigration Rule were met, it  also  makes
    clear in paragraph 10 of its decision that  "if  new  elements  of  the
    Immigration Rules come into play they are  to  be  dealt  with  on  the
    appeal, and the parties must be allowed any appropriate adjournment  in
    order to avoid the injustice of being taken by surprise".

 7. In my conclusion it is plain that if only one issue is taken against an
    appellant in the Secretary of State's refusal letter and  the  Tribunal
    wishes to take other issues of  its  own  volition  then  it  ought  to
    adjourn the determination of the appeal so as  to  give  the  appellant
    adequate opportunity to bring evidence to resolve those  matters  which
    are belatedly put in issue.  Although the instant appeal was determined
    on the papers, there was nevertheless a requirement on  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to adhere to the principles of  natural  justice.  I  conclude
    that the First-tier Tribunal in the instant appeal did not do  so.  The
    consequence of this is that its determination must be set aside.  As  I
    have indicated above, Ms Horsley correctly conceded that this was  the
    appropriate course.

 8. I now turn to the remaking the decision.  Ms Horsley accepted that  the
    only matter the Secretary of State put in issue in her  refusal  letter
    was the failure of the appellant  to  provide  sufficient  evidence  to
    demonstrate that Ms De Rocha had been exercising her treaty rights  for
    the relevant period of time.  She confirmed that the Secretary of State
    did not, and still does not, take issue with any other  requirement  of
    Regulation 15 of the EEA Regulations 2006. She  further  accepted  that
    Judge Powell had concluded that Ms De Rocha had been employed since  28
    August 2007 and that this point is not the subject of challenge by  the
    Secretary of State before the Upper Tribunal.

 9. As a consequence it is clear that the appellant has satisfied the  only
    matter which the Secretary of State puts in issue in  this  appeal.   I
    therefore find that the appellant meets the requirements of  Regulation
    15(1)(b) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
    and his appeal must be accordingly allowed.

Decision

For  the  reasons  given  above  the  First-tier  Tribunal's   determination
contains an error on a point of law capable of affecting the outcome of  the
appeal and it is consequently set aside.

Upon remaking the decision I allow the appellant's appeal on the basis  that
the Secretary of State's decision to refuse to grant him  an  EEA  permanent
residence card breaches his rights under the Community Treaties.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 6 June 2013


