
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29753/2013
                                                               IA/29756/2013
                                                               IA/29754/2013
                                                               IA/29755/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24th February 2014                           |On 10th March 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                PETER HAMMOND
                              Augustina Addison
                          Banjamin Quansah Hammond
                           Benadicta Hammond Diney

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E King of Counsel, instructed by Samars
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. These are the Appellants' appeals against the decision of Judge  Pickup
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 1st November 2013.

Background

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Ghana.  They are  members  of  the  same
    family and their appeals stand and fall together.  The first  Appellant
    arrived in the UK on 20th August 1998  with  leave  to  enter  for  six
    months as a  visitor  and  he  overstayed.   On  25th  August  2000  he
    submitted an application under the  Immigration  Regularisation  Scheme
    for Overstayers which was refused on 23rd February 2003.  He  attempted
    to appeal that decision on 5th May 2003 but his appeal was out of  time
    and never considered further.  The second Appellant arrived in  the  UK
    on 29th March 2011 again as a visitor and again never  left.   She  met
    the first Appellant in 2010.   They  were  married  by  proxy  on  14th
    December 2011 and she gave birth  to  their  twin  children  two  weeks
    later.

 3. The present application was made on 7th July 2012.

 4. The Judge rejected the evidence of the first Appellant and  the  second
    Appellant in its entirety.  He  considered  that  they  had  fabricated
    their account in order to try to justify their  failing  to  return  to
    Ghana.

 5. It was submitted that the application should have  been  considered  by
    the Respondent under the fourteen years long  residence  provisions  of
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.  Because the  application  was
    made before the change in the  Immigration  Rules  the  relevant  legal
    framework was the transitional provisions.

 6. The Judge dealt with that argument as follows:

         "I reject the argument of Ms Solanki.  This was not and  could  not
         have been an application made under the long residence Rules as  at
         the  date  of  the  application  07/07/12  the  Appellant  had  not
         completed fourteen years.  It is obvious that the Appellant  wanted
         to get his application in before  the  change  in  the  Immigration
         Rules or 09/07/12 introducing Appendix FM, intended  to  deal  with
         family life claims.

         The Appellant did not meet the requirements of  the  Rules  for  an
         application under long residence.  The reference in the solicitors'
         covering letter was no  more  than  part  of  a  series  of  points
         addressing proportionality under Article 8.   The  opening  of  the
         letter states that the application  was  for  indefinite  leave  to
         remain 'on the grounds  that  they  have  established  private  and
         family  life  in  the  UK  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR'.   The
         application itself at page 9 stated that the category  under  which
         ILR was sought was 'other purposes or reasons not covered by  other
         application forms'.  Specifically  the  Appellant  explained  below
         that ticked box 'under Article 8 ECHR'.  I note that that page  has
         boxes for long residence in the UK.  These were not ticked.

         Had the application been made for and valid under the fourteen year
         long residence provisions, then the first Appellant would have been
         entitled to have his application determined under those provisions,
         notwithstanding the introduction of Appendix FM.  The fatal flaw in
         Ms Solanki's argument is that  it  is  absolutely  clear  that  his
         application was not made under the  fourteen  year  long  residence
         Rules.  Thus the Appellant cannot  benefit  from  the  transitional
         provisions.  The Appellant cannot expect the Respondent to consider
         an application which was not made and for which the application was
         not qualified at the date of his application."

 7. The  Judge  then  considered  in  detail  the  claim  under  Article  8
    principles and dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 8. The Appellant appealed on the grounds that  the  Judge  had  materially
    erred in dismissing the claim under paragraph 276B of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  As at the date of decision the Appellant had  accrued  fourteen
    years and ten months' residence in the UK and he made  his  application
    before the fourteen year Rule  was  abolished.   It  follows  that  his
    application should have been considered under the Rule  and  he  should
    have benefited from it.  The Appellant relied on JH (Zimbabwe)  v  SSHD
    [2009] EWCA Civ 78 and AQ (Pakistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 833 for the
    proposition that the fact that the Appellant had not  accrued  fourteen
    years as at the date of application was not fatal to  his  application.
    Indeed in MU (Statement  of  additional  grounds  -  long  residence  -
    discretion) Bangladesh [2010] UKUT 442, the Tribunal wrote:

         "As held in AS (Afghanistan) and NV (Sri  Lanka)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ
         1076 there is no time limit on serving a  statement  of  additional
         grounds in response to a Section 120 Notice.  Thus an Appellant may
         accrue ten years' lawful leave (including leave extended by Section
         3C of the 1971 Act) while his appeal is pending.  The Tribunal  may
         then be  asked  to  decide  whether  the  Appellant  qualifies  for
         indefinite leave under the long residence Rule."

 9. The grounds argue that the  decision  in  MU  is  consistent  with  the
    established concept of a  continuing  application  until  the  date  of
    decision.  Whether the correct box was ticked on the  application  form
    is irrelevant and definitely not decisive because as  at  the  date  of
    decision the Appellant met the requirements of the Rule.

10. The Appellant argued that he had an expectation  that  the  application
    would have been considered under the Rule at the date of  decision  and
    he relies on the transitional provisions which  state  that  applicants
    who are granted or who applied for leave under  the  Rules  before  9th
    July 2012 will remain subject to the Immigration Rules in force  as  at
    8th July 2012 until  settlement  (the  grant  of  indefinite  leave  to
    remain) even where the application is granted  on  or  after  9th  July
    2012.  Transitional provisions will apply through to  indefinite  leave
    to remain to those persons  who  were  granted  in  certain  categories
    including fourteen year long residence.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by  Designated  Judge  Shaerf  on  5th
    December 2013 for the reasons stated in the grounds.

12. On 18th December 2013 the  Respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Submissions

13. Ms King relied on her grounds.  The Appellant had made his  application
    44 days short of fourteen years'  residence  and  as  at  the  date  of
    decision had accrued fourteen years and ten months.  She relied on  the
    covering letter which accompanied the application which  recorded  that
    the applicant had resided in the UK for almost fourteen years.  He  had
    made a valid application which should  have  properly  been  considered
    under the old Rules and been granted under the transitional provisions.

14. She referred me to the Respondent's Guidance, both as it was as at  the
    date of application and now.  At paragraph 2.2.7  the  Guidance  states
    that an application for settlement which is considered 28 days or  less
    before the fourteen years is completed, where the applicant  meets  all
    the other criteria, indefinite leave to  remain  may  be  granted.   An
    application which is more than 28 days before the  applicant  completes
    the required qualifying period for long residence should be refused  on
    the basis that they had not completed the required period of  leave  in
    the UK.  The Guidance states that an applicant refused under  the  long
    residence Rules, due to submitting the application too  early,  can  be
    considered for a grant of indefinite leave to remain  if  they  reapply
    once they have completed their qualifying period or up to 28 days prior
    to it.

15. She accepted that the  present  Guidance,  which  requires  refusal  of
    applications received more than 28 days before the applicant  completes
    the required qualifying period for long residence, was consistent  with
    the case law. However she  argued  that  the  Guidance  was  not  clear
    because it also referred to cases where an applicant completes fourteen
    years' continuous residence while waiting a decision on an  application
    or appeal in certain circumstances where their  leave  is  extended  by
    Section 3C of the 1971 Immigration Act. In these  circumstances,  where
    there is a lack of clarity, statute should be interpreted in line  with
    the Human Rights Act and the Appellant ought to be given the benefit of
    the doubt.

16. Mr Diwnycz defended the determination  and  submitted  that  since  the
    application was never made the Appellant could  not  benefit  from  the
    transitional provisions and the Judge had made no error  in  dismissing
    the appeal.

Findings and Conclusions

17. First it is  abundantly  clear  from  the  application  form  that  the
    Appellant never applied for long  residence  under  the  fourteen  year
    Rule.  As the Judge stated, in the application  form,  he  specifically
    ticked under Section B that he was applying for reasons not covered  in
    the application form and that he was doing so under Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.  The covering letter states as follows:

         "We wish to make an application for Peter Hammond, his wife and two
         children to be granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK on  the
         grounds that they have established private and family life  in  the
         UK under Article 8 ECHR."

18. It is correct to say that the letter does state that the applicant  has
    resided in the UK for almost fourteen years but this is in the  context
    of  the  application  under  Article  8,  since  it   refers   to   the
    establishment of private life during his time here.  The Appellant  was
    assisted by professional legal representatives when  he  completed  his
    form.  I agree with the Judge -   the  Secretary  of  State  cannot  be
    criticised  for  failing  to  give  the  Appellant   the   benefit   of
    consideration under the transitional provisions if an  application  was
    never made. The case law cited in the grounds is not  relevant  because
    it refers to continuing applications.

19. Furthermore, I do not  accept  that  there  is  any  ambiguity  in  the
    Guidance.  It makes it perfectly clear that any  application  made,  as
    this was, more than 28 days before the accrual of fourteen years,  will
    be refused.  No doubt this is why the legal advice was that it would be
    fruitless to make it.  The reference to Section 3C leave is  irrelevant
    because the Appellant has never had such leave.

20. No challenge is made in the grounds to  the  Judge's  consideration  of
    Article 8.

Decision

21. The original Judge did not err in law.  The original  decision  stands.
    The appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


