

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29501/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8th June 2017                       |On 9th June 2017                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                SHIHAB UDDIN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed, instructed by Lincoln's Chambers
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS






   1. Mr Uddin was granted permission to appeal the dismissal of his appeal,
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lindsley, against  the  decision  of  the
      respondent dated 17th August 2015 refusing his human rights claim  for
      leave to remain.


   2. Permission was granted on limited grounds only namely:


                  "It was arguable  that  in  consideration  of  the  matter
                  outside of the Immigration Rules the  First-tier  Tribunal
                  did not consider the argument put forward in the  skeleton
                  argument and in the statement of the appellant's aunt  and
                  the appellant's own statement that he has  a  family  life
                  relationship with his aunt. He is clearly  still  in  full
                  time education and has lived with his aunt for the past 10
                  years, who has apparently taken on a parental relationship
                  for him from the age of  11  years.  This  is  arguably  a
                  significant matter which should have been  placed  in  the
                  balance and to which weight could  be  attributed.  Simply
                  because the aunt is found not to have told the truth about
                  other matters does not mean  that  her  evidence  on  this
                  issue could not be material, and in any case would have to
                  be placed with the appellant's own testimony and  that  of
                  his cousin."


   3. Findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  which  permission  was
      sought, but not granted and therefore stand are as follows:


   i) The First-tier Tribunal made  clear  and  reasoned  findings  for  its
      conclusion that the appellant was aged 21 and born  in  1995  and  not
      born in 2000 as claimed;
  ii)  the  Tribunal  clearly  decided  the  case  on  the  basis  that  the
      appellant's father had  died  and  that  his  remaining  relatives  in
      Bangladesh are his mother and brother;
 iii) The First-tier Tribunal considered the  appellant's  English  language
      ability properly, considering it to be a neutral factor;
  iv) Although the appellant is not financially self-sufficient  because  he
      is in full time education, the cousin's financial  support  was  taken
      into consideration.


   4. The respondent opposes the appeal and refers in her Rule  24  response
      to findings by the First-tier Tribunal judge that
   i) The appellant's family in Bangladesh have  continued  to  be  involved
      with the appellant throughout his upbringing;
  ii) The appellant was 21 at the date of hearing and not 18 as claimed;
 iii) The evidence of the aunt was 'incredible';
  iv) Neither the appellant nor his representatives advanced a  case  beyond
      the quality of his private life.


   5. The respondent submits in her Rule 24 response that in the absence  of
      a case being advanced about family life it was open to the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge to find there were no compelling circumstance  such  as
      would warrant consideration outside the Rules.


   6. The First-tier Tribunal found that whilst  not  in  dispute  that  the
      appellant has developed a private life in the UK, no evidence was  put
      forward in terms of the  issue  of  reintegration  to  Bangladesh  his
      account had been  predicated  upon  an  assertion  that  he  had  been
      entirely  abandoned  by  his  family  in  Bangladesh.  The  First-tier
      Tribunal judge did not accept that and found there was family to  whom
      he could turn in Bangladesh. In submissions, Mr Ahmed again reiterated
      that the appellant's aunt had  taken  the  place  of  the  appellant's
      mother. He referred to caselaw on the basis that the appellant  was  a
      minor - a fact specifically found not to be the case by the First-tier
      Tribunal.    His   skeleton   argument   referred   to   matters    of
      proportionality that had been considered and reasoned findings made by
      the First-tier Tribunal and which were not the subject of the grant of
      permission.


   7. Although the First-tier Tribunal  judge  states  that  in  determining
      whether  to  allow  an  appeal  on  Article  8   grounds,   compelling
      circumstances were required and it may be that  the  judge  applied  a
      rather simplified approach, the issue is whether in failing to make  a
      specific finding about the appellant's  relationship  with  his  aunt,
      this amounts to an error of law such that the decision of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal be set  aside  to  be  remade.  The  appellant  did  not
      formulate his appeal based on his family life with his aunt.


   8. The First-tier Tribunal judge does not make a finding  of  the  nature
      and extent of his family life with his aunt but does  make  a  finding
      that he has been and remains in contact with his  mother  and  brother
      and they have remained interested and involved over the years. Even if
      his aunt has become a surrogate mother figure in terms of his care and
      upbringing in the UK, which the judge can be considered because of his
      other findings not to accept, the fact remains that this young man  is
      at the date of the hearing aged 21, in education, has been in  the  UK
      for some 11 years and has contact  with  his  mother  and  brother  in
      Bangladesh. It cannot be said that the decision to  refuse  his  human
      rights claim was disproportionate.


   9. Even if the First-tier Tribunal judge had, as referred to in the grant
      of permission, found that the appellant's aunt had taken on  the  role
      of mother during his minority, when that is  weighed  in  the  balance
      with all the other findings made by  the  judge  including  issues  of
      character, length of residence, education, language ability and  other
      relatives in the UK as well as contact with his mother and brother  in
      Bangladesh, the conclusion reached is not disproportionate.


  10. There is no material error of law such that the decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal should be set aside to be remade.


  11. The appeal is dismissed;  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      stands.

                                    Date 8th June 2017
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
