
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29274/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th March 2015                             |9th March 2015                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              mr algent imeraj
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs P Glass, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Imeraj is a citizen of Albania and who I shall call the claimant. He
    was successful in his appeal under the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Majid  in  a
    decision promulgated on 1st December 2014.

 2. He had applied for a  residence  card  which  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused on the basis that the marriage was one of convenience only  for
    reasons set out in the refusal letter dated 2nd July 2014.  The grounds
    of application contend that the  judge  failed  to  carry  out  a  fair
    assessment of all the evidence and had failed to consider  any  of  the
    reasons for  refusal  detailed  in  the  refusal  letter  which  quotes
    extensively the major discrepancies in the  evidence  of  the  parties.
    Furthermore the judge had  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  detail  any
    evidence that was before the  Tribunal  to  satisfy  the  judge  as  to
    whether the EEA national was in fact  exercising  treaty  rights  -  as
    detailed on the refusal letter it was the position of the Secretary  of
    State that she was not.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the judge's  failure
    to engage with the evidence  and  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
    finding that the marriage was genuine.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 5. For the Home Office Mr Melvin relied on the grounds of application.  It
    was said the decision fell well below the standard to be expected of  a
    judge and the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    a fresh hearing.  The  judge  had  not  dealt  with  the  major  issues
    involved and had ignored the huge discrepancies in the evidence.

 6. For the claimant Mrs Glass said that there had been  a  proper  hearing
    before the judge.  Both the Appellant and his  wife  had  appeared  and
    they were a loving couple.  They had always been  together.   They  had
    given their evidence.  There was no more they could have  done.   While
    the reasoning might not be mapped out in detail and in the  manner  the
    court would wish the discrepancies were minor and overall the depth  of
    the relationship came across.   As such there was no error in  law  and
    the decision should stand.

 7. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 8. The reasons for refusal letter highlights numerous discrepancies  on  a
    number of  different  occasions  between  the  parties  explaining  the
    conclusion of the Secretary of State that the  marriage  undertaken  on
    18th October  2013  was  one  of  convenience  only.   Furthermore  the
    Secretary of State also concluded that the EEA family  member  was  not
    exercising treaty rights at the material time and was therefore  not  a
    qualified person in terms of the Regulations.

 9. For whatever reason the judge failed to engage with  the  points  taken
    against the Appellant in the refusal letter.  There was no analysis  by
    the judge of the number of  discrepancies  in  the  interviews  of  the
    Appellant and Sponsor and no analysis of the alleged  discrepancies  in
    the oral evidence.  Unfortunately the judge engaged in  generalisations
    and irrelevancies (see paragraphs 17 and 18) which are not  helpful  to
    the resolution of the contentious issues between the parties.

10. There is considerable merit in the grounds of application and by a very
    wide margin indeed it can be said that there is a material error of law
    in the judge's decision which cannot stand for  lack  of  any  adequate
    reasoning on the central issues.  The Secretary of State has not had  a
    fair hearing in this case.

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be re-made is such that it is appropriate to remit the case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

13. I set aside the decision.

14. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald









