

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29732/2014
     IA/29737/2014, IA/29738/2014
     IA/29739/2014, IA/29740/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 9 March 2016                     |On : 24 March 2016                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 kadda talbi
                         louafia magraoui epse talbI
                                    [yt]
                                    [amt]
                                    [adt]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Doyle instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellants, husband and wife and their three children ([YT], born  on
   22 August 2005; [AMT], born on 20 May 2009; and [ADT], born  on  30  June
   2011), are citizens of Algeria. They have been given permission to appeal
   against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing their  appeals
   against the respondent's decision to remove them from the United  Kingdom
   following the refusal of their human rights claims.

2. The first two appellants arrived in the United Kingdom on  14  June  2005
   with leave to enter as visitors until 30 November 2005.  They  overstayed
   their visas. On 21 July 2010 the first four appellants applied for  leave
   to remain in the UK but their applications were  refused.  On  10  August
   2010 the first appellant was served with removal papers.  On  9  November
   2010 the appellants applied for asylum, but the application  was  refused
   on 3 December 2010. They did not  appeal  against  the  decision.  On  28
   February 2013 all five appellants applied for leave to  remain  on  human
   rights grounds, but their applications were refused on 14 June 2013.  The
   respondent reconsidered the applications and refused  them  again  on  20
   June 2014.

3. The appellants appealed against that decision. Their appeal was heard  in
   the First-tier Tribunal on 29 June  2015  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Juss. Judge Juss refused a request for the matter to be remitted  to  the
   Secretary of State to make a decision on section 55 of the UK Borders Act
   2007 and went on to consider the matter himself. He found that the eldest
   child,  [YT],  was  a  qualifying  child  for  the  purposes  of  section
   117B(6)(a) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as
   amended), but that it could not be  said  that  it  was  unreasonable  to
   expect him to leave the UK for the purposes  of  section  117B(6)(b).  He
   considered the best interests of the  children  and  found  that  removal
   would not be disproportionate and he dismissed the appeals.

4. Permission to appeal was sought  on  behalf  of  the  appellants  on  the
   grounds that  the  judge,  in  dismissing  the  appeals  under  paragraph
   276ADE(1)(iv) of the immigration rules,  had failed to make  findings  as
   to what were the children's best interests; that the judge had failed  to
   make clear findings as to the weight to be attached to the  private  life
   established by the three children; and that the judge had erred by taking
   the eldest child's  resourcefulness  and  adaptability  as  a  conclusive
   factor. It was also asserted that the judge had failed to  conclude  that
   the respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law owing  to  a
   failure to give proper consideration to section 55.

5. Permission to appeal was initially refused, but was subsequently  granted
   by the Upper Tribunal on 23 November 2015.

Appeal hearing and submissions

6. There was discussion, at the hearing, as to whether the appeal should  be
   adjourned to another day, since the third appellant,  [YT]'s  application
   for British citizenship had been accepted by the Secretary of State in  a
   letter of confirmation dated 4 March 2016 and,  as  a  result,  the  Home
   Office would be reviewing the status of the whole family. Mr  Jarvis  was
   in favour of an adjournment, but Mr Doyle, having taken  the  appellant's
   instructions, wished to proceed. I decided to proceed  to  determine  the
   error  of  law  issue,  since  this  was  unaffected  by  the  change  in
   circumstances.

7. Both parties then made submissions. Mr Doyle expanded upon  the  grounds,
   submitting that there had been a failure by the judge  to  identify  what
   the children's best interests were, an insufficient consideration of  the
   children's private life ties to the UK,  an  erroneous  emphasis  on  the
   resourcefulness of the eldest child and a failure to consider the  short-
   term impact on and disruption caused to the children by their removal  to
   Algeria. Mr Doyle also submitted that the judge ought  to  have  remitted
   the case to the Secretary of State to seek the views of the  children  in
   carrying out her section 55 duties.


8. Mr Jarvis submitted that the grounds were simply a disagreement with  the
   judge's decision.  The  judge  gave  proper  consideration  to  the  best
   interests of the children and was not required to remit the matter to the
   Secretary of  State.  The  judge  properly  considered  the  question  of
   reasonableness in regard to the children. He had  followed  the  relevant
   authorities. There was nothing wrong with his approach.


9. Mr Doyle responded by reiterating the submissions previously made.


10. I advised the parties that in my view there was  no  material  error  of
   law in the judge's decision requiring it to be set aside. My reasons  for
   so concluding are as follows.

Consideration and findings

11. Whilst permission was granted in this case on the basis that  the  judge
   had arguably erred by failing to consider whether the  eldest  child  met
   the  relevant  immigration  rule  (paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)),  Mr   Doyle
   helpfully accepted, in line with the  decision  in  AM  (S  117B)  Malawi
   [2015] UKUT 0260,  that  this  was  in  fact  addressed  by  the  judge's
   consideration of reasonableness in the context of section 117B(6) of  the
   2002 Act. His submission was, however, based on the matters raised in the
   grounds, namely the judge's consideration of the best  interests  of  the
   children.

12. I turn first of all to the  question  of  whether  the  judge  erred  by
   failing to remit the matter to the Secretary of State in relation to  her
   section 55 duties. I do not find any error made  by  the  judge  in  that
   regard. At [4] of his decision  the  judge  gave  consideration  to  that
   question, as raised on behalf  of  the  appellant,  and  found  that  the
   respondent had given consideration to section 55 in the refusal decision,
   which indeed she had at pages 10 and 11, and that it was for the Tribunal
   to consider the matter. The judge's decision not to remit the  matter  to
   the  Secretary  of  State  but  to  consider  section  55  himself   was,
   furthermore, clearly consistent with the decision in  MK  (section  55  -
   Tribunal options) [2015] UKUT 223 where that very issue  was  considered,
   referring to the previous decision in JO and  Others  (section  55  duty)
   Nigeria [2014] UKUT 517, and where reference was  made  at  [27]  to  the
   rejection of the argument that the Tribunal was obliged to remit even  in
   circumstances where the respondent had not discharged  her  duties  under
   section 55.


13. Furthermore, and  contrary  to  Mr  Doyle's  submission,  there  was  no
   requirement for the children to be consulted by the respondent  in  order
   for her section 55 duties to have been properly fulfilled. That  is  made
   clear in the President's decision in MK, where the matter was  considered
   in particular at [36(d)] and where the President found that the  relevant
   issue was whether there was sufficient evidence to enable the Tribunal to
   conduct a properly informed assessment of the child's best interests.  In
   the appellant's case before  Judge  Juss  there  clearly  was  sufficient
   evidence before him for him to assess the children's best interests,  and
   he properly proceeded on that basis.

14. Mr Doyle submitted that Judge Juss had failed to  make  findings  as  to
   where the best interests of the children  lay,  in  accordance  with  the
   guidance at [34] in EV (Philippines) & Ors v Secretary of State  for  the
   Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ  874  and  had  failed  to  consider  the
   children's ties to the UK, concentrating only on the  resourcefulness  of
   the eldest child. However I do not agree. The  judge  plainly  considered
   the length of time the eldest child had been in the UK, his education and
   his friends and other ties to the UK. He considered the  documentary  and
   oral evidence before him in that regard. It is clear  from  his  findings
   that he considered [YT]'s best interests to lie  in  remaining  with  his
   family and he gave full and cogent reasons for concluding that  he  could
   reasonably return with his family to Algeria. The judge properly focussed
   on [YT] as he was the eldest child and the  only  "qualifying  child"  in
   terms of his length of residence in the UK, but at [15], when weighing up
   the children's best interests against other relevant  considerations,  he
   also took into account the two other children and their circumstances and
   medical conditions. The judge was entitled to take  into  account  [YT]'s
   resourcefulness and adaptability, but it is clear that he did  not  treat
   that as being conclusive. He was, likewise, entitled to take  account  of
   the immigration status of the first two  appellants  when  balancing  the
   best interests of the children against the public interest considerations
   and that is consistent with the findings of the Court of Appeal in EV  at
   [58].

15. Taken  as  a  whole,  the  judge's  determination  contains  a  detailed
   assessment of the children's best interests and a  careful  balancing  of
   all  relevant  considerations,  following  the  approach  laid   out   in
   established case law. The judge's conclusions were fully  and  adequately
   reasoned and were properly open to him on the evidence  before  him.  The
   grounds of appeal disclose no errors of law in his decision.

DECISION

16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   an error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision. The decision
   to dismiss the appeals stands.




Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
