
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/29905/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House          |                  Determination & Reasons  |
|                              |Promulgated                                |
|On 25 April 2017              |                  On 3 May 2017            |
|                              |                                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL

                                   Between


                     Mr POOBALASINGAM PURUSHOTHAMARAJAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Ms B Jones, Counsel (instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed to the  Upper  Tribunal  with  permission
           granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on 14 March 2017  against
           the decision and reasons of First-tier Tribunal Judge Monson who
           had dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the refusal  on  14
           August 2015 of his application for further leave  to  remain  on
           Article  8  ECHR  grounds.   The  decision   and   reasons   was
           promulgated on 12 August 2016.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on 7 April  1985.
           The reasons for refusal  letter  records  the  use  of  numerous
           aliases by him.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 3 June 2002
           and claimed asylum.  His claim was refused on 16 July 2002.   On
           25 February 2003 he was granted exceptional leave to remain  for
           a limited period, unspecified.  The Appellant's  appeal  against
           the refusal of his asylum claim was dismissed on  appeal  on  12
           September 2003.  The  Appellant  nevertheless  remained  in  the
           United Kingdom.


      3.    On 4 April 2012, the Appellant was granted  discretionary  leave
           to remain for three years.  Judge Monson surmised that this  was
           likely to have been granted under the legacy scheme,  i.e.,  for
           refused claimants against whom no enforcement  action  had  been
           taken.  The Appellant's application for a  travel  document  was
           refused on 14 March 2014.  On 2 April 2015 (within the  currency
           of his existing leave) the Appellant made  his  Article  8  ECHR
           application, refusal of which gave rise to  the  appeal  to  the
           First-tier Tribunal.


      4.    The reasons for refusal given by the Respondent were that  since
           the previous grant of discretionary leave to remain on  4  April
           2012 the Appellant had been convicted of a  number  of  criminal
           offences. His claim to having a child in the United Kingdom  had
           not been proven.  He did not meet the  suitability  requirements
           of paragraph 276ADE(1)(i) of  the  Immigration  Rules.   He  had
           failed to disclose all of  his  convictions  when  he  made  the
           current application.  Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) was not applicable
           as the Appellant  could  not  show  that  there  would  be  very
           significant obstacles to his integration in Sri Lanka.  He spoke
           the language and had spent the majority of his life  there.   No
           exceptional circumstances had been shown. His family  ties  with
           his sister and two brothers were  not  above  the  normal.   His
           character and conduct did not justify a further grant  of  leave
           to remain.  He  also  had  a  poor  record  of  compliance  with
           reporting conditions.


      5.    In his grounds  of  appeal,  the  Appellant  contended  that  he
           suffered from severe post traumatic stress disorder for which he
           was being treated.   His  mental  health  was  being  monitored.
           Because  of  his  mental  health  removal  to  Sri  Lanka  would
           constitute inhuman and degrading treatment.  His Article 8  ECHR
           rights would also be infringed.   The  grounds  of  appeal  were
           accompanied by a letter dated 28  August  2014  authorising  the
           Appellant's solicitors to act on his behalf.  A 106 page  bundle
           was filed for the appeal hearing.


      6.    An application to adjourn was made to Judge Monson at the  start
           of the appeal hearing.  Counsel  stated  that  her  instructions
           were limited to the adjournment application.  There was  concern
           by her instructing solicitors as to whether  the  Appellant  had
           capacity.  Judge Monson set out the submissions at [25]  onwards
           of his decision and reasons.   A witness statement was  provided
           by the Appellant's solicitor.  The judge refused the application
           because he considered that it was  not  procedurally  unfair  to
           continue with the hearing in the Appellant's absence, given that
           evidence had been filed.


      7.    Judge Monson gave full reasons for his  decision,  referring  to
           paragraph 2 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014, the overriding
           objective. He considered that the grounds of appeal showed  that
           that the Appellant's solicitors already had had  access  to  the
           Appellant's  mental  health  records,  and  had   further   been
           specifically authorised by the Appellant  to  obtain  disclosure
           from third parties such as the Appellant's GP.  The judge  noted
           that the Appellant had legal aid: this was stated on the  Notice
           of Appeal.  The Appellant's sister had been at the tribunal  and
           could obviously have given relevant evidence on material  issues
           raised in the Notice of Appeal, including the Appellant's mental
           health.  There had been no explanation of why such  matters  had
           not been addressed earlier.  There had been an egregious failure
           to comply with the obligation to help the  tribunal  to  further
           the overriding objective, and to  cooperate  with  the  tribunal
           generally.  It is plain  that  the  judge  considered  that  the
           Appellant shared responsibility for that.


      8.    It should be noted that there was no current independent medical
           or psychiatric evidence placed before Judge Monson demonstrating
           that the Appellant lacks capacity.  No such  evidence  has  been
           produced since that date and none was placed  before  the  Upper
           Tribunal.  Yet the Notice of Appeal stated expressly  that  "the
           appellant suffers from severe post traumatic stress disorder for
           which the appellant is taking treatment with the Consultants and
           attending counselling" and "We are currently in contact with the
           mental health team who is constantly monitoring the appellant."


      9.     Judge  Monson  proceeded  to  determine  the  appeal   in   the
           Appellant's  absence.   He  examined   the   evidence   in   the
           Appellant's bundle.  He inferred from Dr  Nathan's  2003  report
           stating that the Appellant suffered from post  traumatic  stress
           disorder from which it would take him "several years" to recover
           that it was unlikely that  the  Appellant  still  suffered  from
           severe  PTSD.   Noting  that  the  Appellant  had  a  reasonable
           expectation of being granted further leave  to  remain  provided
           that the circumstances which had led to the  original  grant  of
           leave had not substantially  altered,  the  judge  examined  the
           change  of  circumstances  relied  on  by  the  Respondent   and
           ultimately concluded that the final conviction dated 28  January
           2015 could not be classified as "unspent"  (adopting  for  these
           purposes the most  favourable  possible  interpretation  of  the
           disclosure requirements) and that the Appellant had thus  failed
           to meet  the  suitability  requirements.    In  any  event,  the
           Appellant could not show that he  would  face  very  significant
           obstacles to his integration into  Sri  Lanka.   Nor  was  there
           evidence showing that he would face an Article 2 or 3 ECHR  risk
           on return because of his mental health.  Nor,  on  the  evidence
           available, did the Appellant's mental  health  justify  allowing
           his appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The judge applied section
           117B of the Nationality and Immigration Act 2002 and found  that
           Appellant's private life had been built up when his  status  was
           precarious.  The Appellant, a repeat petty offender, had accrued
           three convictions for seven offences.  The Appellant's exclusion
           was proportionate.  It was implicit in the judge's decision that
           the Appellant had failed  to  show  family  relationships  which
           engaged Article 8 ECHR.  The appeal was thus dismissed.


      10.   Permission to appeal was refused by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Colyer but was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kebede  on  14
           March 2017 on the renewed  application  because  she  considered
           that the procedural fairness argument that the judge should have
           adjourned the hearing  for  further  medical  evidence  deserved
           further exploration.  It was also arguable that  the  judge  had
           failed to consider the Home Office discretionary  leave  policy.
           Clearly Judge Kebede was by no means convinced  that  there  was
           any material error of law.


      11.   The Respondent filed a rule 24 notice in the form  of  a  letter
           dated 24 March 2017  indicating  that  the  onwards  appeal  was
           opposed because the judge had  directed  himself  properly  when
           refusing the adjournment.




      Submissions


      12.   Ms Jones for the Appellant relied on  the  onwards  grounds  and
           submitted that the judge  had  misdirected  himself  in  various
           ways.  He had not taken account of C v First-tier Tribunal [2016
           EWHC 707 (Admin).  Capacity was  in  issue  and  it  was  wholly
           unfair of the judge to have refused an adjournment and  to  have
           heard the appeal in the Appellant's absence.  The judge had been
           alerted to the difficulties by  the  witness  statement  of  the
           Appellant's solicitor but had ignored the capacity problem which
           was nowhere addressed.  There was no capacity and so the  appeal
           could  not  proceed:  there  was  no  jurisdiction  because  the
           solicitor's retainer had ended for lack of capacity. There  were
           no instructions. It was inevitable that there  could  not  be  a
           fair outcome in such circumstances.  The judge indicated that he
           was aware of the possibility that the  Appellant  was  suffering
           from mental illness, yet ignored the  consequences.   The  judge
           had impermissibly made his own diagnosis that the Appellant  had
           recovered from post traumatic stress disorder  at  [38]  of  the
           determination.


      13.   The judge had also  erred  substantively  when  determining  the
           appeal because he had failed to consider the Home Office  policy
           relating to discretionary leave to remain,  the  Asylum  Process
           Instruction.  Refusal was not the  automatic  consequence  of  a
           criminal record.  The decision maker was  required  to  consider
           the impact of the individual's criminal history before  granting
           any leave.  The decision had not been in accordance with the law
           for Article 8 ECHR purposes.  The errors of law were material.


      14.   The combination of legal errors  meant  that  the  decision  and
           reasons must be set aside.  The appeal should be returned to the
           First-tier  Tribunal  so  that  a  litigation  friend  could  be
           appointed, and reheard before judge other than Judge Monson.


      15.   Mr Tarlow for the Respondent relied on the rule 24  notice.   He
           submitted that there was no error of law and  the  determination
           should stand.  The onwards  appeal  should  be  dismissed.   The
           judge had considered all relevant  facts  and  circumstances  in
           detail.  There was still no up to date medical evidence  showing
           lack of capacity.  This was nothing more than an attempt to have
           a second bite of the cherry.  If there had  been  a  failure  to
           consider Home Office policy, any error of law was not material.


      16.   In reply, Ms Jones reiterated her  earlier  submissions.   There
           had been some medical evidence  before  the  judge.   It  was  a
           serious error of law to deprive someone of a fair hearing.   The
           judge had further erred in his Article 8 ECHR  analysis  by  not
           taking into account the Home Office policy.
      17.   The tribunal indicated at the conclusion of submissions that  it
           found that there was no material error of law and  reserved  its
           determination, which now follows.




      No error of law finding


      18.   The submissions made on the Appellant's behalf were  extravagant
           and misconceived. The fact that counsel had  not  been  given  a
           copy  of  the  Appellant's  Notice  of  Appeal,   an   obviously
           fundamental document, did not,  of  course,  assist  her.   (The
           tribunal provided a copy for counsel's reference.)  This  appeal
           must be understood in its  proper  context,  which  is  why  the
           tribunal has set out the background in more detail  than  usual.
           Judge Monson necessarily gave much  more  detail  and  reference
           should be made to his decision for that.  There was no challenge
           to his accuracy.


      19.   At [27] of his  decision  the  judge  referred  to  the  witness
           statement made by the Appellant's solicitor.  (Ms Jones supplied
           the tribunal with a  copy.)  The  judge  had  seen  no  need  to
           summarise the witness  statement,  but  the  contents  no  doubt
           informed his decision and so it is useful  to  record  what  was
           before him.  The witness statement, dated 25 July 2016, was made
           by a solicitor who was five years qualified.   She  stated  that
           instructions had been accepted on 28 August 2015.  The Appellant
           had been accompanied by a friend but the solicitor did not  have
           any record of the friend's name.  The solicitor  was  instructed
           that the Appellant had suffered from mental ill health.   Notice
           of Appeal was completed as instructed  by  the  Appellant.   The
           Appellant was said to have been  "not  contactable  due  to  his
           illness and mental health condition ", according to his  brother
           and sister, until February 2016.


      20.   A request for  the  papers  sent  to  the  Appellant's  previous
           solicitors had not received a reply.  When notice of the hearing
           was  received,  the  solicitors  contacted  the  Appellant   and
           requested him to  bring  in  his  papers,  which  he  did.   The
           Appellant was fully aware of the hearing  date.   He  failed  to
           attend two scheduled appointments.  The Appellant was eventually
           contacted on 20 July 2016.  He  refused  to  be  assessed  by  a
           psychiatrist.   The  solicitor  made  an   appointment   for   a
           psychiatrist to attend the solicitor's office on 26  July  2016.
           On 22 July 2016 the Appellant attended the  solicitor's  office.
           He  was  distressed  and  angry.   The  solicitor  had   serious














































                                      concerns    that    the     Appellant
           [mis]understood her role.  She told the Appellant that  he  must
           see a psychiatrist and he finally agreed to do so.


      21.   The witness statement is silent  as  other  evidence  gathering,
           such evidence from the Appellant's  siblings  and  friends.   No
           mention is made of contacting the Appellant's GP pursuant to the
           wide authority signed by the Appellant.


      22.   As at the date the appeal stood before Judge Monson,  the  judge
           was entitled to conclude that  the  Appellant  had  capacity  to
           instruct his solicitor. According to the Notice of Appeal, legal
           aid had been obtained on his behalf, as the  judge  noted.   The
           firm's notepaper records that they are  accredited  by  the  Law
           Society in immigration law.  The Appellant had signed  a  formal
           retainer  and  his  instructions  had  been  followed.   He  had
           provided his solicitors with documents and a bundle of  evidence
           had been submitted for the hearing. He was aware of the date  of
           his appeal hearing. He was evidently not an easy client but  the
           solicitors had not exercised  their  right  to  terminate  their
           retainer. The solicitors must also be presumed to  be  aware  of
           the widely reported decision in Re C (above), yet  had  made  no
           application to the tribunal to seek the appointment  of  a  next
           friend. Mental health issues do  not  of  themselves  mean  that
           there is insufficient capacity to continue to give instructions.




      23.   The judge took great trouble over the exercise of his discretion
           and  examined  the  relevant  and  competing  factors.   As  was
           obvious,  this  was  the  Appellant's  appeal  and  it  was  his
           responsibility to pursue it.  It is for the  parties  to  assist
           the tribunal to  complete  its  tasks  in  accordance  with  the
           overriding objective.  As happens  far  too  frequently  in  the
           First-tier Tribunal, and as Judge Monson  rightly  noted,  there
           had been an egregious failure  to  comply  with  the  overriding
           objective, for which the Appellant shared  responsibility.   The
           solicitors had been instructed for nearly a year, yet  had  done
           little to prepare for what  was  bound  to  be  an  appeal  with
           limited  prospects  of  success.    There  is  a  strong  public
           interest in the judicial business of the Immigration and  Asylum
           Chamber being despatched promptly, because appellants who  enjoy
           "in country" appeal rights  either  have  their  existing  leave
           extended (or their  removal  deferred)  by  section  3C  of  the
           Immigration Act 1971.  This can result in a reward for delay.


      24.   The judge pointed out that the authority signed  by  the  client
           was sufficient to enable them to obtain any necessary documents,
           including medical records, to support the case advanced  in  the
           Notice of Appeal.  There were also family members  available  to
           give evidence.  The tribunal considers that the judge was  right
           to conclude  that  it  was  fair  to  proceed  on  the  evidence
           provided.   There  had  already  been  abundant  opportunity  to
           provide evidence.


      25.   Contrary to Ms Jones's submission, the judge did not  engage  in
           impermissible medical diagnosis concerning the Appellant's  past
           severe PTSD.   Dr Nathan had specifically stated as long ago  as
           2003 that the Appellant should recover over several  years.   It
           need hardly be said that 13 years is rather longer than  several
           years, so the judge's inference was  proper  and  logical.   The
           judge made no finding that the  Appellant  could  no  longer  be
           suffering from  PTSD,  merely  that  it  would  on  Dr  Nathan's
           prognosis  no  longer  be  severe.   There  was  no  medical  or
           psychiatric evidence before the judge to cause  him  to  take  a
           different view.


      26.   Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 418  (IAC)  was  not
           mentioned expressly by the judge in his decision but  there  was
           no need to do so.  That decision was based on the AIT  Procedure
           Rules 2005  (as  amended),  with  particular  reference  to  the
           restrictions of rule 21(2),  although  at  [9],  the  simplified
           adjournment provisions of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014 were
           foreshadowed and briefly discussed.  There is  no  rule  in  the
           2014 rules which resembles rule 21(2) of the  2005  rules.   The
           overriding objective of the 2014 rules  differs  from  the  2005
           rules, and may be seen as wider. The present appeal was governed
           by the Tribunal Procedure  Rules  2014.  The  right  to  a  fair
           hearing is, of course, a basic principle.  There can be no doubt
           that it was very much in  the  experienced  judge's  mind.   But
           fairness involves fairness to all stakeholders.  The  judge  was
           entitled to conclude that there  was  no  evidence  of  lack  of
           capacity such as to have terminated the solicitor's retainer and
           that  a  fair  hearing  in  the   Appellant's   unsatisfactorily
           explained absence was possible in all the circumstances.


      27.   As to the Home Office policy, this had not been  raised  in  the
           Notice of Appeal and, of course, no submissions were made on the
           Appellant's behalf.  The relevant facts for the exercise of  the
           Secretary  of  State's  discretion  were  the  convictions   the
           Appellant had accumulated, or at least those which were unspent.
            The judge considered paragraphs S-LTR.1.1, S-LTR.1.6, S-LTR.2.1
           and S-LTR.2. 2 of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(i)  of  the  Immigration
           Rules, as well as  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).   These  paragraphs
           cover essentially the same grounds as  the  Home  Office  policy
           which was said to have been overlooked.  There was  no  evidence
           that the Respondent unlawfully fettered her  discretion  or  had
           misapprehended material facts.  In any event,  the  tribunal  no
           longer  has  "a  not  otherwise  in  accordance  with  the   law
           jurisdiction".  This appeal was, as the judge noted,  under  the
           new version of section 82.  The old section 86(3) had gone.  The
           Article 8 ECHR "not in  accordance  with  the  law"  test  under
           Razgar [2004] HL  27  tests  means  not  that  the  decision  in
           question was lawful but rather  was  there  power  to  make  it:
           Malone [1984] ECHR 10.   Plainly  there  was  such  power.   The
           second ground of appeal has no real merit.   Any  error  of  law
           cannot     be     shown     to     have      been      material.






      28.   The tribunal accordingly finds  that  there  was  no  procedural
           unfairness and no material error of  law  in  the  decision  and
           reasons. There is no basis  for  interfering  with  the  judge's
           decision.


      29.   The tribunal adds, as Judge Monson hinted, this  will  doubtless
           not be the end of the Appellant's claims.  He  failed  to  leave
           the United Kingdom following the dismissal of his asylum  appeal
           and the expiry of his ELR.   The reasons for refusal letter made
           no mention of specific enforcement action  being  taken  by  the
           Secretary of State (although a long list of aliases  was  given,
           suggesting familiarity with  the  Appellant).   Much  later,  in
           2012, the Secretary of State for the Home Department granted him
           discretionary leave to remain in what has been accepted  as  his
           true identity.  No doubt yet another application will be made to
           the Home Office on his behalf following  the  dismissal  of  the
           present  appeal.   Those,  however,  are  not  matters  for  the
           tribunal, which has served its function by properly hearing  and
           deciding the appeal before it.




      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making  of  an
error on a point of law and stands unchanged

      Signed                                  Dated 28 April 2017




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
