

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/29270/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 June 2013                               |On 15 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                               DHALIREM MAHATO

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Al-Khayat instructed by Turpin & Miller,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal who was born on 13  January  1985.
      He arrived in the United Kingdom as a student  on  25  September  2009
      with leave valid until 17 October 2011.  On 18 October 2011 he applied
      for further leave to remain and that  application  was  refused  on  9
      January 2012.   On  13  March  2012,  the  appellant  made  a  further
      application for leave to remain relying on  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
      That application was subsequently certified by the Secretary of  State
      as clearly unfounded  on  14  March  2012.   On  27  March  2012,  the
      appellant lodged an application for judicial review of  that  decision
      and on 24 April 2012 the Secretary of State withdrew her  decision  of
      14 March 2012 including the certification.  Thereafter, the  Secretary
      of State considered the appellant's further representation  to  remain
      in the UK under Article 8 based upon his relationship with  a  British
      citizen, Ms Emily Gibbons.  In a letter dated  4  December  2012,  the
      Secretary of State refused the  appellant's  application  for  further
      leave on that basis and on 6 December 2012 made a decision  to  remove
      him to Nepal by way of directions as an overstayer under s.10  of  the
      Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

   2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      dated 12 March 2013, Judge Whiting dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
      under para 276ADE and Appendix FM and Section EX1 of  the  Immigration
      Rules (HC 395 as amended).  The Judge also found that the respondent's
      decision did not breach Article 8 of the ECHR.

   3. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The
      grounds prepared by the appellant himself repeat his claim based  upon
      his relationship and asserts that it would be a breach of Article 8 to
      send him back to Nepal.

   4. On 4 April 2013, the  First-tier  Tribunal  (DJ  Wilson)  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the  following
      grounds:

           "2.   The appellant is now unrepresented.  I grant  leave  as  I
                 consider  it  arguable  the  Judge's  assumption   that   a
                 settlement visa could be granted in due course ignores  the
                 fact that the partner is currently on minimum wage and thus
                 could  not  foreseeably   meet   the   appropriate   income
                 requirement.  As this could impact on  the  proportionality
                 assessment I grant leave."

   5. Thus, the appeal came before me.

   6. At the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Judge  had  both
      written statements and oral evidence from Emily Gibbons and also  from
      her mother Wendy  Taylor  and  her  grandmother  Daphne  Hill.   Emily
      Gibbons was born on 5 April 1995 and so was 17 and 10  months  old  at
      the date of the hearing.  The evidence, which does not appear to  have
      been challenged before the Judge and was accepted by him, was that the
      appellant and Emily Gibbons met  in  February  2011  and  developed  a
      friendship.  Some months later the appellant began  to  stay  with  Ms
      Gibbons overnight.  Ms Gibbons lives with her mother (Wendy Taylor) in
      a caravan in the grounds of the home of her grandmother, Daphne  Hill.
      In August 2011, the appellant moved in  with  Emily  Gibbons  and  her
      mother where he remained before being detained in  February  2012  and
      where he has lived since his release on bail in April 2012.  The Judge
      heard evidence about the close relationships that existed  between  Ms
      Gibbons and her  mother  and  grandmother  and  also  the  appellant's
      integration within that family unit.  Ms Gibbons' father  left  before
      she was born.  Ms Gibbons  gave  evidence  that  the  removal  of  the
      appellant from the UK would be devastating to her and that  she  could
      not follow him to Nepal because of  the  linguistic  difficulties  and
      because she would be unable to leave her family members with whom  she
      had formed a close-knit unit, namely her mother and  grandmother.   Ms
      Gibbons is a full-time student and is  financially  supported  by  her
      family.

   7. The evidence was that Ms Gibbons and the appellant intended  to  marry
      on 13 April 2012 and provisional arrangements had  been  made  at  the
      Bridgeport Register Office.  However, that ceremony never  took  place
      because the appellant was detained.  The appellant and Ms Gibbons were
      committed to marry but  they  realised  that  the  immigration  issues
      needed to be addressed first.

   8. As regards the appellant's situation in Nepal, the evidence  was  that
      his mother, father, brother and sister all resided in Nepal working on
      the family farm.  He had another brother in Malaysia.  He remained  in
      contact with family members in Nepal and spoke to his sister every two
      or three days.  He said that his family lived well  off  the  farm  by
      Nepalese standards.  However, he said that he could not return to work
      on the family farm as  it  was  a  difficult  economy  in  Nepal  with
      political instability and not good marketing.

   9. The Judge first dealt with the appellant's claim under the Immigration
      Rules. As regards para 276ADE of the Rules the appellant, who had been
      in the UK for less than 20 years, needed to satisfy the requirement in
      para 276ADE(vi) that he has "no ties, including  social,  cultural  or
      family) with the country to which he would have to go if  required  to
      leave the UK".  It was accepted before the Judge  that  the  appellant
      could not satisfy this requirement as was, indeed, clear from his  own
      evidence concerning his family in Nepal with  whom  he  kept  contact.
      Instead, the appellant relied upon his relationship with  Ms  Gibbons.
      Relevant to that issue under the Rules is whether the  appellant  fell
      within Section EX1(b) of Appendix FM which states:

           "The applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
           partner who is in the UK and is a British  citizen,  settled  in
           the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
           protection, and there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
           life with that partner continuing outside the UK."

  10. At para  35  of  his  determination,  the  Judge  concluded  that  the
      appellant had failed to  establish  that  there  were  "insurmountable
      obstacles" to Ms Gibbons accompanying him to Nepal.   The  Judge  said
      this:

           "35.  It is clear from the foregoing  recorded  facts  that  the
                 appellant has a  supportive  family  in  Nepal  engaged  in
                 farming in which enterprise he was employed before entering
                 the UK as a student.  Ms Gibbons has  had  limited  contact
                 with his family members in Nepal and they appear supportive
                 of their relationship.  There is no reason to suppose  that
                 Ms Gibbons would be unable to relocate to  Nepal  and  live
                 there with the appellant should that be their mutual  wish.
                 Ms Gibbons currently occupies a mobile home  together  with
                 her mother and the appellant situated in the grounds of her
                 grandmother's  home.    The  appellant's  family  enjoy   a
                 comfortable life measured by Nepalese standards. Ms Gibbons
                 has a desire to remain in the  UK  and  continue  with  her
                 educational course.   She does not wish to leave her mother
                 and grandmother with whom she enjoys a close  relationship.
                 I  find  that  in  all  the  circumstances  there  are   no
                 insurmountable obstacles which  would  prevent  Ms  Gibbons
                 accompanying the appellant to Nepal and there residing with
                 him in continuance of  their  relationship,  other  than  a
                 desire to remain living in the UK."

  11. Neither the grounds of appeal nor  Mr  Al-Khayat  in  his  submissions
      challenged the Judge's adverse decision under  the  Immigration  Rules
      and his conclusion that there were no "insurmountable obstacles" to Ms
      Gibbons accompanying the appellant.  Instead, Mr Al-Khayat  challenged
      the Judge's decision in respect of Article 8 of the ECHR.

  12. It was accepted before the Judge (see para 33  of  his  determination)
      that the appellant and Ms Gibbons had established family life  in  the
      UK and also that the appellant  had  established  private  life  as  a
      student and during his employment.  At para 36, the Judge  found  that
      the respondent's  decision  interfered  with  those  rights  and  that
      therefore Article 8 was engaged.

  13. At paras 37-40, the Judge referred to the cases of  Chikwamba  v  SSHD
      [2008] UKHL 40 and Beoku-Betts v SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  39  and  set  out
      extracts from the cases of Hayat (Pakistan) v  SSHD  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
      1054, Huang v SSHD [2007]  UKHL11  and  Y  v  Russia  (Application  No
      20113/07) [2008] ECHR 1585.

  14. Then, at paras 41-46, the Judge gave his reasons for  concluding  that
      Article 8 would not be breached as follows:

           "41.  The appellant's representative's skeleton argument submits
                 that  the  appellant's   conjoined   family   life   cannot
                 reasonably be continued in Nepal.  Both the  appellant  and
                 Ms Gibbons and all other parties have been aware throughout
                 that the relationship has been formed  when  the  appellant
                 possessed  only  limited  student  leave  to   remain   and
                 continued to develop after that  leave  expired.   In  such
                 circumstances the continuation of family and  private  life
                 in the United Kingdom was always  precarious.   It  is  not
                 established that mere inconvenience, expense or linguistic,
                 social   or   cultural   difficulty   suffices   to    show
                 unreasonableness or disproportionality.  Whilst Ms  Gibbons
                 will only achieve majority in  April  2013  and  has  close
                 family ties with her mother and grandmother in the  UK,  it
                 is clear that couples do  emigrate  for  personal  reasons,
                 leaving family members  behind  in  their  quest  for  life
                 together.  The prospect of accompanying  the  appellant  to
                 Nepal, leaving behind her  family  members,  would  clearly
                 provide Ms Gibbons with a difficult  choice.  I  note  that
                 there has been limited communication in English between the
                 appellant's family and Ms Gibbons and that the  appellant's
                 family are engaged in  farming  and  that  the  appellant's
                 family are supportive  of  their  relationship.   In  those
                 circumstances there exists a clear prospect of  short  term
                 or long term support for her together  with  the  appellant
                 within the appellant's family unit in Nepal.

             42. In Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 the appellant's husband  was  a
                 refugee who  could  thus  not  be  expected  to  return  to
                 Zimbabwe accompanying the appellant and the appellant could
                 not be expected to leave  her  child  behind  if  she  were
                 returned to Zimbabwe and that if the appellant were  to  be
                 returned to Zimbabwe  she  would  have  every  prospect  of
                 succeeding in an application made there for  permission  to
                 re-enter and remain in this country with her husband.   The
                 facts of that case are  very  different  from  the  present
                 appeal.  It was clear that the  issue  was  essentially  an
                 issue of timing because if the claimant in Chikwamba's case
                 was returned to  Zimbabwe,  she  would  in  due  course  be
                 granted entry clearance.  Whilst  the  appellant  has  been
                 supported by Ms Gibbons mother and to a  lesser  extent  by
                 her grandmother whilst living with  Ms  Gibbons  there  has
                 been no present attempt to demonstrate  on  behalf  of  the
                 appellant that, if returned to Nepal, he would be  able  to
                 meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules in  relation
                 to maintenance.  The income and outgoings of Ms Taylor from
                 her part-time employment making deliveries on behalf of the
                 Cinnamons restaurant have  not  been  quantified,  with  or
                 without any other income, nor  has  any  financial  support
                 from Ms Hill be identified.  Whilst an  individual  may  be
                 able to survive for a period of time upon the  goodwill  of
                 or handouts from others that history does  not  necessarily
                 establish that the needs  of  the  parties  in  respect  of
                 maintenance would equal the minimum standards required  for
                 the maintenance of a couple in the UK under the Rules.   It
                 is clearly a relevant matter when assessing proportionality
                 in relation to the economic well-being of  the  country  as
                 part  of  the  balancing  exercise  that  a  couple  should
                 demonstrate  an  ability  to  maintain  themselves  to  the
                 required minimum objective economic  standard  in  the  UK.
                 That  standard  has  not  been  demonstrated   within   the
                 circumstances of this appeal and thus the clear prospect of
                 a grant of entry clearance for the appellant from Nepal  is
                 absent.

             43.  As above noted Article 8 does not give a couple the  right
                 to choose their country of residence.  The appellant and Ms
                 Gibbons have  been  throughout  aware  of  the  precipitous
                 nature of their relationship  and  the  prospect  that  the
                 appellant would have to return to Nepal.

             44. If Ms Gibbons  were  not  to  accompany  the  appellant  if
                 required to return to Nepal there is a clear  prospect  she
                 could seek employment either on completion of  her  current
                 course in July 2013 or upon completion  of  any  subsequent
                 courses, leading to employment, in order to  seek  to  meet
                 the requirements for settlement by the appellant in the  UK
                 as a fianc�e under the Immigration Rules if  not  otherwise
                 met.  Whilst such choice may  involve  delays  or  variable
                 periods she has evinced a  clear  determination  to  remain
                 supportive of the appellant should he be returned to Nepal.
                  The prospect of financial assistance has been stated to be
                 available from her family members to facilitate a visit  by
                 her to the appellant in  Nepal  in  such  circumstances  if
                 needs be.

             45. If the appellant is able to satisfy the requirements of the
                 extant Immigration Rules upon return to Nepal unaccompanied
                 by Ms Gibbons then the length of their separation would  be
                 reasonably likely to be resolved between the current  Nepal
                 settlement visa processing times of 12-24  weeks.   I  take
                 due  cognizance  of  such  prospective   delay   in   those
                 circumstances.  If those circumstances obtained the  period
                 of decision would be relatively short.

             46. I have above made and recorded reasoned findings in respect
                 of component  parts  of  the  appellant's  application  and
                 appeal.  Those findings mean that in balancing  the  rights
                 of the parties against the public interest I find as a fact
                 that the respondent has demonstrated that the  interference
                 with the conjoined parties Article 8 rights consequent upon
                 the refusal is in all the  circumstances  proportionate  to
                 the legitimate public end sought to be achieved."

  15. Mr Al-Khayat accepted that the ground upon which permission to  appeal
      had been granted by DJ Wilson could not be made out.  That ground  was
      that the Judge had arguably erred in  law  by  failing  to  take  into
      account that if the appellant returned to Nepal he was unlikely to  be
      able to meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  given  the
      financial circumstance of Ms Gibbons and the appellant. In  fact,  the
      Judge did take that into account in para 42 of his determination which
      I have set out above.  There, he noted that Ms Gibbons was financially
      dependent on her family and had no earnings of her own as  she  was  a
      student.  In the penultimate sentence of para 42 the Judge noted  that
      it was a relevant matter when assessing proportionality that:

           " A couple could demonstrate an ability to  maintain  themselves
           to the required minimum objective economic standard in the UK."

  16. Having said that, in the final sentence of para 42  the  Judge  stated
      that:

           "That  standard   has   not   been   demonstrated   within   the
           circumstances of this appeal and thus the clear  prospect  of  a
           grant of  entry  clearance  for  the  appellant  from  Nepal  is
           absent."

  17. Consequently, as Mr Al-Khayat acknowledged, the Judge made  a  finding
      that the appellant, if he returned to Nepal,  would  not  be  able  to
      establish the maintenance requirement of the Immigration  Rules.    At
      para 44, the Judge clearly considered the circumstances on  the  basis
      that Ms Gibbons would not accompany the appellant to Nepal  and  that,
      although they would not be able to meet the  maintenance  requirements
      of the Immigration Rules  immediately,  once  she  had  completed  her
      course there was at least a prospect that she could obtain  employment
      with a view to the appellant meeting the requirements of the Rules.

  18. For these reasons, the  ground  on  which  permission  to  appeal  was
      granted is simply not made out.  Judge Whiting did take  into  account
      in his proportionality assessment the fact that  the  appellant  would
      not, at least until such time as Ms Gibbons obtained employment in the
      UK, be able to obtain entry clearance to return to the UK.

  19. In the light of that, Mr Al-Khayat sought in his submissions to  raise
      a number of points (not raised in the grounds of  appeal)  challenging
      the Judge's decision under Article 8.

  20. He submitted that the Judge had  misdirected  himself  in  applying  a
      "insurmountable obstacles" test and also a test  of  'exceptionality'.
      He relied upon the Judge's citation from the case of  Y  v  Russia  at
      para [140] where the Strasbourg Court  specifically  referred  to  the
      need  to  establish  "insurmountable  obstacles"  and  that  only  "in
      exceptional circumstances" would it be disproportionate  to  interfere
      with family life which was created at a time  when  the  parties  knew
      that the immigration status of one of them was "precarious" (see  para
      [104] of Y v Russia).

  21. In my judgement, there are two answers to Mr Al-Khayat's  submissions.
      First,  reading  the  Judge's  determination  carefully,  he  did  not
      actually  apply  any  of  these  tests.   Apart   from   the   Judge's
      consideration of the appellant's claim under  the  Immigration  Rules,
      namely Section EX1(b) where the test of "insurmountable obstacles"  is
      a requirement, there is no reference by the Judge to that test in  his
      reasons at para 41-46 when reaching his findings in respect of Article
      8.  The only reference is in the quotation from Y  v  Russia  at  para
      [140].  Indeed at para 41 the Judge quotes  the  appellant's  skeleton
      argument that the appellant argued that "family life cannot reasonably
      be continued in Nepal".  That, of course, is the test adopted  by  the
      domestic courts in EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41  (see  especially
      Lord Bingham of Cornhill's speech at [12] and in VW  (Uganda)  v  SSHD
      [2009] EWCA Civ 5).  Further, in Huang, the House of Lords made  clear
      that there was no test of "exceptionality" that had  to  be  satisfied
      before a breach of Article 8 could be established.  At no point in the
      Judge's reasoning in paras  41-46  did  the  Judge  suggest  that  the
      appellant could only succeed under Article 8 if his circumstances were
      "exceptional".   In  my  judgement,  the  Judge  applied  the  correct
      approach and found, in effect, that it was  reasonable  to  expect  Ms
      Gibbons to accompany the appellant to Nepal.  However,  in  fact,  the
      Judge dealt with the parties' circumstances on the  alternative  basis
      (which put the appellant's case at its highest) that  Ms  Gibbons  did
      not accompany the appellant to Nepal (see paras 44 and 45).   That  is
      sufficient in itself for me to reject Mr  Al-Khayat's  submissions  on
      this issue.

  22. But, there is a second reason for rejecting Mr Al-Khayat's submissions
      which emerges from the recent case law.  In R (Nagre)  v  SSHD  [2013]
      EWHC 720 (Admin) Sales J at [47]  sought  to  reconcile  the  apparent
      conflict between the Strasbourg  Court's  language  and  that  of  the
      higher domestic court on the basis that EB (Kosovo)  and  VW  (Uganda)
      had only stated that:

           "An 'insurmountable obstacle' or 'insuperable obstacle' test was
           not the test to be applied under Article 8 in this sort of case,
           but that a wider assessment taking into account other  potential
           relevant factors as well could be required."

  23. Likewise at [49] Sales J observed that the  "test  of  exceptionality"
      was not in itself wrong providing that:

           "'An overall assessment of the  facts'  was  made  in  assessing
           proportionality."

  24. I respectfully agree with what was said by Sales J in Nagre which  was
      also the view of Burnett J in R (Kotecha)  v  SSHD  [2011]  EWHC  2070
      (Admin) at [34]-[39].

  25. On this basis, it would also be wrong to identify an error of  law  in
      the Judge's decision  based  upon  his  reference  to  the  Strasbourg
      Court's terminology unless he has failed properly to  assess  all  the
      relevant circumstances in carrying out the balancing exercise inherent
      in the issue of proportionality.  It was that latter issue  which  was
      the subject of the bulk of Mr Al-Khayat's submissions.  I turn now  to
      consider those.

  26. First, Mr Al-Khayat submitted that the Judge was wrong, on  the  basis
      of the evidence, to state (at para 13) that:

           "Their developing relationship through that period  must  always
           have been to both parties knowingly tenuous."

  27. The reference to "that period" is a reference to  the  time  that  the
      appellant had limited leave to remain and that, at the time  he  moved
      in with Ms Gibbons,  he  only  had  about  two  months  of  his  leave
      remaining.  The fact of the matter was that when the  parties  met  in
      February 2011, the appellant only had limited leave  to  remain  as  a
      student.  When he moved in with Ms Gibbon in August 2011 his leave was
      due to expire on 17 October 2011.  That leave did, in fact, expire  on
      that day and from 18 October 2011 the appellant has  been  in  the  UK
      without leave.  As the Judge noted in para 13 itself:

           "From meeting Ms Gibbons until deciding to  live  together  both
           parties were aware that the  appellant  had  no  expectation  of
           remaining in the UK".

  28. In my judgement, exception cannot be taken to that statement.   It  is
      correct.  In these passages, the Judge was  not  suggesting  that  the
      appellant's relationship with Ms Gibbons was other than  genuine.   He
      accepted it was.  In stating that the parties' developing relationship
      was "knowingly tenuous", the Judge was no more than observing that the
      parties' relationship was formed and developed during a time when they
      both knew that the appellant had no expectation of remaining in the UK
      unless,  of  course,  he  could  satisfy  the  requirements   of   the
      Immigration Rules.  That, of course, as the Judge found (and it is now
      not challenged), he could not do.  That point  is  also  made  by  the
      Judge at para 41 of his determination.

  29. Secondly, Mr Al-Khayat criticised the Judge  when  he  stated  in  the
      final sentence of paragraph 15 of his determination that the  parties'
      proposed marriage in April 2012 was

           "solely an attempt to seek to persuade the respondent to  permit
           the appellant [to] remain in the UK".

  30. Mr Al-Khayat submitted that that was not consistent with the  evidence
      of the appellant and sponsor that they had intended to marry then  but
      could not do so because the appellant was in detention and that  there
      were good reasons why they did not do so thereafter.

  31. At para 15 the Judge noted the appellant's  evidence  that  they  were
      committed to marriage but, in the Judge's words,  "immigration  issues
      needed to be addressed first".  Mr Al-Khayat submitted that the  Judge
      had been wrong to make an adverse inference against, in particular, Ms
      Gibbons as she had offered in her evidence an explanation  as  to  why
      they had not rearranged their marriage ceremony after April 2012.   Mr
      Al-Khayat, who did not  represent  the  appellant  before  the  Judge,
      stated that his instructions were that the Judge  had  not  accurately
      recorded the appellant's evidence.  Even if this is correct, and there
      are considerable difficulties with this argument  in  the  absence  of
      supporting documentation or evidence as to Ms Gibbons evidence  before
      the Judge, this matter simply did not factor into the Judge's  reasons
      at paras 41-46 (set out above)  for  reaching  his  finding  that  the
      respondent's decision was proportionate.  The Judge did not doubt  the
      genuineness  of  the  parties'  relationship  and  made   no   adverse
      credibility findings against either.  The Judge approached  the  issue
      of proportionality on the basis that Ms Gibbon would not accompany the
      appellant to Nepal and then considered the situation both on the basis
      that their separation would be short if the appellant could  meet  the
      requirements of the Rules (see para 45) but, (and this is  important),
      more likely on the basis that their separation would be longer  as  he
      could not do so (at least currently) because he  could  not  meet  the
      maintenance requirements (see para 44).

  32. In my judgement, the Judge fully considered the circumstances  of  the
      parties and Ms Gibbons' family.  The Judge was entitled to  take  into
      account that the  parties'  relationship  had  been  formed  when  the
      appellant's immigration status was temporary and more recently,  since
      October 2011, that the appellant has had no legal basis to  remain  in
      the UK under the Immigration  Rules.   The  Judge  was  also  properly
      entitled to take into account as an important aspect of the legitimate
      aim of the economic well-being of the country that the  parties  could
      not meet the maintenance requirements of  the  Rules.    Taking  those
      matters into account, it was not perverse or  Wednesbury  unreasonable
      for  the  Judge  to  find  that  the  respondent's  decision   was   a
      proportionate interference with the parties' Article 8 rights.

Decision

  33. For these reasons, the Judge did not err  in  law  in  dismissing  the
      appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules and Article  8  of  the
      ECHR.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss  the  appellant's
      appeal stands.




                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:




















