
IAC-AH-SAR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29381/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 23rd January 2015                          |On 29th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                            MR PRADEEP TALLAPALLI
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  India  born  on  3rd  April  1986.   The
    Appellant was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom as a student on
    26th February 2009.  On 31st May 2013 the  Appellant  made  a  combined
    application for further leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier
    2 (General) Migrant and for a biometric residence permit  (BRP).   That
    application was refused by the Secretary of State on 3rd July 2013.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Blake sitting at Taylor House on 1st September 2014.   In
    a determination promulgated on  24th  September  2014  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

 3. On 3rd October 2014 the Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal.  On 4th December 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal P J  M
    Hollingworth  granted  permission  to   appeal.    Judge   Hollingworth
    concluded that there was an arguable error of law in  relation  to  the
    scope of the enquiry which may be undertaken by the Respondent  in  the
    circumstances appertaining to the Appellant where "new entrants" are to
    be contrasted with "experienced worker".  There is no Rule 24  response
    from the Secretary of State.

 4. It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me.  The Secretary  of
    State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer  Mr  Kandola.   The
    Appellant does not appear.  What however is produced to the Tribunal is
    an e-mail from the Appellant in which he states:

         "I want to notify that I am not wishing to proceed with  my  appeal
         which is due to be held on 23rd January 2015 as I  have  chosen  to
         move forward with a fresh application with Home  Office  which  was
         also stated to me in lower Tribunal".

 5. It is consequently a view expressed by the Tribunal that  there  is  an
    application made by this e-mail requesting that the Appellant's  appeal
    be withdrawn.  In order for an appeal to be withdrawn it  is  necessary
    for the Tribunal to consent.  The Tribunal does consent.



Notice of Decision

On  reading  the  e-mail  from  the  Appellant  and  on  hearing  from   the
representative  of  the  Home  Office,  the  Appellant's  appeal  is  marked
withdrawn and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  No application is made to vary that order and none is made.


Signed        Date 29th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed        Date 29th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
