
[pic]
IAC-HW-MP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29728/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd November 2015                 |On 29th December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ADEPEJU AWORENI ADESOLA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr J Nkwocha of Pillai & Jones, solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as "the Applicant" is a citizen of
    Nigeria, born on 7 November 1977.  The Applicant states she arrived  in
    the United Kingdom in 2002: it would appear without any  documentation.
    She made an application for leave on 7 January 2011 which  was  refused
    on account  of  a  failure  to  pay  the  requisite  fees.   A  further
    application was made and on 10 October 2013 and was refused with no in-
    country right of appeal.  Further representations were made  on  behalf
    of the Applicant which resulted in a decision  by  the  Appellant  (the
    SSHD) on 2 July 2014 to refuse her claim based on her rights  protected
    by the European Convention and to remove her to Nigeria.  The SSHD gave
    reasons for the decision in a  letter  of  2  July  2014  (the  reasons
    letter).

The SSHD's Decision

 2. The SSHD noted the Applicant's three children were born in  the  United
    Kingdom in 2005, 2010 and 2012 and for the  purposes  of  the  decision
    were her dependants.  She noted their father held a permanent residence
    card as the family member of an EEA national, Sabrina Belaala, a French
    citizen.  That relationship had been ended by a divorce  pronounced  on
    23 January 2012. He was the father of the  Applicant's  three  children
    and the Applicant claimed their relationship was of  some  considerable
    duration.

 3. The SSHD concluded  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  definition  of
    "partner" defined in Section GEN1.2 of Appendix FM of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 4. The SSHD went on to find that in any event the Applicant could not meet
    all the requirements of Section R-LTRP.1.1 of Appendix  FM,  especially
    sub-paragraph (d) which  refers  to  Section  E-LTRP  although  in  the
    reasons letter she did not specify which paragraphs of  Section  E-LTRP
    the Applicant failed to meet.  It would appear from paragraph 18 of the
    reasons letter that the SSHD did not accept  the  relationship  between
    the Applicant and Mr Owagoke was genuine and subsisting.  He would also
    not appear to meet the requirements of E-LTRP.1.2 because he is  not  a
    British citizen, is not present  and  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom
    within the meaning of the Immigration Rules nor is he a person  granted
    international  surrogate  protection.   Further   with   reference   to
    paragraph GEN.1.2 he was not the Applicant's partner.

 5. Further, the Applicant had failed to establish there  was  any  durable
    relationship between them because at the  time  he  was  said  to  have
    fathered the Applicant's children he was married to Sabrina Belaala.

 6. Paragraph Section EX.1 did not apply  because  the  Applicant  did  not
    satisfy the requirements of Section R-LTRP1.1(d).  However, this  would
    appear to contradict what was said  at  paragraph  22  of  the  reasons
    letter when the SSHD accepted the Applicant  met  the  requirements  of
    Section S-LTR.1.1-3.1 (being the entire Section).  However the SSHD had
    already considered that the Applicant did not have a partner within the
    meanings of the relevant Sections of Appendix FM and so on that  ground
    could not meet the requirements of Section R-LTRP.1.1  which  the  SSHD
    mentioned at paragraph 23 of the reasons letter.

 7. The SSHD went on to consider whether the Applicant could succeed in her
    application for leave as a parent.  It was accepted she was the  mother
    of her three children but because she could not meet  the  requirements
    of  Section  R-LTRPT.1.1(d)  Section  EX.1  could   not   apply.    The
    requirements of Section R-LTRPT.1.1(d)(i) are that the applicant  meets
    the requirements of Section  S-LTR  which  the  SSHD  had  accepted  at
    paragraph 22 of her reasons letter  the  Applicant  met  and  that  she
    satisfies the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRPT.2.2-2.4  and  3.1-3.2.
    These Sections state:-

         Relationship Requirements

         E-LTRPT.2.2. The child of the applicant must be-

             (a)  under the age of 18 years at the date of application, or
             where the child has turned 18 years of age since the applicant
             was first granted entry clearance or leave to remain as a
             parent under this Appendix, must not have formed an
             independent family unit or be leading an independent life;

             (b)  living in the UK; and

             (c)  a British Citizen or settled in the UK; or

             (d)  has lived in the UK continuously for at least the 7 years
             immediately preceding the date of application and paragraph
             EX.1. applies.

         E-LTRPT.2.3. Either-

             (a)  the applicant must have sole parental responsibility for
             the child or the child normally lives with the applicant and
             not their other parent (who is a British Citizen or settled in
             the UK); or

             (b)  the parent or carer with whom the child normally lives
             must be-

             (i)  a British Citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;

             (ii) not the partner of the applicant (which here  includes  a
             person who has been in a relationship with the  applicant  for
             less than two years prior to the date of application); and

             (iii)    the applicant must not be eligible to apply for leave
             to remain as a partner under this Appendix.

         E-LTRPT.2.4.

             (a)  The applicant must provide evidence that they have either-



             (i)  sole parental responsibility for the child, or that the
             child normally lives with them; or

             (ii) access rights to the child; and

             (b)  The applicant must provide evidence that they are taking,
             and intend to continue to take, an active role in the child's
             upbringing.

         Immigration status requirement

         E-LTRPT.3.1. The applicant must not be in the UK-

             (a)  as a visitor;

             (b)  with valid leave granted for a period of 6 months or
             less, unless that leave was granted pending the outcome of
             family court or divorce proceedings;

             (c)  on temporary admission or temporary release (unless
             paragraph EX.1. applies).

         E-LTRPT.3.2. The applicant must not be  in  the  UK  in  breach  of
         immigration laws, (disregarding any period  of  overstaying  for  a
         period of 28 days or less), unless paragraph EX.1. applies."

    The Respondent did not state which of these requirements the  Applicant
    did not satisfy.

 8. The SSHD went on to consider whether  the  Applicant  was  entitled  to
    leave by reason of her private  life.   Paragraph  32  of  the  reasons
    letter includes references to Appendix FM and also, but without express
    reference, the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Applicant had grown up and been educated  in  Nigeria  with
    which she maintained cultural ties and so could return.  Reference  was
    made to the private lives of the Applicant's  three  children  and  the
    State's  duty  under  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009 to have regard to their best interests.  The  SSHD
    referred to the background evidence  about  Nigeria  and  concluded  it
    would not be a breach of the United Kingdom's obligations under Article
    8 if the Applicant and her three children were returned to Nigeria.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 9. On 21 July 2014 the Applicant and her three children lodged notices  of
    appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).  The grounds refer to their private and
    family lives, paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and Appendix FM
    as well as Article 8 of the European Convention but  without  reference
    to any particular circumstances or  aspects  of  their  individual  and
    family situations.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

10. Following a hearing  on  9  March  2015  at  which  the  SSHD  was  not
    represented, Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  S  Taylor  allowed  the
    appeals by reference to the Immigration Rules.

11. On 19 May 2015 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  P  J  M  Hollingworth
    refused the SSHD application for permission to appeal  which  the  SSHD
    renewed to the Upper Tribunal and on 23 July 2015 Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Kopieczek granted permission to appeal  because  it  was  arguable  the
    Judge appeared to have dealt with the claim by way of an approach  more
    akin to a consideration of a claim under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention outside the Immigration Rules.



The Upper Tribunal Hearing

12. The Applicant attended the  hearing  with  two  male  friends.   I  was
    informed that neither of them was her husband.  I explained to her  the
    purpose of and the procedure to be adopted at the hearing.

Submissions for the SSHD

13. Ms Willocks-Briscoe relied on the permission grounds.  These  refer  to
    the Judge's finding that  the  Applicant  was  not  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with Mr Owagoke although he continued  to  live
    in the family home and shared joint responsibility  for  the  children.
    The Judge had concluded that the Applicant could not therefore  succeed
    under "the partner route".  She also did not satisfy  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules to succeed in a claim  based  on  her  private
    life in the United Kingdom. The Judge had found it would be  reasonable
    for the eldest child to leave the United Kingdom but had failed to take
    account of the fact the Applicant would be returning  to  Nigeria  with
    her  three  children.   Reference  was  made  to  the  judgment  in  EV
    (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

14. The permission grounds also assert  that  given  the  Judge  found  the
    Applicant does not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  his
    conclusion  allowing  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration   Rules   is
    erroneous.  Finally, the grounds assert the Judge made no  findings  in
    respect of the Applicant's two younger children and specifically stated
    he did  not  consider  any  claim  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention outside the Immigration Rules.

15. At paragraphs 11-13, the Judge made several findings to the effect that
    the Applicant could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.
     Having come to that conclusion it was necessary for  him  to  consider
    whether he should look at the circumstances of the entire  family  with
    reference to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  He had not  made
    a holistic assessment  of  the  situation  of  the  Applicant  and  her
    children and whether it was reasonable for her to return and whether Mr
    Owagoke would continue his financial  support  of  the  children.   The
    Judge had conflated his  treatment  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  a
    consideration of any Article 8 claim outside the Rules as evidenced  at
    paragraph 14  of  his  decision.   In  his  dealing  with  the  factors
    identifying the public interest contained in ss.117A-D of the 2002  Act
    he  had  failed  to  consider  whether  the  children's  father  was  a
    qualifying partner within the meaning of s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  He
    had also not taken into account the jurisprudence in EV (Philippines).

16. The Judge  at  paragraph  15  of  his  decision  had  referred  to  the
    Applicant's medical condition and the evidence of  available  treatment
    in Nigeria.  It appears he had overlooked the middle part of  paragraph
    15 in the decision.  The conclusion reached there obviated any need  to
    consider any claim under Article 8 of the European  Convention  outside
    the Immigration Rules.   Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  concluded  the  decision
    could not stand and should be set aside.



Submissions for the Applicant

17. Mr Nkwocha referred to the delay between the SSHD's decision of 2  July
    2014 and the hearing of the appeal in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  9
    March 2015.  He stated the evidence showed the Applicant and Mr Owagoke
    lived in the same property and shared responsibility for the  children.
    The Judge had found the children  were  close  to  both  their  parents
    although I note the finding is that the Applicant and Mr Owagoke  share
    the responsibility of looking after the children: see  para.15  of  the
    Judge's decision.

18. He continued that the Judge had properly  addressed  the  claims  under
    Article 8.  He made no reference to any specific part  of  the  Judge's
    decision.  The Applicant was receiving treatment  for  cancer  and  the
    decision should stand.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe had nothing to add  by  way
    of response and I reserved my decision.

Consideration and Findings

19. The Judge at paras.11-13 of his decision made several findings that the
    Applicant could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  It
    would appear  that  para.11  sought  to  address  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 286 of the Immigration Rules and Appendix FM.  At para.12  he
    appears to have focussed on  the  requirements  of  paragraph  298  and
    Appendix FM and at para.13 on paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Rules but  the
    decision is far from clear.  Further, the Judge did not address many of
    the specific reasons for refusal given in the reasons letter of 2  July
    2014.

20.  In  the  light  of  Dube  (ss.117A-117D)  [2015]  UKUT  90  which  was
    promulgated less than two weeks before the Judge heard this appeal, his
    treatment of the factors referred to in ss.117A-D of the  2002  Act  is
    inadequate.   The  Judge  also  failed  to  deal  adequately  with  the
    jurisprudence in EV (Philippines).

21. For these reasons, I find  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains material errors of law such that it should be set aside in its
    entirety and the appeal heard afresh.

22. Having regard to the nature and extent of the fact-finding  which  will
    be required on a hearing  afresh  and  s.12(2)  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(b), I find  the  matter
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the hearing afresh.

Anonymity

23. No anonymity direction had been made  before  the  date  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing.  There was no request for an anonymity direction  and
    having heard the appeal I consider none is warranted.





NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and is set  aside.   The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh before a Judge other than Judge S Taylor.


Signed/Official Crest  Date: 14. xii. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
