
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/29582/2014
                                                               IA/29583/2014
                                                               IA/29584/2014
                                                               IA/48575/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 09 December 2015                  |On 21 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               AKTHER HOSSAIN
                           (AND THREE DEPENDANTS)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A.A.M. Rahman of MQ Hassan Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.     The  first  appellant  ("the   appellant")   appealed   against   the
    respondent's decision dated 08 July 2014 to refuse him,  his  wife  and
    two dependent children (X aged 8 and Y aged  10  years  old)  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds. First-tier Tribunal Judge Dean  allowed
    the appeal in a decision promulgated on 23 March 2015.

3.    The appellant entered the United  Kingdom  on  11  January  2003  with
    entry clearance as a student that was valid until 01 January 2006.  His
    wife, Eshrat Jahan,  claims  to  have  entered  the  UK  in  2003.  The
    appellant was granted further leave to remain as a student nurse  until
    30 June 2006. Leave to remain as a student nurse was extended until  31
    August 2007 and again until 30 November 2008. Both children  were  born
    in the UK. The appellant was then granted further leave to remain as  a
    Tier 1 (Post-study work) Migrant until 21 October 2010. On  20  October
    201 the appellant applied for further leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant but the application was refused on 17 January
    2011. It is unclear whether they appealed the decision but on the  face
    of the chronology it appears that they remained  without  leave  for  a
    period of around one year and eight months. On 29  September  2012  the
    appellant and his dependents applied  for  leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds. In a decision dated 15 October 2012 the appellant,  his
    wife and youngest son were refused leave to remain. In a decision dated
    23 October 2012 their oldest son,  Y,  was  refused  leave  to  remain.
    Following  judicial  review  proceedings  the  respondent   agreed   to
    reconsider the applications but refused them in fresh  decisions  dated
    08 July 2014.

4.    The First-tier Tribunal Judge ("the judge")  considered  Y's  position
    first. She found that the respondent had failed to  apply  the  correct
    version of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv). At the date  when  the  application
    was made paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) only required the  applicant  to  show
    that he was "under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously  in
    the United Kingdom for at least 7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
    imprisonment)" [11]. The subsequent requirement relating to whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the  UK  was  not
    inserted into the immigration rules until 13 December  2012  [12].  She
    noted that Y had made his application for leave  to  remain  before  13
    December 2012 and that the version that should have  been  applied  was
    the one without the 'reasonableness test'. As such she concluded that Y
    met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) because he was under 18
    years and had lived continuously in the UK for at least seven years.

5.    The judge went on to consider the position of the  appellant  and  his
    other two dependents under the immigration  rules.  She  was  satisfied
    that the two adults had a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
    with the children. The family spoke English and were well integrated in
    the UK. She concluded that the  two  adults  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM. She went on to consider the position  of
    the youngest child, X. The respondent had refused the application under
    paragraph E-LTRC.1.6 because his parents did not meet the  requirements
    of Appendix FM. In view of her findings relating  to  his  parents  she
    concluded that X met the requirements of paragraph  E-LTRC.1.6  of  the
    immigration rules.

6.    The respondent seeks to challenge the First-tier Tribunal decision  on
    the  ground  that  the  judge  erred  in  failing   to   consider   the
    'reasonableness test' contained in paragraph  EX.1(a)(ii)  of  Appendix
    FM. The assessment of whether it would be reasonable for the family  to
    return to their country of origin should have been made with  reference
    to the relevant case law relating to the best interests of  the  child.
    The fact that the other members of the family did not qualify for leave
    to remain under the immigration rules was relevant to whether it  would
    be reasonable to expect them to return to their country of origin.

Decision and reasons

7.    After an informal discussion with both parties  at  the  beginning  of
    the hearing  it  was  agreed  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    involved the making of an error on a point of law.

8.    The respondent initially sought to appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    finding that the reasonableness test was  not  contained  in  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) at the date of application, subsequently resiled from the
    position in the grounds of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  then
    changed her mind once again when her representative  applied  to  amend
    the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal at a hearing on 11 November
    2015.

9.    Whether the First-tier Tribunal  was  correct  to  conclude  that  the
    'reasonableness test' was  not  applicable  at  the  relevant  date  is
    immaterial for the purpose of the decision that I have  to  make  today
    because it is quite clear that when  the  judge  went  on  to  consider
    whether the child's parents met the requirements of paragraph  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM she failed to consider the 'reasonableness test'  contained
    in paragraph EX.1(a)(ii), which had formed part of that paragraph since
    it was introduced in July 2012. It was on this point that both  parties
    agreed that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred.

10.   For these reasons I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    involved the making of an error on a point of law. Given that the issue
    of whether it is reasonable for the oldest child to leave  the  UK  has
    not yet been considered in  any  detail,  and  there  are  no  existing
    findings, I consider it appropriate to remit the appeal to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal

Signed       [pic]     Date 09 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
