
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29481/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18th May 2015                         |On 29th June 2015                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                               Mr Laziz Gadaev
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Cooke, Farani Javid Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    M J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Uzbekistan born on 10th  September  1988.
    He made an application for a residence permit as the husband of Roberta
    Klingaite, a national of Lithuania.  That application  was  refused  on
    7th July 2014.

 2. The appellant first came to the UK as a student in  2007  and  extended
    his leave as a student before being issued with a residence card on 3rd
    June 2013.  He sought a further residence card on 24th April 2014 which
    was refused and the subject of this appeal.

 3. On 6th January 2015 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Seelhoff  decided  the
    matter on the papers at Richmond Magistrates' Court and  dismissed  the
    appeal.

 4. He attached no weight to unsigned statements of the appellant  and  his
    wife and found that the respondent had provided evidence  that  gave  a
    basis for questioning the genuine nature of the marriage which had  not
    been rebutted.  He added at paragraph 6:

         "I further note that  the  appellant  has  failed  to  provide  any
         documents since April 2014 showing him or his wife  living  at  the
         claimed address which raises  questions  as  to  whether  they  are
         genuinely together."

 5. An application for permission to appeal was made on the basis that  the
    judge could not properly have considered the appellant's  case  because
    he did not have all the relevant information.

 6. The appeal was originally listed for an oral hearing  to  be  heard  on
    18th December 2014.  The appellant's solicitors wrote to the  court  on
    10th December 2014 requesting that the matter be  listed  for  a  paper
    hearing because the appellant could not  attend  for  medical  reasons.
    The appellant had lost a kidney earlier in 2014 and  in  December  2014
    was suffering from severe pain  and  was  heavily  medicated.   Further
    directions were sought from the Tribunal.

 7.  A  letter  dated  17th  December  was  delivered  to  the  appellant's
    solicitors' office on 24th December directing that any further  written
    submissions for the paper hearing be submitted by 18th  December  2014.
    By the  time  the  letter  arrived  the  deadline  for  submissions  of
    documents had already passed.

 8. A bundle of documents had been served in readiness for the oral hearing
    originally scheduled for 18th December 2014 but in the  light  of  this
    being changed to a paper consideration it was considered essential that
    further documents such as the signed witness statements and submissions
    be filed.

 9. A further ground was that the judge had placed too much weight  on  the
    document of the respondent dated 11th  September  2004  relating  to  a
    visit to the  property  on  31st  October  2013.   The  writer  of  the
    respondent's document was not identified and the  document  itself  was
    unsigned.  The document was dated 11th September 2004 which was clearly
    inaccurate.  The judge failed to notice the inaccuracy and there was no
    indication from the respondent as to how long after the  alleged  visit
    the document was written.  There was no consideration of the fact  that
    this document was written nearly one year after the  alleged  visit  to
    the property.

10. It was submitted that it was inconsistent and an error of law to  place
    no weight on the unsigned witness statements but to place  full  weight
    on an unsigned incorrectly dated document provided by the Home Office.

11. Further the judge erred in  failing  to  consider  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had been granted an EEA residence  card  valid  between  June
    2013 and 2018.

12. The judge also failed to properly consider the evidence relating to the
    appellant's wife's exercise of treaty rights.

13. It was submitted that it was an appropriate case to make an  order  for
    reconsideration.   Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge V P McDade as it was arguable  that  there  had  been  a
    degree of unfairness towards the appellant in the circumstances.

14. A Rule 24  response  was  submitted  and  the  respondent  opposed  the
    appellant's appeal on the basis that the refusal was made on  7th  July
    2014 and the hearing on 7th January  2015.   This  gave  the  appellant
    ample time to produce any documents that he  wished  to  ahead  of  the
    hearing.

15. In my conclusions although the Tribunal had set the  hearing  for  18th
    December the appellant's representatives had written to the Tribunal on
    10th December 2014 and explained the following:

         "We write in relation to the above named matter which is set to  be
         heard on 18th December 2014 at Richmond Magistrates' Court.

         Our client has informed us that due to medical reasons he is unable
         to attend the hearing as he is suffering from severe  pain  and  is
         heavily medicated due to the loss of his kidney earlier this year.

         Therefore we kindly ask for this matter to be dealt with as a paper
         hearing.  We feel that the issues in this case are simple  and  are
         appropriate to be dealt with on paper.  Our client does not want to
         delay matters any further, therefore we would be  grateful  if  you
         could change this accordingly and provide us with directions as  to
         how to proceed further and when to submit  written  submissions  as
         well as the refund of the court fee."(my emphasis)

16. Unfortunately in response to  this  letter  the  Tribunal  sent  out  a
    further notice of directions dated 22nd December 2014  instructing  the
    appellant to send any written evidence and submissions to the  Tribunal
    by 18th December 2014 which is a date which had already passed.

17. Instructions were also sent by the Tribunal to the respondent to submit
    further evidence not before 14th January  2014.   Notwithstanding  this
    Judge Seelhoff proceeded to determine the matter on the papers  on  2nd
    January 2015 and his decision was promulgated on 6th January 2015.   In
    other words the Tribunal had  issued  a  deadline  and  the  judge  had
    undertaken a hearing prior to that deadline elapsing.  I also note that
    in his determination the judge made reference to attaching no weight to
    the unsigned statements of the  appellant  and  his  wife  which  lends
    credence to the point that the  appellant's  representative  solicitors
    made that further evidence should be presented in the form for  example
    of a signed statement.

18. Ms Cooke on behalf of the appellant also made reference  to  the  issue
    raised in relation to the sponsor exercising treaty rights.  She agreed
    that the Tribunal was entitled  to  take  this  into  account  but  the
    appellant had not been given notice of this and it was  not  raised  in
    the reasons for refusal letter.

19. I indicated at the hearing that this would now be a live issue.

20. I find that there was  an  error  of  law  because  of  the  procedural
    irregularities and that the matter should be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing.

21. In the circumstances I am not persuaded that the matter can  be  justly
    decided on the papers and directed that an oral hearing take place.

22. I have issued a direction that all further evidence should be submitted
    at least fourteen days prior to the  date  of  any  subsequent  hearing
    which should be an oral hearing.

Notice of Decision

The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
decision pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and
Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent of
the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007 and further to 7.2 (b)
of the Presidential Practice Statement

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 26th June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

