
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29731/2013
                                                               IA/29721/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 April 2014 and 3 June 2014              |On 6 June 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                        mr chukwunweike stephen okoh
                          mr ogechukwu michael okoh
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Rendle of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are both citizens of Nigeria, born  as  to  Chukwunweike
    Stephen Okoh on 14 September 1994  and  Ogechukwu  Michael  Okoh  on  3
    January 1999; they are brothers.  (Stephen and Michael)

 2. On 25 July 2011 they both applied for leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on human rights grounds outside the Immigration Rules.   On  26
    June 2013, the respondent refused the applications because she was  not
    satisfied that they qualified under paragraph 276ADE or under  Appendix
    FM and  there  were  no  exceptional,  compassionate  circumstances  to
    justify the grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules.

 3. The appellants' appeals against the respondent's refusal  were  allowed
    by Judge Miles  (the  judge)  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  27
    February 2014.  The Secretary of  State's  grounds  claimed  the  judge
    arguably made a material error of law in that he misdirected himself by
    finding that the appellants had  been  living  in  the  United  Kingdom
    continuously for seven  years.   The  respondent  said  the  appellants
    entered the United Kingdom as visitors on 20 December 2006  but  at  an
    unknown date soon afterwards they returned to  Nigeria  and  re-entered
    the United Kingdom on the same basis on 30 March 2007 and had  remained
    since.  The Secretary of State argued that as  the  appellants  entered
    the United Kingdom as visitors, they were  not  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom continuously, particularly as  they  had  returned  to  Nigeria
    before re-entering the  United  Kingdom  as  visitors.   As  such,  the
    respondent argued that the judge's finding that the appellants had been
    living in the United Kingdom continuously was flawed and further,  that
    his findings under Article 8 were equally flawed because he  failed  to
    identify any compelling circumstances.

 4. Judge Kelly granted permission to appeal on 18 March  2014  because  he
    found that in holding that  paragraph  276ADE  and  the  provisions  of
    Appendix FM applied only to applications that were made on or  after  9
    July 2012 (see [21] of the determination)  it  was  arguable  that  the
    judge failed to apply  the  "transitional  provisions  and  interaction
    between part  8  Appendix  FM  and  Appendix  FM-SE"  (with  particular
    reference to paragraph A277C that were set out at the  commencement  of
    Part 8 of the Rules and that he thus erred  by  failing  to  adopt  the
    approach set out in Gulshan  when  considering  whether  to  allow  the
    appeal on the ground that the appellants' removal would be incompatible
    with their rights under Article 8.  It was also  arguable  that  having
    decided that the new Rules  were  inapplicable  to  the  facts  of  the
    appeal, it was inconsistent for the judge thereafter to  calculate  the
    period of the appellants' continuous residence in the United Kingdom by
    reference to the Home Office guidance relating to  the  application  of
    those Rules. See [26] and [27] of the determination.

 5. Following an error of law hearing, I found that the judge did not adopt
    the correct approach.   He  started  out  in  error  in  terms  of  the
    applicability of the Rules and the rest of his determination was  built
    upon that inadequate foundation such that I set aside his  decision  to
    be remade by me.

Evidence

 6. The appellants' evidence is contained in the appeal bundle prepared for
    the hearing before  the  judge,  the  supplementary  bundle  before  me
    including their statements dated 27 May 2014,  the  statement  of  Ryan
    Thompson, Social Worker and the oral evidence of the appellants,  Sarah
    Bass and Ryan Thompson.  I will summarise the evidence as necessary  in
    the course of explaining the reasons for my decision.

 7. I have considered each item of evidence and have reviewed that evidence
    in the round.  The fact that I have not specifically  referred  to  any
    particular piece of evidence in my determination does not mean that the
    evidence has not been considered in the manner I have described.

Findings and Conclusion

 8. In this appeal the burden lies with the appellants to prove  the  facts
    and matters they rely upon.  Their case was advanced on the basis  that
    they have established a private and family life in the  United  Kingdom
    since their arrival here in 2006 and that their removal in  consequence
    of the respondent's decision would breach their rights under Article 8.
     The standard of proof is that of a balance of probabilities.   See  EH
    (Iraq) [2005] UKIAT 00065.

 9. The development of the case law is significant. MF  (Article  8  -  new
    rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC)  found that the new  Immigration
    Rules were not a "complete code" when it came to Article  8  claims  as
    decisions still had to be compliant with Section 6 of the Human  Rights
    Act 1998 [25].  The  assessment  remained  in  two  stages,  first  the
    application of the Rules and second, the application of Article 8  [32]
    - [41].  In one important respect, the new Rules  affected  the  second
    stage Article 8 assessment because they  gave  greater  specificity  to
    which  circumstances  attracted  the  greatest  weight  in  the  public
    interest.  The degree to which the new Rules changed the interpretation
    of the public interest should not be exaggerated.   Previous  case  law
    held that the proportionality  assessment  did  not  treat  the  public
    interest as immutable such that the Upper Tribunal found that  in  most
    cases, the new Rules  established  an  "exceptionality  threshold"  (my
    emphasis) for the public interest to be outweighed [42] - [45].

10. Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)  [2013]  UKUT  00640
    (IAC) See headnote:

         "On the current state of the authorities:

         (a)  the maintenance requirements of E-LTRP.3.1-3.2 stand, although
             Blake J in R (on the application of MM) v Secretary  of  State
             for the Home Department [2013] EWHC  1900  (Admin)  said  that
             they could  constitute  an  unjustified  and  disproportionate
             interference with the ability of spouses to live together;  he
             suggested that an appropriate figure may  be  around  �13,400,
             and highlighted the position of  young  people  and  low  wage
             earners caught by the higher figure in the rules;

         (b)  after applying the requirements of the Rules,  only  if  there
             may be arguably good grounds  for  granting  leave  to  remain
             outside them is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to  go  on
             to consider whether there  are  compelling  circumstances  not
             sufficiently recognised under them: R (on the application  of)
             Nagre v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC
             720 (Admin);

         (c)  the term "insurmountable  obstacles"  in  provisions  such  as
             Section  EX.1  are  not  obstacles  which  are  impossible  to
             surmount: MF (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393
             (IAC); Izuazu (Article 8 - new Rules) [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC);
             they concern the practical possibilities  of  relocation.   In
             the absence of such insurmountable obstacles, it is  necessary
             to   show   other   non-standard   and   particular   features
             demonstrating that removal will be unjustifiably harsh: Nagre.

         The Secretary of State addressed the Article 8  family  aspects  of
         the respondent's position through the Rules, in particular EX1, and
         the private life  aspects  through  paragraph  276ADE.   The  judge
         should have done likewise, also paying attention to  the  guidance.
         Thus the judge should have  considered  the  Secretary  of  State's
         conclusion under EX.1 that there were no  insurmountable  obstacles
         preventing the continuation of the  family  life  outside  the  UK.
         Only if there were arguably good  grounds  for  granting  leave  to
         remain outside the Rules was it necessary for  him  for  Article  8
         purposes to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  were  compelling
         circumstances (my emphasis) not sufficiently recognised  under  the
         Rules."

11. Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC)

         "(i) Failure on the part of the Secretary of State to  identify  in
             her decision any legitimate aim under Article 8(2) of the ECHR
             does not prevent a court or tribunal from seeking to do so  on
             the basis of the materials before it.

         (ii) "Maintenance of effective immigration control" whilst  not  as
             such a legitimate aim under  Article  8(2)  of  the  ECHR  can
             normally be assumed to be either an aspect of  "prevention  of
             disorder or crime" or an aspect of "economic wellbeing of  the
             country" or both.

         (iii)     "[P]revention  of  disorder  or  crime"  is  normally   a
             legitimate aim both in expulsion cases where  there  has  been
             criminal conduct on the part of the claimant and in  expulsion
             cases where there have only been breaches of immigration law.

         (iv)  MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  held  that  the   new
             Immigration Rules regarding deportation of a foreign  criminal
             are  a  complete  code.   This  was  because  of  the  express
             requirement in  them  at  paragraph  398  to  have  regard  to
             exceptional circumstances and other factors.

         (v)  It follows from this that any other rule which has  a  similar
             provision will also constitute a complete code;

         (vi) Where an area of the rules  does  not  have  such  an  express
             mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for
             the Home Department [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)  ([29]-[31]  in
             particular) and Gulshan (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -  correct
             approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) should be followed: i.e. after
             applying the requirements of the Rules, only if there  may  be
             arguably good grounds for granting  leave  to  remain  outside
             them is it necessary for  Article  8  purposes  to  go  on  to
             consider  whether  there  are  compelling  circumstances   (my
             emphasis) not sufficiently recognised under them."

12. Article 8 of ECHR states:

    (i)  Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life,
         his home and his correspondence.

    (ii) There should be no interference by a  public  authority  with  the
         exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
         and is necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the  interest  of
         national security, public safety or the economic wellbeing  of  the
         country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for   the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others.

13. In Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 Lord Bingham gave guidance at paragraph 17  as
    to the correct approach when dealing with Article 8 as follows:

         "In considering whether a challenge to  the  Secretary  of  State's
         decision to remove a person must clearly fail, the reviewing  court
         must consider:

         (i)  Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or family life?

         (ii) If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         (iii)    If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (iv) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interest of national security,  public  safety  or  the
             economic wellbeing of  the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, or the protection of health or  morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (v)  If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?"

14. The Court of Appeal has stated in a number of cases that the  threshold
    for establishing an interference with private or  family  life  is  not
    high.  In AG (Eritrea) [2007] EWCA Civ 801, Sedley LJ said at paragraph
    28:

         ".....while an interference with private or  family  life  must  be
         real if it is to engage Article 8(1), the threshold  of  engagement
         (the 'minimum level') is  not  a  specially  high  one.   Once  the
         Article is engaged, the focus moves  as  Lord  Bingham's  remaining
         questions indicate, to the process of justification  under  Article
         8(2).  It is this which, in all cases which  engage  Article  8(1),
         will determine whether there has been a breach of the Article."

15. In many cases the issue of substance will be the proportionality of the
    decision.  The Court of Appeal has emphasised on a number of  occasions
    that the assessment of proportionality must be properly and  adequately
    reasoned.  DM (Zambia) [2009] EWCA Civ 474.

16. In MM (Zimbabwe) [2009] UKAIT 00037, the Tribunal summarised the higher
    courts indication of the process that the Tribunal  must  undertake  in
    making the proportionality assessment.

17. In applying Article 8 Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39 provides  that  it  is
    not just the applicant's family (or private)  life  that  needs  to  be
    taken into consideration but that of his family members too.

18. A number of cases have considered how to approach the best interests of
    children, LD (Article 8 - best interests of child) Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT
    278 (IAC), ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC  4,  Omotunde  (Best  Interests  -
    Zambrano applied  -  Razgar)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00247  (IAC),  E-A
    (Article 8 - Best Interests of Child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315  (IAC).
    The appropriate principles were paraphrased at [10] of  Zoumbas  [2013]
    UKSC 74:
             (1) The best interests of a child are an integral part of the
             proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;
             (2) In making that assessment, the best interests of a child
             must be a primary consideration, although not always the only
             primary consideration; and the child's best interests do not
             of themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;
             (3) Although the best interests of a child can be outweighed
             by the cumulative effect of other considerations, no other
             consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;
             (4) While different judges might approach the question of the
             best interests of a child in different ways, it is important
             to ask oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in
             order to avoid the risk that the best interests of a child
             might be undervalued when other important considerations were
             in play;
             (5) It is important to have a clear idea of a child's
             circumstances and of what is in a child's best interests
             before one asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed
             by the force of other considerations;
             (6) To that end there is no substitute for a careful
             examination of all relevant factors when the interests of a
             child are involved in an article 8 assessment; and
             (7) A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she
             is not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent.

19. In Huang [2007] UKHL 11 the House of  Lords  confirmed  that  the  ECHR
    confers no rights for individuals or  families  to  choose  where  they
    prefer to live and that in most cases where the applicant complains  of
    a violation of Article 8 rights, in a case where the impugned  decision
    is authorised by law for a legitimate object and the  interference  (or
    lack of respect) is of sufficient seriousness to engage  the  operation
    of Article 8, the  critical  question  is  likely  to  be  whether  the
    interference (or lack of respect) complained of is proportionate to the
    legitimate end sought to be achieved.   Their  lordships  said  that  a
    judgment on proportionality:

         "....must always involve the striking of a fair balance between the
         rights of an individual and the interests of the community which is
         inherent  in  the  whole  of  the  Convention.   The  severity  and
         consequences of interference will call for  careful  assessment  at
         this stage."

20. In VW [2009] EWCA Civ 5 the Court of  Appeal  held  that  in  assessing
    proportionality and whether an appellant's family should return to  his
    country of  origin  with  him,  the  test  is  not  whether  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to prevent  their  going  but  whether  it  is
    reasonable  to  expect  them  to  go.   If  there  are   insurmountable
    obstacles, they will succeed but  if  there  are  not,  they  will  not
    necessarily fail.

21. Ms Holmes helpfully conceded that the appellants' circumstances reached
    the "compelling" and/or "extraordinary"  requirement  I  have  set  out
    above at [9]-[11] above, such that she invited me to move on  to  carry
    out an Article 8 proportionality assessment.  Mr Rendle confirmed  that
    he was not pursuing what was described as  the  appellants'  subjective
    fear of kidnap on return because of their Christian faith.

22. Ms Holmes did not dispute that neither of the appellants' parents  were
    in  the  United  Kingdom,  that  their  current  whereabouts  and   the
    whereabouts of Aunt Victoria (see below [23] were unknown.

23. It is not disputed that the appellants came to the  United  Kingdom  in
    December of 2006 with their mother.  They went first to London and then
    to Kent where their mother  left  them  in  the  care  of  their  aunt,
    Victoria Ngozi Okocha who in turn, in April 2011, left  the  appellants
    in the care of Sarah and Alan Bass.

24. None of the appellants'  considerable  achievements  as  found  by  the
    judge, during the almost eight years  they  have  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom are in dispute.  The judge found as I do, that they  have  both
    excelled  in  terms  of  their   educational   achievements,   sporting
    activities  and  conduct.  There  are  glowing  references   for   both
    appellants from Medway Council officers, Mrs Bass,  their  schools  and
    others with whom they have come into contact. They  have  clearly  been
    well integrated in their local community.

25. Paul Witchalls and Ryan  Thompson,  both  Social  Workers,   have  been
    looking after Michael and Stephen respectively.  As regards Michael, Mr
    Witchalls had this to say in his report dated 2 June 2014:

         "Michael has lived with  "relatives  and  friends"  foster  carers,
         Sarah and Alan Bass at 132 Princes  Avenue,  Walderslade,  Chatham,
         Kent ME6 8AJ since 02 April 2011.

         Michael is 15 years old and relies upon  the  support  he  receives
         from Sarah and Alan Bass and Medway Social Services to provide  for
         all his developmental needs.

         He  is  currently  in  full-time  education  at  Greenacre  School,
         Walderslade, where he is currently achieving at high A Level  which
         can be attributed to the overall  support  that  he  receives  from
         Sarah and Alan Bass.

         Michael would not be able to support himself financially apart from
         his foster carers or manage to  excel  at  the  level  he  has  and
         continue in his development into a positive focused young man  with
         the aspirations that he currently holds.

         His older brother, Stephen Okoh, is  not  in  a  position  to  take
         charge of his younger brother's care as  he  too  relies  upon  the
         financial, emotional and developmental  support  that  he  receives
         from Sarah Bass and Social Services.

         Michael has no other family members in the UK from  whom  he  could
         receive care and support.

         Michael does not know of any family members in Nigeria,  and  would
         not be in a position to make contact with them for them to  provide
         the support that Michael  needs.   Stephen  is  also  in  the  same
         position."

26. As regards Stephen Okoh, Ryan Thompson had this  to  say  in  a  letter
    attached to his statement dated 3 June 2014:

         "I have been working  with  Stephen  since  approximately  December
         2012, following his 18th birthday when he ceased  to  be  a  looked
         after child.  Stephen is now a care leaver (former relevant) and is
         therefore entitled to leaving care services, mainly  consisting  of
         advice and guidance.   Stephen  resides  in  a  supported  lodgings
         environment which is  funded  by  the  Leaving  Care  Team  (Social
         Services).

         Stephen has always been extremely focused on his  football  career,
         which potentially could see him turn professional.  Should  Stephen
         be granted leave to remain he will be  able  to  sign  a  semi  pro
         contract.  Stephen is  a  very  motivated  young  man  who  strives
         success.  Stephen has gained excellent results through the  Wrotham
         Schools Football Academy, including a distinction for  BTEC  Sport.
         Most  recently  Stephen  applied  for   a   Level   3   Engineering
         qualification at a local  college  but  unfortunately  due  to  his
         immigration status Stephen was  not  guaranteed  funding  therefore
         could not continue with his studies.  Despite this  disruption  and
         the uncertainty around his immigration status Stephen has  remained
         busy, focussed and polite to all those I have observed  him  having
         contact with.

         Stephen is still engaging with  support  from  Medway  Youth  Trust
         despite the fact he is unable to make applications until a decision
         has been made on his immigration status.  He is actively looking at
         apprenticeships as well  as  attending  regular  training  for  two
         football clubs as well as exercising in the  gym  several  times  a
         week.  It is very refreshing to have worked with  young  male  like
         Stephen.  Stephen is a law abiding citizen who not only works  hard
         to achieve his goals on the football pitch, but  academically  too.
         Through no fault of his own Stephen has been left in  this  country
         by his family with no clear understanding of their whereabouts.  As
         a result Stephen became looked after by the local authority.

         In my professional opinion Stephen is very  able  on  many  levels.
         However, I also believe that he has little life experience and  the
         trauma of being left by his care givers is a factor that  continues
         to impact upon his emotional wellbeing.  This requires a  level  of
         support currently  being  offered  by  the  Leaving  Team  and  its
         colleagues in the Medway area.  Stephen also responds well  to  the
         emotional support offered by his  current  accommodation  provider.
         Without this  input  I  feel  Stephen  could  quickly  lose  focus.
         Stephen has no  experience  of  living  independently,  nor  is  he
         prepared or equipped to provide  the  level  of  support  that  his
         younger sibling, who is currently looked after, would require.

         As both Stephen and his brother potentially face being returned  to
         Nigeria, they would, in my professional opinion, still require  the
         level of support they receive in the UK, which I do not believe  he
         would be able to  access.   Without  this,  and  the  potential  of
         Stephen being the responsible adult  for  his  younger  brother,  I
         would be greatly concerned for their  future,  given  the  progress
         Stephen has made in the UK, achieved partly by his  own  motivation
         but with advice and guidance from others also.

         My future role with Stephen, along with  the  assistance  from  his
         current  accommodation  providers  is  to   prepare   Stephen   for
         independence."

27. Clearly, the respondent's  decision  interferes  with  the  appellants'
    rights to family and private life and is lawful and legitimate in terms
    of the  exercise  of  immigration  control.   The  issue  must  be  the
    proportionality of the decision with  regard  to  the  appellants'  own
    particular circumstances.

28.  Ms  Holmes  did  not  suggest  that  I  should  treat  the  appellants
    individually. I find I must treat  the  appellants  as  a  family  unit
    rather than individuals who could be potentially divided,  for  example
    by Stephen,  now  an  adult  being  returned  to  Nigeria  and  Michael
    remaining here. I find they  enjoy  family  life  together  within  the
    household of Mr and Mrs Bass. They have never lived apart. Their  lives
    are emotionally and physically inter-dependant.

29. Ms Holmes asked me to find that the appellants had not been as she  put
    it, "entirely transparent" regarding their circumstances.  There was  a
    third brother Henry who Ms Holmes claimed was mentioned for  the  first
    time before me, although I find that he was referred to  as  being  the
    son of Aunt Victoria in the refusal letter  dated  26  June  2013.  The
    evidence before  me  was  that  Henry  is  the  older  brother  of  the
    appellants, the implication being that he is a full sibling of the same
    parents although his parentage was not explored in terms  of  what  was
    said in the refusal.

30. Mrs Bass was clear that she would have liked to have been in touch with
    Henry on behalf of the appellants, however, save that she understood he
    had UK residence and had fathered a son, she knew nothing  of  him  and
    did not know his whereabouts.

31. Ms Holmes asked me to find  that  the  appellants  remembered  more  of
    Nigeria than they were prepared to admit such that their  circumstances
    were  not  so  cut  and  dried  as   they   wanted   me   to   believe.
    Notwithstanding   Ms   Holmes   submissions,   no   contradictions   or
    inconsistencies emerged from the oral evidence before me.

32. It might be that the appellants have chosen to emphasise their lack  of
    family and cultural ties to Nigeria because they hope to obtain  status
    here.  If that was true then it would have a bearing upon my view as to
    whether it was proportionate for the appellants to return  to  Nigeria.
    As it is, I found the appellants credible witnesses and  their  account
    was corroborated by not only Mrs Bass but also by the statement  of  Mr
    Witchalls.  Mr Thompson was of the view that if  returned  to  Nigeria,
    the appellants would still require there the level of support  received
    in the United Kingdom and there was no suggestion from Ms  Holmes  that
    such support would be forthcoming.  The view of Mr  Thompson  was  that
    Stephen's life experiences had been such that there had been an adverse
    effect upon his emotional wellbeing  and  that  without  the  continued
    support he receives here, he would suffer  an  emotional  decline.   Mr
    Thompson said that although  he  has  been  working  with  Stephen  for
    approximately eighteen months, he still would not open up to  him.   Mr
    Thompson's view was that he might well need counselling  and  that  for
    the moment, he was not ready  to  live  independently  of  the  support
    system that has been established here.  Ms Holmes told me that she  did
    not take issue with the views of the social workers nor did she seek to
    persuade me to go behind their reports.

33. If they were both to be returned, then they would be going  back  to  a
    country which they left almost eight years ago, Stephen being  at  that
    time roughly 12 years of age or thereabouts and Michael being roughly 7
    years of age or thereabouts. There  have  been  great  developments  in
    their  young  lives  in  the  meantime  and  they  have  grasped  their
    opportunities here. See [24] above. Over the time they have  been  here
    they have adopted the cultural  norms  appropriate  to  their  age  and
    circumstances in the United Kingdom. They have no relatives or contacts
    in Nigeria. They would be returning to a country with  which  they  are
    unfamiliar, notwithstanding that they are Nigerian nationals  and  have
    been living with Mrs Bass who is of Nigerian extraction,  although  she
    has lived here for 32 years. They speak no native  Nigerian  languages,
    only English. Stephen told me that he did not know the name of the town
    they lived in and only had a vague idea  of  the  name  of  the  State.
    Michael had less knowledge than his brother. All  they  could  remember
    was that they lived in a compound with their mother and Henry and  went
    to school locally. Their mother worked to support them. They might have
    had a maid.

34. I find their outcome on return to Nigeria would be unpredictable  given
    that there would be no support, accommodation or means  by  which  they
    could survive financially; neither of them have worked  in  the  United
    Kingdom, such that they have no experience  of  earning  a  living.  Ms
    Holmes did not suggest that there would be support facilities available
    in Nigeria in terms  of  accommodation  and  financial  maintenance.  I
    speculate that Stephen could eventually secure  employment  to  support
    and accommodate them both, but their conditions would be precarious  in
    the meantime.

35. Michael is still a child. Stephen is a young adult who  I  find  to  be
    vulnerable, as I accept Mr Thompson's evidence in that regard. See [26]
    above. I consider the best interests of Michael in terms  of  the  case
    law I have set out at [18] above. At present he has a settled life with
    Stephen in the home of Mr and Mrs Bass. There is  no  expectation  that
    the present arrangement should change in the near future.  Clearly  the
    appellants will form a separate life of their own  at  some  stage  but
    that is not anticipated at the moment. In removing  the  appellants  to
    Nigeria, they will be taken from a secure, caring home  to  an  unknown
    and potentially threatening future. In such circumstances I  find  that
    it is in the best interests of Michael  and  indeed  for  Stephen  too,
    although he is an adult, to remain with Mr  and  Mrs  Bass  until  they
    reach the requisite maturity to  make  their  own  way  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

36. I find it is not reasonable to expect the  appellants  to  relocate  to
    Nigeria, only because they spent the first years of their lives  there;
    there is no other link. I find the personal  and  cultural  roots  they
    have put down here should take precedence  over  their  past  lives  in
    Nigeria.

37. For all of these reasons, I find that removal of either appellant would
    amount to a disproportionate interference with their  right  to  family
    and private life.  I remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  by
    allowing the appeal.

Decision

38. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds - Article 8.

39. No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date 3 June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart


