
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29736/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 June 2012                               |On 5 June 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                             ms merlene williams

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Pretzell, Counsel, instructed by Makka
Solicitors Ltd.
For the Respondent:    Ms M Tanner, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, who was born on 28  February  1955,  is  a  national  of
    Jamaica.  She claims to have arrived in this country in  November  2000
    as a visitor, and this is not disputed on  behalf  of  the  respondent.
    Subsequently, it appears that she remained  in  this  country  lawfully
    until February 2007, when she applied for further leave to remain as  a
    carer.   That  application  was  refused  by  the  respondent  but  the
    appellant remained in this country without leave.

 2. In late 2010 the appellant applied for further leave to remain  outside
    the Rules, but this application was refused by  the  respondent  on  27
    January 2011.  The refusal letter is dated the same date.  Because  the
    application was made at a time when the appellant did  not  have  valid
    leave to remain, she had no right of appeal against this decision.

 3. Subsequently, the appellant asked for the decision to be  reconsidered,
    but the respondent refused  this  application  as  well.   The  refusal
    letter is dated 27 September.  On this date, the respondent also served
    a notice on the appellant informing her of her liability  to  detention
    and removal.  This decision did carry a right of appeal.

 4. As was her right, the appellant appealed against this decision, and her
    appeal was heard before Immigration  Judge  Prior,  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross on 24 November 2011.

 5. In a short determination, promulgated on 30 November 2011, Judge  Prior
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.  He found that the appellant's  claim
    under Article 3, which had been put  on  the  basis  of  withdrawal  of
    medication as a result of her removal to Jamaica, was not made out, and
    he also rejected her claim under Article 8.

 6. The appellant appealed against  this  decision.   The  grounds  do  not
    challenge the decision under Article 3, but assert that  Judge  Prior's
    consideration of the appellant's Article 8 claim had  contained  errors
    of law such that that part of his decision fell to be set aside and re-
    made by the Upper Tribunal.

 7. The appellant was granted permission to appeal by Immigration Judge J M
    Holmes on 15 December 2011.  In granting permission  to  appeal,  Judge
    Holmes stated as follows:

         "...2.   There is no challenge  to  the  judge's  approach  to  the
             evidence of the appellant's health.  Although  the  judge  was
             not assisted by any representation on behalf of the respondent
             it is however arguable that the judge did not  make  a  proper
             analysis of the evidence of the appellant's 'private life'  in
             the UK as established since entry in November  2000,  or  make
             adequate findings of fact in relation to either it, or to  the
             strength of her connections with Jamaica, and family remaining
             in Jamaica.  It is arguable that the finding that her  Article
             8 rights were not engaged by the decision  to  remove  was  in
             these circumstances perverse as not being open to him  on  the
             evidence, the threshold for engagement is not a high one.   It
             is also arguable (i) that the judge did not follow the  Razgar
             step-by-step approach to the Article 8 appeal, and, (ii)  that
             the judge failed to identify  the  true  burden  of  proof  in
             relation  to  Article  8(2),  and,  (iii)  what  it  was  that
             justified the interference in  any  'private  life'  that  was
             established, and, (iv) thus made no adequate assessment of the
             proportionality of the removal decision.  In the circumstances
             it is also arguable that there was no adequate approach to the
             issues raised by paragraph 395C."

 8. This appeal then came before me on 26 June 2011.  I  heard  submissions
    on behalf of both parties, which I shall not set out verbatim, as  they
    were recorded contemporaneously by me, and are set out in my Record  of
    Proceedings.  Having considered these submissions,  and  also  all  the
    evidence which was contained  within  the  file,  I  found  that  Judge
    Prior's consideration of the appellant's Article 8 claim had  contained
    material errors of law, such that that part of his decision must be set
    aside and re-made by the Upper Tribunal.  My reasons  are  as  follows.
    Judge Prior failed to give any (let alone  any  adequate)  reasons  why
    Article 8(1) was not engaged, as he had found at paragraph  12  of  his
    determination.   I  also  considered  that  if,  the  respondent  being
    unrepresented, Judge Prior had been considering making a  finding  that
    the evidence as to the appellant's relationship  with  her  family  was
    inadequate, given that both the appellant and her daughter were present
    at  the  Tribunal,  he  should  have  indicated  these  doubts  to  the
    appellant's Counsel, so that they could have been  addressed.   I  also
    considered, and find, that Judge Prior did not follow the  step-by-step
    approach posited by Lord Bingham in Razgar.

 9. Having informed the parties that I had found an error of  law,  I  then
    went on to re-hear the appeal, in order to make the decision.

Subsequent Directions

10. During the course of the hearing,  evidential  matters  were  canvassed
    with the parties, and subsequently,  I  was  told  by  the  appellant's
    Counsel that the appellant's daughter, who had  given  evidence  during
    the hearing, had further documents which should be before the  Tribunal
    before any final decision was made.

11. As a result of these submissions, I agreed that I  would  consider  any
    further material on the point at issue  and  any  submissions  made  in
    respect of this material before making  a  determination,  and  I  gave
    directions to this effect, in a document entitled "Decision and Further
    Directions" which was dated the same date  as  the  hearing.   In  this
    document, I gave further directions giving the appellant permission  to
    file further evidence, and setting out the time in which this  evidence
    should  be  submitted  to  the  Tribunal.   In  accordance  with  these
    directions, some further documents were  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.

12. Unfortunately, the file in this appeal was then misplaced, as a  result
    of which I did not write my determination within the  timescale  I  had
    originally intended.  However, the file is now before me, and with  the
    assistance of my Record of Proceedings,  I  am  now  able  to  give  my
    determination.

The Hearing

13. Having found an error of law,  the  Tribunal  then  heard  evidence  on
    behalf of the appellant.  The appellant herself gave evidence, followed
    by her daughter, Maxine Chambers and  Sharon  Carr,  whose  mother  was
    being looked after by the appellant.  These witnesses were  all  cross-
    examined.  I had  also  previously  been  provided  with  a  bundle  of
    documents on behalf of the appellant, which included various statements
    of support for the  appellant.  Following  the  live  evidence  of  the
    witnesses, I then heard submissions on behalf of both parties.

14. I recorded the evidence contemporaneously, and this is contained in the
    Record of Proceedings.  Accordingly, I shall not set out this  evidence
    word for word, but shall refer below only to such parts of the evidence
    as is necessary for  the  purposes  of  this  determination.   I  have,
    however, taken full account of everything which was said to  me  during
    the course of the hearing, as well as to all  the  documents  contained
    within the file.

15. The appellant's case is summarised concisely in the  skeleton  argument
    which was prepared on her behalf by Mr  Pretzell.   The  appellant  has
    been in this country for a long period of time,  since  2000,  and  had
    valid leave  to  remain  until  2007.   She  has  a  daughter  and  two
    granddaughters who are settled in the UK and whom she  regularly  sees.
    She has co-habited with them in the past,  over  a  three  year  period
    between 2007 and 2010.  She sees her grandchildren regularly now.   She
    also has a close relationship with Enid Carr, who is  an  elderly  lady
    suffering from Alzheimer's, who is the mother of Sharon  Carr,  who  is
    said in the skeleton argument to be the appellant's church pastor.   It
    is also said that the appellant is Mrs Carr's primary carer, with  whom
    she lives in.  The appellant has no immediate family in Jamaica to whom
    she could turn were she to have to return there.  She is not in receipt
    of benefits, and has not sought to rely on public funds whilst  in  the
    UK.  She has never been involved in any criminal activities.

16. The respondent's case was  summarised  by  Ms  Tanner  in  her  closing
    submissions.  While it was accepted that the appellant  had  a  private
    life in this country, it was  not  accepted  that  her  ties  with  her
    daughter and grandchildren went  beyond  the  normal  ties  of  a  nice
    family.  It was accordingly not  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a
    "family" life (as opposed to a private life) in this country on  normal
    Kugathas principles.  The appellant now lived in a different city  from
    her daughter and grandchildren and there was nothing in the pattern  of
    their visiting each other which suggested that  the  relationship  went
    beyond the normal ties to be expected between a grown up  daughter  and
    her mother.

17. Although the appellant  was  stating  that  she  could  not  afford  to
    continue her medical treatment in Jamaica, there was no Article 3 claim
    here.  Mr Pretzell accepted that the appellant  could  not  succeed  on
    this ground alone, but he  did  argue  that  it  was  a  factor  to  be
    considered when the Tribunal decided whether removal was  proportionate
    under Article 8.

18. Although there was evidence that the appellant did care for Enid  Carr,
    the nature of that evidence had to  be  considered  with  care.   On  a
    number of matters contradictory evidence had been given.   It  was  not
    clear as to whether she was in fact living with Mrs Carr,  or,  if  she
    was, for what periods she had been living with her.  There was a lot of
    documentary evidence showing her address as 74 Nelson's Road, including
    her own application where she gave  that  address.   That  address  was
    apparently still listed on the court  file,  and  the  respondent  also
    relied on a letter  from  Sharon  Carr,  Mrs  Carr's  daughter,  of  16
    November 2011, where she referred to the appellant being  "expected  to
    come to the home", which would suggest she had not in fact been  living
    there.  It was the respondent's case that the appellant  said  she  was
    living with Mrs Carr in order to make her claim seem stronger  than  in
    fact it was.

19. Although Ms Tanner initially  submitted  that  there  was  no  evidence
    before the Tribunal to confirm the nature and extent  of  the  type  of
    care which Mrs Carr needed, in fact  this  evidence  was  contained  at
    pages 14 to 18 of the bundle prepared for this hearing, which Ms Tanner
    had not had an opportunity to see before the date of the hearing.

20. If the appellant had to return to Jamaica, Mrs Carr's daughter,  Sharon
    Carr could make alternative arrangements for her mother.

21. Although the appellant had  a  private  life  in  connection  with  the
    church, which was well supported by letters, she had had a  churchgoing
    life before in Jamaica, and when she returned  she  could  continue  to
    establish herself there as she had done over here.  Article 8  did  not
    confer a right to an alien either to a job or a home in the UK,  so  on
    that aspect, the appellant would have to provide for herself.

22. It was proportionate to require the appellant to leave this country, in
    light of her immigration history.  She had spent seven  years  in  this
    country lawfully, but that was  just  one  factor.   The  most  weighty
    consideration was that she had decided to stay and having attempted  to
    renew her permission to remain and  failed,  she  stayed  anyway.   She
    should have left.

23. In his closing submissions, Mr Pretzell re-made the points which I have
    already summarised above.  He submitted that there was  a  family  life
    between the appellant and her  daughter  and  grandchildren.   She  had
    actually co-habited with them between 2007 to  2010,  although  it  was
    accepted that contradictory evidence had been given on this point.

24. Although it was accepted that there was also contradictory evidence  as
    to precisely what she did for Mrs Carr, the evidence was that Mrs  Carr
    could not dress or feed herself, and the appellant  gave  big  support.
    It was clear that the appellant gave a great service to Mrs  Carr,  not
    in the context of her being remunerated but in  return  for  board  and
    lodging.  This put a roof over her head.

25. Mr Pretzell addressed me briefly with  regard  to  the  inconsistencies
    regarding the address, and then referred to the domestic history of the
    appellant's daughter, who had been the  victim  of  domestic  violence,
    with regard to which the appellant had given her emotional support.

26. Although the difficulties which the appellant would have with regard to
    her medication were she to return to Jamaica would not entitle  her  to
    remain under Article 3, this was nonetheless a factor to be taken  into
    account when the Tribunal considered Article 8.

27. Mr Pretzell also reminded the Tribunal that the appellant had been here
    lawfully for seven of the twelve years or so that she  had  been  here,
    and that her overstaying had not been particularly reprehensible.   She
    had not significantly contrived to evade immigration control,  but  had
    at least attempted to regularise her position from  shortly  after  her
    leave had run out.  The public interest in removing her was  less  than
    it would have been for someone who had been here for less time or whose
    immigration history was worse.

Discussion

28. Asking myself the questions posited by Lord Bingham in Razgar,  I  must
    consider first whether the appellant's removal would be an interference
    with the exercise of her right to respect for  her  private  or  family
    life,  and  then,  if  so,  whether  this   interference   would   have
    consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of
    Article 8.  Clearly this appellant does have a  private  life  in  this
    country, having been here since 2000, and clearly her Article 8  rights
    would be engaged by her removal.  I discuss below the strength of  that
    private or family life.

29. Clearly  also,  such  interference  as  there  would  be  would  be  in
    accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the
    interests of the  economic  well-being  of  the  country,  through  the
    maintenance of a fair and effective system of immigration control.

30. The real issue this Tribunal  now  has  to  determine  is  whether  the
    removal of this appellant, taking account of all the factors, both  for
    and against removal, is proportionate for this purpose.

31. I do not propose to analyse the evidence which was  put  before  me  in
    minute  detail.   It  was  clear  that   there   were   a   number   of
    inconsistencies in the evidence,  some  of  which  remain  unexplained.
    This was acknowledged by  Mr  Pretzell  on  behalf  of  the  appellant.
    However, I feel able to find the following facts,  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities.   This  appellant  has  a  good  relationship  with  her
    daughter and grandchildren, and sees them regularly.   Whether  or  not
    this amounts to "family life" it is perhaps unnecessary to  decide,  as
    it is plainly a significant part of her private life in  this  country,
    and the interference with this aspect of her private life  would  cause
    her and her family significant distress.   The  appellant  also  has  a
    private life insofar as she provides  considerable  assistance  to  Mrs
    Carr.  Again, while I cannot make any precise findings  as  to  exactly
    what she does for Mrs Carr, it is clear  that  Mrs  Carr  is  very  ill
    indeed and that the help given to her by this appellant is significant.
     It has also gone on for a substantial period of time.

32. I accept that the appellant is closely involved with her church in this
    country,  and  while  she  could  almost   certainly   build   up   new
    relationships on return to Jamaica, again the disruption to that aspect
    of her life would be significant.

33. I take into account also that this appellant has been in  this  country
    for a long period of time, and that of that time, she was here lawfully
    for about seven years.  I also do not  consider  that  her  immigration
    history contains any significant factors which need to be given  weight
    beyond the fact that she overstayed.

34. This is also not a case where the appellant has committed any  offences
    while she has been here (beyond overstaying) and nor has  she  been  in
    receipt of benefits.

35. I do not consider that her ability or otherwise to obtain medication on
    return to Jamaica is a significant factor.

36. While of course the need to remove overstayers for the  economic  well-
    being of the community as a whole is an important  factor,  the  public
    interest in removing such persons must in this case be reduced to  some
    extent by the length of time this appellant has been in  this  country,
    of which, as already  noted,  a  significant  proportion  of  this  was
    lawful.

37. Although this is a finely balanced decision, when I weigh  up  all  the
    competing factors, on the facts of this case I do not consider that the
    removal of this appellant after the length of time she has been in this
    country, would be proportionate.  It follows that her  appeal  must  be
    allowed.

Decision

I set aside the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  as  containing  a
material error of law and I substitute the following decision:

The appellant's appeal is allowed, under the Immigration Rules.




Signed:                                 Dated: 4 June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

