
IAC-FH-CK-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29733/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 April 2015                     |On 12 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE MCGOWAN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                            Mr Zohier Taguelmimt
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam, Counsel instructed by UK Immigration
                    Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  Greasley  promulgated  on  5  January  2015  which
    followed a hearing on 11 December 2014, that decision being to  dismiss
    his appeal under the EEA Regulations and under Article 8.

 2. Permission was granted on two grounds,

      i) that it was arguable that the  Tribunal  erred  first  in  that  it
         failed to attach weight or sufficient weight to the  submission  by
         the EEA national of her self-assessment tax returns as evidence  of
         her self-employment between the years 2003 or 2004 and 2009 and

     ii) that the Tribunal erred in finding that the EEA national's delay in
         declaring her tax liabilities in respect  of  that  employment  was
         sufficient to cast doubt on their existence.

    The background is relatively straightforward and I am grateful  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for their summary of the relevant facts.

 3. The appellant is an Algerian national who was born on 25 November 1986.
     He came to the UK and was issued with a residence card on 12 June 2003
    as the spouse of a French national, Saida Nathalie Errin.   The  decree
    absolute shows that their marriage was dissolved on 30  May  2013.   It
    was accepted that his former spouse  now  resides  in  France.   It  is
    relevant to note that the appellant was sentenced to a  term  of  three
    months' imprisonment on 28 January 2009 for an offence of theft.

 4. On 16 May  2014  the  appellant  applied  for  permanent  residence  as
    confirmation of a right of residence.  In order to  satisfy  Regulation
    10(5) he had to show:

      1) evidence that his  former  spouse  had  been  exercising  her  free
         movement rights in the UK at the time of the divorce,

      2) that the marriage had lasted for at least three years,

      3) that he and his spouse had resided in the UK for at  least  a  year
         during the marriage,

      4) that he was in employment, self-employment  or  economically  self-
         sufficient, and for his purposes his case is that he  has  been  in
         employment at the relevant times,

      5) that he had resided in the UK for a continuous period of five years
         within the Regulations which required him to show that  his  former
         spouse had been continuously exercising her free movement rights up
         to the point of the divorce and

      6) that he had continued in employment since the divorce.

 5. To meet the requirements of Regulation 15(i)(f) the  evidence  required
    had to cover a  five  year  period.   The  appellant  produced  in  the
    Tribunal a number of documents in support of  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's earlier decision.   He  produced  a  marriage  certificate
    showing that he and his former spouse had married in  April  2003.   He
    produced a decree  absolute  dated  30  May  2013  and  he  produced  a
    succession of payslips  which  showed  and  proved  that  he  had  been
    resident in the UK for at least a year.

 6. Prior to the respondent's decision he had not provided evidence in  the
    following categories.  He had not provided  evidence  that  his  former
    spouse was a qualified person at the time of the divorce,  which  meant
    that he had not shown that he was residing in the UK in accordance with
    the Regulations at the time of the divorce.   He  had  also  failed  to
    satisfy Regulation 10(6) which required him to show, by evidence,  that
    he had been working since the divorce and further he was  not  able  to
    provide  evidence  of  the  fact  that  he  met  the  requirements   of
    Regulations 10(5)  and  10(6)  and  had  not  retained  his  rights  of
    residence since the time of the divorce.

 7. The respondent had also considered, given the length of  the  marriage,
    whether the appellant qualified for permanent residence during the time
    he had been a family member of an  EEA  national.   The  appellant  had
    submitted his former wife's payslips which  spanned  dates  between  29
    January 2003 and 29 April 2003 and material which he said was  evidence
    of her self-employment.  There were at that stage highlighted a  number
    of discrepancies which had caused the Secretary of State not  to  treat
    those documents as genuine.  The Secretary of State  pointed  out  that
    the tax code did not change on the payslips despite the change  of  tax
    year.  The documents purported to show a national insurance number  but
    HMRC records showed that she did not in fact have a national  insurance
    number at the relevant time.  The appellant  claimed  that  his  former
    spouse had been self-employed since 2003 but the letter from HMRC dated
    October  2009  showed  that  the  Revenue  was  thanking  her  for  her
    notification of her self-employed status commencing in June 2009.   The
    Secretary of State refused to accept the tax  calculations  dated  2009
    but purporting to cover the previous six years as proof that his former
    spouse was economically active in the United Kingdom as a self-employed
    person at the relevant time.

 8. It appeared, as the Secretary of  State  found,  that  the  appellant's
    former wife had not contacted Revenue & Customs about her  being  self-
    employed until six years after the time at which the appellant  claimed
    she had taken up self-employment.  There was no documentary evidence of
    work being carried out.  There were  no  invoices,  no  statements,  no
    audited accounts, no business bank accounts, no receipts or no form  of
    advertising of any sort of business.  We accept the point  made  by  Mr
    Aslam that some forms of  self-employment  produce  less  documentation
    than others and that the list as identified is illustrative rather than
    a formal requirement but the fact was that no contemporaneous  material
    at all to support the appellant's contention of his former wife's self-
    employment was provided or indeed has been provided.

 9. The evidence called by him at the hearing of  the  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision came from him alone.  He gave evidence of
    his own employment, which certainly continued by virtue of the material
    he produced until 2013.  He  gave  evidence  that  his  wife  had  been
    employed for about the first year of their marriage as  a  housekeeper.
    Thereafter she had become self-employed and his evidence in  terms  was
    that he could not recall a time throughout their relationship at  which
    she had not been working, either in the early days as an employee or on
    his account for almost the entirety of their marriage and time together
    in a self-employed status.  They had, he said, separated  in  2009  and
    she had left the United Kingdom in 2011 returning to France, and we are
    told and accept that she has played no part in  his  life  since  then.
    The divorce finally was made absolute in 2013.

10. The appellant at the hearing below produced payslips for his wife dated
    2003 and self-assessment tax returns purporting to  be  for  the  years
    from 2004 to 2009, all of which, it must be noted, were  dated  by  the
    Revenue as being received in 2009.  He produced his own bank statements
    which showed his employment and the income he received from it  up  and
    until 2013 but was only  able  to  produce  what  was  described  as  a
    shortened version of a bank statement for 2014 which  could  not  prove
    details as to where he was being paid at that stage.  He gave  evidence
    on his own behalf and produced documents but could not account for what
    the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal was  to  find  was  a  discrepancy
    between the letter from  the  Revenue  thanking  his  former  wife  for
    registering her status as self-employed and his account  that  although
    that letter and registration had taken place in 2009 she  had  in  fact
    been self-employed dating back as long as 2003.

11. The judge was not  satisfied  on  the  evidence  before  him  that  the
    appellant either fulfilled the requirements of the 2006 Regulations  or
    that he had a valid claim under  Article  8.   He  found  that  despite
    having had ample opportunity to deal with  the  issues  raised  in  her
    decision letter by the Secretary of State the appellant had not done so
    in documentary or oral evidence.  Those are findings  which  the  judge
    was  perfectly  entitled  to  reach  on  the  evidence  both  oral  and
    documentary before him.  He found, as he was to express in his  reasons
    at paragraph 19, conflict  between  the  appellant's  account  and  the
    Revenue letter of October 2009  which  he  could  not  resolve  in  the
    appellant's favour.  He  considered  that  under  the  Regulations  the
    evidence which had been provided did not satisfy  the  requirements  on
    the appellant to show the claimed family membership for a period of ten
    years nor the exercise of treaty rights  for  a  continuous  five  year
    period during the marriage.

12. In addition he considered the claim under the  well-known  Razgar  R  v
    (SSHD) [2204] UKHL 27 principles and found that the  original  decision
    was proportionate and therefore reasonable in  all  the  circumstances.
    He considered and found, notwithstanding the appellant's  residence  in
    the UK for thirteen years or thereabouts,  that  he  had  no  right  to
    remain here permanently.  He  further  found  that  the  appellant  has
    skills which are eminently transferable and which could be used by  him
    to find employment in Algeria.  He found that his  private  life  would
    continue in all its essential  elements  and  that  his  preference  to
    remain  here  could  not  be  satisfied  on  the   evidence   provided.
    Accordingly the judge  in  the  Tribunal  below  dismissed  the  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's refusal.

13. We find that the judge was  entitled  to  find  as  he  did,  that  the
    appellant was required to satisfy the Tribunal of both aspects  of  his
    former spouse's employment or self-employment upon which he  sought  to
    rely despite the fact that she no longer resided in the UK.  Further we
    find that the judge was entitled to dismiss the claim that she had been
    self-employed throughout the period from 2003 when all  the  Revenue  &
    Customs documentation showed that  she  had  not  registered  as  self-
    employed until 2009 and that after that date  had  merely  provided  or
    there had been provided to the Revenue on her behalf or in her  name  a
    series of back  calculations  purporting  to  go  back  to  the  period
    beginning in 2003.  He also found, as he  was  entitled  to,  that  the
    anomaly,  or  discrepancy,  between  the  payslips  provided  and   the
    Revenue's records that no  such  national  insurance  number  had  been
    issued to his former spouse and that the tax  code  appeared  incorrect
    were material discrepancies and  that  in  the  absence  of  any  other
    evidence he was entitled to conclude that such  discrepancies  had  not
    been adequately explained and  could  not  support  the  contention  of
    continuous  self-employment  by  the  spouse  throughout  the  relevant
    period.

14. Accordingly this appeal is dismissed and the determination of 5 January
    2015 stands.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 6 May 2015

Mrs Justice McGowan
