
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29428/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 August 2014                             |On 2 September 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

            DESIGNATED JUDGE OF THE FIRST TIER TRIBUNAL J M LEWIS

                                   Between

                     mr Digvijaysinh Ghanshyamsinh Gohil
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Syed-Ali of Immigration Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The History of Events

 1. The Appellant, Mr Digvijaysinh Ghanshyamsinh Gohil,  is  a  citizen  of
    India.  He was in the UK with leave  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Migrant under the points-based system.  His leave  expired  on  31  May
    2012.

 2. On a date which I cannot immediately identify,  the  Appellant  applied
    through his previous solicitors to extend his  leave.   The  Respondent
    wrote to his solicitors on 31 October 2012.  The letter stated that the
    Appellant had been  informed  by  letters  of  27  June,  8  August,  7
    September  and  5  October  2012  that  he  was  required  to  make  an
    appointment to  provide  his  biometric  information  as  part  of  his
    application for leave to remain in the UK, and that he had not done so.
      His  application  was  therefore  being  returned  as   invalid   and
    arrangements had been made to return the fee which had accompanied  it.



 3. At the error of law hearing before me Mr Syed-Ali, who said that he had
    only very recently been instructed, said that the Appellant stated that
    he did not receive any of the four letters requesting him  to  make  an
    appointment to provide his  biometric  information  and  that  he  only
    became aware of this from the Respondent's letter of 31  October  2012.
    The Appellant's witness statement, which was submitted  by  his  former
    solicitors on 1 November 2013  and  which  contains  his  narrative  of
    events, makes no reference to this.

 4. On 31 December 2012 the Appellant submitted a further  application  for
    leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant  under
    the points-based system and for a biometric residence permit.

 5. This application was refused by the  Respondent  in  a  letter  to  the
    Appellant of 29 June 2013.  The letter stated that his leave  to  enter
    had expired on 31 May 2012 but he had not submitted a valid application
    for leave to remain until 31 December 2012, which was more than 28 days
    after the expiry of his previous leave.  The Confirmation of Acceptance
    for Studies (CAS) which he had submitted was from a college  which  was
    not listed as a Tier 4 sponsor.  So no points could be  awarded  for  a
    CAS nor, therefore, for maintenance (funds).  As the Appellant's  leave
    to enter had expired on 31 May 2012, he did not have leave to enter  at
    the time of his application.  Nor, therefore, did he have  a  right  of
    appeal against the decision.

 6. The Appellant gave  notice  of  appeal  on  11  July  2013,  seeking  a
    determination on the papers.  This was done by Judge Hunter sitting  at
    Stoke.  In a determination of 27 May 2014,  promulgated  the  following
    day, the appeal was allowed.

 7. Judge Hunter considered whether the Appellant  had  a  valid  right  of
    appeal.   He considered a direction previously  made  by  the  Tribunal
    that, in the light of Basnet (validity  of  application  -  Respondent)
    [2012] UKUT 00113 (IAC), the onus of proof was  on  the  Respondent  to
    show that the correct fee was not paid, and that the Respondent  should
    therefore do so.  Finding that  the  Respondent  had  not  demonstrated
    this, the judge considered the application  substantively  and  allowed
    it.  He did not consider the issue raised in the refusal letter  of  29
    June 2013 that, because the Appellant's leave to enter had expired more
    than 28 days before he made his application, he had no right of appeal.



 8. On 4 June 2014 the Respondent sought permission to  appeal.   This  was
    granted on 24 June 2014 by Judge Colyer and supplemented by  subsequent
    procedural directions.

 9. The Appellant attended the error of law hearing before me,  which  took
    the form of submissions.  I have taken  these  into  account,  together
    with the  Respondent's  application  for  permission.   I  reserved  my
    determination.



Determination

10. Both parties recognise - the Respondent in the  permission  application
    and the Appellant in Mr Syed-Ali's submissions to me - that the  reason
    for the rejection of the application was not related to non-payment  of
    a fee.  The papers which  were  before  the  judge  included  from  the
    Appellant's solicitors the Appellant's statement and grounds of appeal.
     The grounds of appeal misled him by discussing the irrelevant issue of
    the fee and not addressing the contention that  the  Appellant  had  no
    right of appeal.  The judge understandably fell into error in  allowing
    the appeal based upon a chain of reasoning premised on a false  factual
    basis and in not considering the contention of the  Respondent  in  the
    refusal letter that the Appellant had no right of appeal.  Had he  done
    so, he would inevitably have concluded that the Appellant had no  right
    of appeal and that the judge therefore had no jurisdiction to entertain
    an appeal.

11. I find that the judge misunderstood the position.   His  discussion  of
    the issue was based upon a mistake of fact  which  led  to  a  material
    error of law. I accordingly set the decision  aside  and  consider  the
    appeal afresh.

12. Mr Syed-Ali did not meet the contention that  because  the  application
    had  been  submitted  more  than  28  days  after  the  expiry  of  the
    Appellant's leave he did not have a right of appeal.  Nor could he have
    done so.  It is plain that the Appellant had no right of appeal.

13. Mr Syed-Ali submitted that the Respondent had been under an  obligation
    to consider the appeal, submitted out of time, in the same way  as  she
    had to consider appeals submitted within time;  that  she  should  have
    followed the policy discussed in Patel (revocation of sponsor licence -
    fairness) India [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC) of allowing the Appellant a  60
    day period to find a new college which would issue him with  a CAS; and
    that a failure to do so render the decision unlawful and required it to
    be remitted to her.  These submissions are not  legally  correct.   The
    Respondent had no obligation to consider an out of time application.

14. The beginning and the end of the matter is that the  Appellant  had  no
    right of appeal.  Having set the determination  aside,  I  resolve  the
    issue simply by recording this to be the case.

Decision

15. The original determination contained an error of law and is set  aside.



16. The Appellant has no right of appeal.

Signed
    Dated: 1 September 2014



Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal J M Lewis
