
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29196/2014,
     IA/29204/2014, IA/29213/2014,
     IA/29219/2014, IA/29224/2014,
     IA/29231/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 June 2016                                |On 5 October 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    LORD TURNBULL OF THE COURT OF SESSION
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

|                |gn e                                      |First Appellant |
|                |o o e                                     |Second Appellant|
|                |s c e                                     |Third Appellant |
|                |f i e                                     |Fourth Appellant|
|                |f d e                                     |Fifth Appellant |
|                |d c c e                                   |Sixth Appellant |


                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss M Sirikanda, Solicitor, Ahmed Raheman Carr
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       appellants. Breach of this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of
       court. We make this order because the case concerns the  welfare  of
       children and they are entitled to privacy.

    2. This case comes before  us  following  a  transfer  order.   It  has
       previously been heard by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A  Black  who
       found an error of law and set aside the decision of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal. She gave reasons  for  that  finding  in  a  Decision  and
       Reasons sent to the parties on 21 April 2016.  A  copy  is  appended
       hereto.

    3. Deputy Judge Black also ordered the Respondent to file and serve any
       written submissions within 14 days of her decision that there was an
       error of law being sent to the parties.  No  such  submissions  were
       sent.

    4. The Appellants appeal a decision of the Respondent on 9 July 2014 to
       remove them from the United Kingdom. It is the Appellants' case that
       their removal would contravene the United Kingdom's obligation under
       the European Convention on Human Rights and, more particularly, that
       the Third, Fourth and Fifth Appellants were entitled to remain under
       paragraph 276ADE of HC 395 because, at the date of application, they
       had lived in the United Kingdom continuously for at  least  7  years
       and it would not be reasonable to expect them to leave. We note that
       the application was originally made on 3 April 2013 and reconsidered
       on 9 July 2014. The decision of 9 July 2014,  the  decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal that Deputy Judge Black has set aside and Deputy
       Judge Black's Decision and Reasons all considered the  case  on  the
       basis that the Third, Fourth and Fifth Appellants were  entitled  to
       consideration under paragraph 276 ADE. We deduce therefore that  the
       reconsidered decision assumed a date  of  application  that  brought
       those Appellants within the rule. Clearly it is too late now  to  go
       behind that and Mr Bramble did not seek to change  the  Respondent's
       position.

    5. There were written submissions before the  Upper  Tribunal  dated  4
       April 2016 and an addendum to those  written  submissions  from  the
       Appellants provided to us the day before the hearing.

    6. The Appellants are all members of the same family and  are  citizens
       of Nigeria. The First and Second  appellants  are  married  to  each
       other. The First Appellant was born in 1966 and she is the  wife  of
       the Second Appellant who was born in 1960.

    7. It is clear that the First and Second Appellants entered the  United
       Kingdom with permission. The First Appellant entered as a visitor in
       September 2005 and left  during  the  currency  of  her  leave.  She
       returned in February  2006  shortly  before  her  leave  lapsed  and
       remained. The Second  Appellant  was  given  entry  clearance  as  a
       visitor  on  several  occasions,  most  recently  in  October  2008.
       Although the First and Second Appellants' appeal may well be subject
       to the same decision as the appeals of the other  Appellants,  their
       circumstances are rather different from  those  of  the  other  four
       Appellants who are their children. Put simply, the First and  Second
       Appellant have exhibited an irresponsible  attitude  to  immigration
       control. That cannot be said of their children.

    8. The decision letter  dated  9  July  2014  states,  correctly,  that
       neither the First nor the Second Appellant are eligible for leave to
       remain as parents because they  are  not  settled  lawfully  in  the
       United Kingdom. Nevertheless, the letter accepts, unremarkably, that
       the First and Second Appellants are  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
       parental relationship with minor children  who  are  in  the  United
       Kingdom and have been for a least seven years immediately  preceding
       the application.

    9. It is the Respondent's contention that it would not be  unreasonable
       to expect the children to leave the United Kingdom.

   10. The Third  Appellant  was  born  in  January  2002  and  the  Fourth
       Appellant was born in April 2004.  They entered the  United  Kingdom
       in September 2005.  It follows that the Third Appellant  is  now  14
       years old and has lived in the United Kingdom for very  nearly  nine
       years.  The Fourth Appellant is now 12 years old and  has  lived  in
       the United Kingdom for nearly seven  years.   The  Fifth  and  Sixth
       appellants have lived all their lives in the  United  Kingdom.   The
       Fifth Appellant was born in September 2006 and so is  now  about  10
       years old.  The Sixth Appellant was born in August 2011  and  so  is
       now 5 years old.

   11. This is not a case where we  have  the  benefit  of  an  independent
       social worker's report or other objective evidence about the family.
        It appears to us, and is not in dispute, that the  Appellants  live
       together  as  a  nuclear  family  which  is  generally   happy   and
       supportive. There are school reports and supporting letters  from  a
       Church pastor, a youth club and a sports club.

   12. The evidence points to the family members having made their home  in
       the United Kingdom and much of their social life is enjoyed  through
       associations that they have made at a local independent  evangelical
       church.  It is to the discredit of the First and  Second  Appellants
       that they have established a private and family live in  the  United
       Kingdom knowing that they have been there without leave. That  point
       aside (we will return to it below, it is not insignificant) we  know
       nothing to their discredit.  Further, as far as we are aware,  there
       are  no  obvious  compelling  reasons  that  make  it   particularly
       desirable for them to remain in the United  Kingdom.   For  example,
       these are not appeals by people with particular medical, educational
       or social needs.

   13. The Appellants remind us that we are obliged by Section  55  of  the
       Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  to  make  the  best
       interests of the children a prime consideration.   We cannot do that
       without ascertaining what we find their best interests to be.

   14. In the absence of contrary pointers, we regard it as clearly in  the
       best interests of the minor Appellants to live with  their  siblings
       and parents and that family unity is, generally, a  more  compelling
       factor than the financial and other advantages of remaining  in  the
       United Kingdom.  Nevertheless, the evidence points to  the  children
       being settled there and we have no doubt that as far as  each  child
       is concerned it is in that child's best interests to remain  in  the
       United Kingdom with the rest of his family if that can  be  achieved
       lawfully.  It does not follow from this that  the  appeals  will  be
       allowed because children cannot always  have  their  best  interests
       satisfied but we must bear in mind as a primary  consideration  that
       that is where their best interests lie.

   15. We also find that the children have  little  for  them  in  Nigeria.
       There is a supplementary statement from the second appellant  saying
       that the children have "minimal understanding of our local  language
       in Nigeria".  The Second Appellant explained that he  and  his  wife
       tried  to  teach  their  children  the  language  but  there  is  no
       opportunity to speak it  outside  the  home  and  they  have  little
       incentive to learn.  Although the evidential basis for this claim is
       exceedingly  thin,  consisting  of  little  more  than  an  unsigned
       statement, we accept it because it is so inherently plausible.   The
       parents do not suggest the children have no  knowledge  of  a  local
       language in Nigeria or that they could not learn it, but assert  and
       we accept, that they do not presently speak a Nigerian language.

   16. We have read and considered the oral  and  written  submissions  and
       have considered the evidence mentioned there include statements  and
       letters from the Third, Fourth  and  Fifth  Appellants.   Again  the
       claims  are  unremarkable  and  all  the  better   for   not   being
       exaggerated.

   17. We accept that the Third Appellant  is  doing  well  at  school  and
       details are given of his  successful  involvement  in  the  national
       "Magistrate's Mock Trial Competition" and  to  his  being  a  useful
       goalkeeper.  He is also involved in church work.

   18. His sister, the Fourth Appellant, is a popular girl at school and is
       well thought of.  She has been given an  award  as  an  "outstanding
       achiever" and is particularly involved in the local youth club  that
       the Third Appellant also attends.

   19. We have seen, and accept, similarly encouraging school reports about
       the Fifth Appellant.

   20. We make it clear that they are not to be given  any  special  status
       because they are doing well at school.  Any  entitlement  to  remain
       does not rest on academic success. The point is that  their  success
       at school shows that they are integrated into the community  in  the
       United Kingdom.  Life in the United Kingdom is not merely  the  only
       life that they know but it is a life  that  they  are  living  well.
       They throw themselves into the opportunities that life  gives  them.
       This shows that it is there that they belong.

   21. The Third, Fourth and Fifth Appellants  have  lived  in  the  United
       Kingdom continuously for at least seven years.  If it "would not  be
       reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the United  Kingdom"  in
       each of their cases then they  are  entitled  to  remain  under  the
       rules. The key point is whether their circumstances come within  the
       scope of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) which applies where  a  person  "is
       under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the  UK  for
       at least seven years (discounting any period of imprisonment) and it
       would not be reasonable to expect the appellant to leave the UK).

   22. The Respondent has clearly decided that it  is  reasonable  for  the
       Third, Fourth and Fifth Appellants to remove to  Nigeria  but  gives
       little justification for  this  finding  except  for  asserting  the
       parents had no leave to be in the United Kingdom and they  would  be
       returned as a family and  that  there  is  a  functioning  education
       system in Nigeria.

   23. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the  children  had  secured
       cultural ties with Nigeria because of their parents and  that  these
       were reinforced by the  "African/Nigerian  cultural  ethos"  of  the
       Church that they attended. We accept this but cannot give these ties
       much weight. The fact that they know a bit about  Nigeria  and  some
       African (including Nigerian) people does not make it reasonable  for
       the Third, Fourth and Fifth Appellants to live there after they have
       spent more than seven years of their lives in the United Kingdom.

   24. We agree with the Respondent that the children would have some  sort
       of education in Nigeria and they would, probably, adapt  and  manage
       there because that is what  children  do.  However,  being  able  to
       manage is a higher test then the rules require and is not at all the
       same as saying that it is "reasonable" for the child  to  leave  the
       United Kingdom. The children have their  own  lives  in  the  United
       Kingdom.

   25. We find much wisdom in the Second  Appellant'  Additional  Statement
       dated 18 August 2015 at paragraph 3 where he says:

  "There is a huge difference in moving a child like [the Third  Appellant]
  from a country such as England to Australia or another first world modern
  country with similar cultures and facilities to moving to a  third  world
  country such as Nigeria, where the  education  system  lags  far  behind,
  children are subjected to physical  punishment  and  the  facilities  are
  severely lacking."

   26. We agree that the removal of the children would involve a sever jolt
       to their way of living. It would not only involve giving up most  of
       the relationships that they have formed  outside  the  home  but  it
       would  involve  learning  new  life  skills  in  a  very   different
       community.

   27. The decision of the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) and  Others,  R
       (on the application of) the Upper Tribunal (Immigration  and  Asylum
       Chamber) and Another [2016] EWCA Civ 705 was handed down on  7  July
       2016 after we had heard this appeal. We have not asked  for  further
       submissions.  Clearly we have no intention of ignoring the  guidance
       given by the Court of Appeal which binds us.

   28. Unremarkably, given the history of the courts' attitudes to children
       who have been in the United Kingdom for more than  seven  years,  it
       was recognised throughout that case that the seven years'  residence
       in the life of a child is a significant factor in favour of allowing
       the child to remain. We also recognise, following MA,  that  all  of
       the circumstances have to  be  considered  in  determining  what  is
       reasonable in the  case  of  any  particular  child.   For  example,
       something that is reasonable in the case of a  child  whose  parents
       have overstayed may not be reasonable in the case of children  whose
       parents have behaved in a particularly unpleasant and  unlawful  way
       so that their removal becomes particularly desirable.

   29. In saying this we recognise that although the binding  authority  is
       clear, the Court of Appeal might have been thought  to  signal  some
       dissatisfaction on its part with the state of the law on this point.
       If the dissatisfaction that we perceive is  well  founded  that  the
       Appellants' cases are strengthened.

   30. The written submissions asserts that neither of the first or  second
       appellants  have  criminal  convictions  and  are  not  liable   for
       deportation.  That is true but rather overlooks the fact  that  they
       are liable to be removed from the United Kingdom because for much of
       the time that they have been there  they  have  been  there  without
       permission. Generally, overstaying is a  criminal  offence  although
       one that  is  in  our  experience  rarely  prosecuted.  Mr  Bramble,
       rightly, emphasised that the First and Second Appellants  had  shown
       scant regard for immigration control. Their behaviour is not benign.
        There is an important social reason in removing  them.  Immigration
       control depends on enforcement but, in the  absence  of  aggravating
       factors, we find that it is not a  strong  reason  that  makes  much
       impact on the reasonableness of removing the children who have spent
       seven years or more in the United Kingdom.

   31. It follows that we find that it would  not  be  reasonable  for  the
       Third, Fourth and Fifth Appellants to leave the United  Kingdom  and
       we allow their appeals under paragraph 276ADE of HC 395.

   32. We  now  consider  the  appeals  of  the  First,  Second  and  Sixth
       Appellants under article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
       rights and particularly  with  reference  to  Section  117B  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

   33. We  recognise  (and  have  already  acknowledged)  that  maintaining
       effective immigration control is in the  public  interest  and  that
       little weight should be given to a private life established  when  a
       person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully. However, we accept  that
       the First and Second Appellant are willing  to  work  and  do  speak
       English.

   34. In their cases were remind ourselves that section  117B(6)  provides
       that:

  "In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,  the  public
  interest does not require the person's removal where-

  (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a
  qualifying child, and

  (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the  United
  Kingdom".

   35. We have found that it would not be reasonable to expect the children
       the leave the United Kingdom and so we find that the public interest
       does not require removal.

   36. This is a case where the public interest in removal is outweighed by
       the interests of the Third, Fourth and Fifth Appellants and we allow
       the appeals on the First and Second  Appellants  with  reference  to
       article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

   37. We similarly allow the appeal of the Sixth Appellant. Much  of  what
       say about the older children applies in his case too but in  a  more
       dilute way. The strongest point in his favour is  that  it  is  very
       desirable that he remains with his brother, sisters and parents.

   38. We make it clear that this is not a decision we would  have  reached
       if only the parents  had  to  be  considered.   Although  they  have
       established private and family life in the United Kingdom it is void
       of exceptional features and has largely been established  when  they
       have been in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  They  are  citizens  of
       Nigeria who would ordinarily would  be  expected  to  live  in  that
       country.  It is solely because they are parents of children who have
       been in the United Kingdom  for  long  enough  to  have  established
       weighty reasons to be allowed to remain that we allow their appeals.

   39. The First and Second Appellants also need  to  understand  that  our
       decision does not entitle them to settle in the United  Kingdom.  It
       is for the Respondent to decide what leave to give them.

Decision

   40. The appeals of the First, Second and Sixth Appellants are allowed on
       human rights grounds.

   41. The appeals of the Third and Fourth Appellants are allowed under the
       Immigration Rules.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 28 September 2016              |



                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29196/2014
     IA/29204/2014, IA/29213/2014
     IA/29219/2014, IA/29224/2014
     IA/29231/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 April 2016                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                         ms g n e (first appellant)
                         mr o o e (second appellant)
                       master s c e (third appellant)
                        miss f i e (fourth appellant)
                        miss f d e (fifth appellant)
                                master d c c
                             e (sixth appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE )
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms S Sirikanda (Solicitor, Ahmed Rahman Carr
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clark, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Nigeria.   The  first  and  second
    appellants are the parents of the remaining appellants.  The appellants
    appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal (Judge Dean) ("FTT") who  in
    a decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  dismissed  their  appeal  on
    immigration and human rights grounds.

Background

2.    The appellant's respective dates of birth  are  23  October  1966,  30
    June 1960, 15 January 2002, 30 April  2004,  5  September  2006  and  3
    August 2011.  The fifth and sixth appellants were born in the UK.   The
    third and fourth appellants entered the UK on  4  September  2005  with
    valid visitor entry until 22 April 2007.  The six months leave to enter
    expired on 4 March 2006.

Issues under appeal
3.    The issues considered by the  FTT  were  whether  or  not  the  third,
    fourth and fifth appellants satisfied the Rules under Appendix FM  with
    reference to paragraph 276ADE(iv) and, further in consequence of  their
    appeals being allowed under the Rules, whether the  first,  second  and
    sixth appellants right to family life under Article  8  ECHR  would  be
    breached.  It was accepted by the FTT that the third, fourth and  fifth
    appellants were under the age of 18 years and had lived continuously in
    the UK for at least seven years and  were  "qualified  children".   The
    issue to be determined by the FTT  was  whether  or  not  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the three children  to  leave  the  UK.   The  FTT
    dismissed  the  appeals  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  found  no
    compelling  circumstances  not  recognised  by  the  Rules  to  justify
    consideration of Article 8 outside of the  Rules.   The  FTT  concluded
    that the family would be removed  together  and  could  continue  their
    family life in Nigeria and in all respects their private life could  be
    carried out in all essential respects in Nigeria.

Grounds of Appeal

4.   Ground 1 - The FTT erred by failing to conduct  an  assessment  of  the
    best interests of the children.  This was necessary  to  determine  the
    appeals under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules and under Article  8  ECHR.
    (JO and Others (Section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517  (IAC))  [6]
    (R on the application of Sandia Behary) [2013] EWHC 3575 (70).  Further
    the FTT failed to  identify  the  views  and  wishes  of  the  children
    themselves about leaving the UK.  The third appellant had  submitted  a
    handwritten letter to the FTT to which no reference was made.

5.   Ground 2 - The FTT failed to give adequate reasons for finding that  it
    would be reasonable for the third appellant to leave the UK and  failed
    to give individual consideration of the circumstances of  each  of  the
    three children under the Immigration Rules.  (Azimi-Moayed [2013]  UKUT
    197 (13).  The FTT erred by not  distinguishing  the  position  of  the
    three appellants as assessed under paragraph 276ADE and failed  to  set
    out an analysis of their respective circumstances in the UK.

Permission

6.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Pooler  on  26
    February 2016 in the following terms

         "It is arguable that in deciding under paragraph 276ADE(iv) of  the
         Immigration Rules whether it would be reasonable  for  a  child  to
         leave the UK, the duties  which  arise  under  Section  55  of  the
         Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  ("section  55")
         require the judge to have regard to the child's best interest;  and
         that the judge did not  reach  findings  as  to  where  their  best
         interests lay.


         It is also arguable that such a duty arose separately in respect of
         each child and that the judge failed to undertake  such  individual
         assessment or to give adequate reasons for her findings.


         It is less likely that paragraph  9  of  the  grounds  discloses  a
         material error of law insofar as it relates to  Article  8  because
         there is no specific allegation that the  judge  erred  in  law  in
         concluding  that  there  were  no  grounds  for   considering   the
         appellants' circumstances outside the Rule; but since permission is
         to be granted all grounds may be argued."

Rule 24 Response

7.   The respondent opposed the appeal in the response dated 3 March 2016.

8.   It was conceded that the FTT failed to expressly refer  to  Section  55
    but the  issues  were  nevertheless  considered  in  substance  in  the
    determination.  The FTT expressly took into  account  the  guidance  in
    Azimi-Moayed which makes  clear  that  the  starting  position  is  for
    children to be with both parents.  The FTT dismissed the appeals of the
    first, second and sixth appellants under the Rules  and  observed  that
    the family would be removed together  which  chimes  with  the  general
    approach in EV (Philippines).  It was submitted that the FTT  undertook
    a comprehensive consideration of the circumstances of the family in the
    round and took  into  account  the  length  of  stay  in  the  UK,  the
    appellants' integration including  time  spent  in  education  and  the
    appellants' cultural connections to Nigeria.  The FTT further took into
    account the contention that education was better in the UK.   It  found
    that the children would be able to adapt to new environments and  their
    educational development  could  continue  in  Nigeria.   There  was  no
    evidence of health concerns and the official language  of  Nigeria  was
    English.  The grounds amounted to a disagreement with the well-reasoned
    findings of the FTT.

Error of Law Hearing

7.   At the hearing before me  Ms  Sirikanda  expanded  on  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  The  detailed  submissions  are  set  out  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings.  She relied on the following decisions MK (best  interests
    of child) India [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC), EV  (Philippines)  and  Others
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874, JO and Others (Section  55  duty)  Nigeria  [2014]
    UKUT 00517 (IAC), AM (Section 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) and R
    (on the application of Sandia Behary  [2013]  EWHC  3575  (Admin).   Mr
    Clark relied on the Rule 24 response and PD and  Others  (Article  8  -
    conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC).

Discussion and Decision

8.   I decided that the FTT materially erred in law.  I took the  view  that
    the arguments were finely balanced.  I  was  greatly  assisted  by  the
    guidance in the recent  Tribunal  decision  of  PD  and  Others   which
    referred to EV (Philippines) and JO  and  Others  which   are  also  of
    relevance to the present matter.

9.   In an otherwise thorough and detailed  decision  and  reasons,  I  find
    that the FTT failed to properly assess where the best interests of  the
    children lay and in particular with reference to the  third  appellant.
    No reference was made to the statutory provisions for  section  55  but
    also the FTT failed to consider or acknowledge the wishes of the  third
    appellant who had provided a letter setting out his wishes for the  FTT
    to consider.  Furthermore, I  am  satisfied  that  the  FTT  took  into
    account issues which had no  bearing  on  the  best  interests  of  the
    children, namely their immigration status[17].  Whilst  accepting  that
    the question of where the best interests of the children lie will be  a
    primary consideration, it is nevertheless an important    consideration
    which must be carried out in full and adequately so  as  to  illuminate
    the FTT's assessment  of "reasonableness  of  return"  under  paragraph
    276ADE(iv).

10.   The  Upper  Tribunal  has  given  clear  guidance  in  PD  [39]   that
    reasonableness  requires  a  balance  of   all   material   facts   and
    considerations and is a fact-sensitive  assessment.  PD  sets  out  the
    correct approach to be followed in an appeal of  this  type  where  the
    private lives of the children are  in  effect  the  significant  factor
    leading to consideration of Article 8 for the parents.

11.  In reaching its decision the FTT engaged with the  evidence  concerning
    the children's best  interest  to  an  extent.  Much  of  the  decision
    consisted of generalised reasoning and failed to focus on each  of  the
    children who are the subjects of this appeal [16].  There  was  nowhere
    in the decision and reasons any finding as to where the children's best
    interests lay whether that be in remaining  in  the  UK  continuing  in
    education with their parents or not.  Such findings  would  necessarily
    have informed and be material to the FTT's assessment of reasonableness
    under the Rules.  Accordingly I find that  the  failures  amount  to  a
    material error in law.

12.  Accordingly I set aside the decision made.  As to  future  disposal  Ms
    Sirikanda provided written submissions to be taken into account by this
    Tribunal  in  remaking  any  decision.   Mr  Clark  had  not  had   the
    opportunity to consider those submissions.

13.  It is the intention of this Tribunal  to  remake  the  decision  having
    regard to the evidence that was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  14.
    Thereafter the Tribunal will  remake  the  decision  based  on  written
    submissions.

Notice of Decision

14.     There is a material error of law.  The decision is set aside.

     The respondent is directed to file and serve  any  written  submissions
    within fourteen days of the issue of this decision and reasons - a copy
    of the same to be served on the appellants' solicitors.  Thereafter the
    UT will remake the decision of the FTT.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court  proceedings.  The  four
appellants are children.


Signed                                  Date 15.4.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I will consider this issue at the end of the proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 15.4.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
