
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/29645/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 26 January 2015                   |On 3 February 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                             HARISH GANNAPUREDDY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Lee of Salam & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Thorne promulgated on 16 January  2014  which  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 24 July 1986 and is a national of India.

 4. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom as a  student  on  10  October
    2009 and his leave was extended until 23 May 2013.On 23  May  2013  the
    Appellant  applied for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on  the
    basis of his relationship with Abbey Heather Kendrick

 5. On 27  June  2013  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application and issued directions for his removal. The  refusal  letter
    gave a number of  reasons:  the  Respondent  did  not  accept  that  Ms
    Kendrick was a 'partner' for the purpose of the Appendix FM as they had
    not been together long enough; he could not benefit from EX.1 as he had
    no partner or child in the United Kingdom and it  was  not  established
    that there were insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  outside  the
    United Kingdom ;  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276 ADE of the Rules nor would his removal  be  a  breach  of
    Article 8 of ECHR.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Thorne  ("the  Judge")  dismissed   the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision. The Judge heard evidence from the Appellant,  Ms
    Kendrick and her father and found that he accepted that ms Kendrick was
    a partner for the purpose of Appendix  FM;  it  appears  to  have  been
    conceded that the Appellant could not meet the  financial  requirements
    of the Rules and therefore the Judge  went  on  to  consider  paragraph
    EX.1; he did not accept that the Appellant met the evidential burden of
    establishing that he and  his  partner  continuing  their  family  life
    outside of the United Kingdom finding it both practically possible  and
    not unduly harsh;  he  found  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE; he  found  no  arguable  grounds  for
    granting leave outside the Rules under Article 8 ; in  the  alternative
    he considered the case under Article 8 and found no breach  of  article
    8.

 7. Grounds of appeal were lodged which  were  initially  refused  and  the
    application was renewed. On 6 March 2014  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Reeds
    gave permission to appeal.

 8. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Ms  Lee  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that :

      a) She relied on the case of MM (Lebanon) and others [2014]  EWCA  Civ
         985 to suggest that by imposing minimum income  requirements  there
         was an interference that required justification.

      b) The Judge failed to take into account the evidence about the safety
         and security issues for the Appellant's partner in India..

      c) There had been no consideration  of  the  wife's  circumstances  in
         accordance with Beoku-Betts v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2008] UKHL 39.

 9. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Mc Vitie submitted that :

      a) There was nothing in MM to suggest  that  the  court  was  able  to
         revisit the issue of the maintenance  levels.  MM  found  that  the
         Respondent was right to set such levels and  the  levels  set  were
         proportionate.

      b) The suggestion that the Judge had failed to take into account Beoku
         Betts was not argued in the grounds.

      c) In relation to the issue of the security of the Appellant's partner
         in India the Appellant  is  relying  on  Foreign  and  Commonwealth
         Travel warnings that apply in India and a  number  of  other  major
         world cities in relation to lone women travelling. It was a warning
         to be careful and no more. There is no disproportionate  levels  of
         violence in India that would make return unreasonable.

      d) If the Appellant could not meet the requirements of the  Rules  the
         answer was to make a fresh application

The Law

10.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law. Unless an Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have  taken  no  account  of  evidence  that  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration judge concludes that the story told is untrue. If  a  point
    of evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is
    a failure to take into account a material consideration.

Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

13. Ground 1 argues that the Judge failed to follow the guidance in MM  and
    Other v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  EWHC  1900
    (Admin) where the court had found that the minimum income levels set by
    the  Rules  the  measures  were  arguably  so  onerous  as  to   be   a
    disproportionate interference with family life and thus a violation  of
    Article 8. However  I  note  that  it  was  always  accepted  that  the
    Appellant could not meet the financial requirements of the Rules and it
    is not clear on what basis it was argued  before  the  Judge  that  the
    income levels should not have been applied to this Appellant.Even if at
    the time of the decision the Judge failed to take into MM it was not an
    error that was material as MM was overturned on appeal. In MM (Lebanon)
    and others [2014] EWCA  Civ  985  it  was  said  that  in  setting  the
    maintenance limits the Secretary of State had "discharged the burden of
    demonstrating that the interference was both the minimum necessary  and
    strikes a fair balance between the interests of  the  groups  concerned
    and the community in general. Individuals will have different views  on
    what constitutes the minimum income requirements needed  to  accomplish
    the stated policy aims. In my judgment it is not  the  court's  job  to
    impose its own view unless, objectively judged, the levels  chosen  are
    to be characterised as irrational, or inherently unjust  or  inherently
    unfair. In my view they cannot be". MM when taken  with  the  statutory
    presumptions in new paragraph 117B(3) of the Rules, inserted by s.19 of
    the Immigration Act 2014, with  effect  from  28  July  2014  (see  The
    Immigration  Act  2014  (Commencement  No.1,  Transitory   and   Saving
    Provisions) Order 2014 2014/1820), effectively closes the door  on  any
    argument either within or without the  Rules  that  figures  less  than
    those set out in the Rules might be acceptable.

14. Ground 2 argues that the Judge erred in his assessment of whether there
    were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  Appellant  and  his   partner
    continuing their family life in India. The Judge set out his reasons at
    paragraphs 29 to 33 of the decision. The grounds accept that the  Judge
    directed himself correctly, which he did at paragraph 31  by  reference
    to all of the relevant caselaw, but applied the test incorrectly in the
    Appellant's case. I reject that argument. The Judge took  into  account
    all of the relevant factors: the couple were young, fit, well educated,
    resourceful,  speak  one  of  the  official  languages  of  India;  the
    Appellant's partner knew of his immigration status when  they  married;
    there was no adequate evidence that the  sponsors  concerns  about  the
    security situation were well founded or reasonable given that the  only
    evidence relied on was an FCO advice about caution  being  required  if
    travelling in India and therefore there was no reason  to  conclude  it
    would be unjustifiably harsh to work elsewhere in India .  This  ground
    is an argument about the weight given by  the  Judge  to  the  evidence
    produced and is such not an  error  of  law  as  the  conclusions  were
    clearly open to him.

15. The third ground argues that the Judge has failed to take into  account
    the Appellant's relationship with his  partner  and  her  family.  This
    argument has no merit. The Judge directed himself correctly taking into
    account Razgar, Beoku Betts and Chikwamba (paragraph 48). He heard  and
    recorded in detail the evidence of  the  Appellant's  partner  and  her
    father and the fact that she had close family  members  in  the  United
    Kingdom (paragraph 23) I remind myself  of  what  was  said  in  Shizad
    (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) Afghanistan [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
    about the requirement for sufficient reasons to be given in a  decision
    in headnote (1) : "Although there is a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
    explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which an  appeal
    is determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as a
    whole makes sense, having  regard  to  the  material  accepted  by  the
    judge." Against this background of evidence which  the  Judge  did  not
    reject he further detailed the factors that he  took  into  account  at
    paragraph 63  which  again  specifically  related  to  the  Appellant's
    partner. Therefore the grounds are no more than an attempt to re  argue
    the case.

16. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge properly directed  himself  and
    his  decision  when  read  as  a  whole  set  out  findings  that  were
    sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

17. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

18. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date 2.2.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

