
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29250/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 September 2015                         |On 6 October 2015             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                           Mr Hafiz Muhammad Imran
                       (anonymity direction Not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. R. Layne, Counsel instructed by Wilsons
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the  decision  of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Majid promulgated on 24 March 2015 in  which  he
       dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  decision
       to  refuse  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under   the
       Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006.   Permission
       to appeal was granted on the ground that it was  arguable  that  the
       decision was inadequately reasoned in relation to the main issue  of
       dependency.

    2. I heard submissions from  both  representatives  following  which  I
       announced my decision that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       involved the making of an error of law and  I  set  out  my  reasons
       below.

Submissions

    3. Mr. Layne submitted that it was a very short decision.  At paragraph
       [10] the judge stated that the Appellant had not persuaded him  that
       he had been a dependant of his  brother-in-law  but  had  failed  to
       explain why this was so.   Financial  documents  had  been  provided
       which showed money being sent by the Appellant's  brother-in-law  to
       the Appellant in Pakistan.  The Appellant's bank statements had also
       been provided which showed money being paid to  him  in  the  United
       Kingdom by his brother-in-law.

    4. He submitted that there had been cogent evidence before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal of the Appellant's financial dependence on his brother-
       in-law, but  there  was  no  analysis  of  these  documents  in  the
       decision.  There was no reference at all to the  evidence  on  which
       the Appellant had relied.  No reasons had been given as to  why  the
       Appellant's evidence had been rejected.  He submitted in  conclusion
       that it was the duty of the judge to assess the evidence and set  it
       out clearly.  He had failed to do that and the decision was woefully
       inadequate.

    5. Mr. Duffy referred to the  Rule  24  response.   He  submitted  that
       paragraph [10] of the decision stated that the  Appellant  had  said
       that his college fees had been paid by his parents, but he  accepted
       that the issue of dependence on his brother-in-law, and the  receipt
       of funds from his brother-in-law, had not been  dealt  with  by  the
       judge and he accepted that it should have been.  He  submitted  that
       where the Appellant had been  denied  a  fair  hearing,  the  proper
       course of action was to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision
    6. In paragraph [10] of  the  decision  the  judge  states  "Of  course
       "dependence" is the most significant issue in this case".   He  then
       goes on to state that the Appellant "has not persuaded  me  that  he
       has been a dependant of his brother-in-law".  No reasons  are  given
       for this finding.  There is no reference  in  the  decision  to  the
       financial evidence provided by the  Appellant,  which  evidence  was
       before the First-tier Tribunal.   Although  there  is  reference  in
       paragraph [10] to the Appellant stating that his  college  fees  had
       been paid by his parents, this in and of itself does not answer  the
       question of whether or not he was dependent on his brother-in-law.

    7. There are no further reasons given in the decision for why the judge
       was not persuaded that the Appellant was dependent on his brother-in-
       law.  In paragraph [13] the judge finds that the Appellant is living
       with his brother-in-law.  In paragraph [14] the judge finds that the
       Appellant's  brother-in-law  occasionally  helped  him  but  he  was
       dependent on his parents.  Again no explanation is  given  for  this
       finding.


    8. I find that the First-tier Tribunal judge failed to give reasons for
       his finding that the Appellant was not dependent on his  brother-in-
       law.  I find that the decision involved the making of  an  error  of
       law capable of affecting the outcome of the decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law.

Accordingly the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 5 October 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

