
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/29171/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6th July 2017                         |  On 13th July 2017                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    M S S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Timson of Counsel instructed by HSK Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge  Burnett  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 24th November 2016.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a male Indian citizen born 28th  July  1991.   On  27th
    March 2015 the Claimant applied for leave to remain in the  UK  as  the
    spouse of a British citizen.

 4. The application was refused on 12th August 2015 with  reference  to  S-
    LTR.1.6.

 5. The Secretary of State concluded that  the  Claimant  had  submitted  a
    TOEIC certificate issued by Educational Testing Service (ETS) which had
    been obtained by deception.  The Secretary of State believed  that  the
    Claimant had employed a proxy test taker.

 6. The Claimant appealed to the FtT who heard the appeal on  7th  November
    2016.  The FtT found that the Secretary of State had  failed  to  prove
    that the Claimant obtained his English language test certificate by the
    use of a proxy tester and therefore allowed the Claimant's appeal.

 7. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was  contended  that  the  FtT  had  erred  by
    failing to give adequate reasons for concluding that the  Claimant  had
    not obtained the ETS certificate by deception.  The Secretary of  State
    had provided generic  witness  statements  from  Peter  Millington  and
    Rebecca Collings and a certificate issued by ETS  confirming  that  the
    Claimant's tests had been declared invalid.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge N J Bennett of the FtT in the
    following terms;

         "Permission to appeal is granted because it is  arguable  that  the
         judge erred by failing to analyse the claim in accordance with  the
         President's decision in SM and Qadir [2016]  UKUT  229  by  finding
         whether the generic  evidence  discharged  the  initial  evidential
         burden and, if so, by finding whether the Appellant had provided an
         innocent explanation and that this failure arguably led  the  judge
         to err in concluding that the Respondent had not  proved  that  the
         Appellant obtained his test certificate fraudulently."

 9. Following the grant of permission the Claimant did not lodge a response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  Directions were issued  making  provision  for  there  to  be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

Submissions

10. Mr McVeety relied upon the grounds contained within the application for
    permission to appeal, and the grant of permission.  I was asked to find
    that the FtT had not adopted the correct approach, and had erred by not
    finding  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  discharged  the  initial
    evidential burden of proof.

11. Mr Timpson argued that the FtT had not materially erred in law.  I  was
    referred to paragraph 24 of the FtT decision in which the FtT described
    the burden of proof as being on the Claimant to establish the facts  in
    respect of the matters relied upon.  Mr  Timpson  submitted  that  this
    indicated that the FtT had accepted that the initial evidential  burden
    had been discharged, and therefore there was a burden on the  Appellant
    to provide an innocent explanation.   The  FtT  had  analysed  all  the
    evidence, and concluded that the  Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to
    discharge the legal burden of proof, and therefore there was  no  error
    of law.

12. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

13. The FtT correctly referred to the relevant case law.  In  paragraph  26
    there is reference to Qadir  [2016]  UKUT  229  (IAC)  and  Shazad  and
    Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615.  The FtT sets out an  extract  from  the
    latter decision, which confirms  that  in  a  case  such  as  this  the
    Secretary of State bears the initial  burden  of  furnishing  proof  of
    deception.  This is an evidential burden,  which  if  satisfied,  means
    that the burden shifts onto the  individual  to  provide  a  plausible,
    innocent explanation and if the individual does so  the  burden  shifts
    back to the Secretary of State.

14. In setting out findings and conclusions the FtT  does  not  demonstrate
    that approach has been followed as there is no reference to the initial
    evidential burden and whether or not this is discharged.

15. It is common ground that the generic statements of Mr Millington and Ms
    Collings, together with specific evidence in relation to an individual,
    such as the certificate issued by ETS confirming that the  test  result
    is invalid,  is  sufficient  to  shift  the  evidential  burden.   That
    evidence was submitted in this case,  and  therefore  it  fell  to  the
    Claimant to provide a plausible innocent explanation.

16. Although there is no specific reference to the evidential burden  being
    satisfied, the FtT must have found that to be the case, because the FtT
    goes on to consider whether the Claimant has provided a  plausible  and
    innocent explanation.  At paragraph 34 there is specific  reference  to
    consideration of the Claimant's explanation.

17. The FtT analyses all material evidence, noting  at  paragraph  35  that
    there "was little evidence presented to me other than  the  Appellant's
    oral evidence that he undertook the test himself."

18. Having examined all the evidence presented, and the Respondent did  not
    present any further evidence, other than the generic witness statements
    and the certificate issued by ETS confirming the test  to  be  invalid,
    the FtT concluded that the Secretary of State had failed  to  discharge
    the legal burden of proof.  The FtT accepted as  a  plausible  innocent
    explanation, the Claimant's account that he undertook the test himself.



19. In my view the  FtT  was  entitled  to  reach  that  conclusion  having
    considered all the evidence, and has given adequate  reasons  for  that
    finding.  Of course it may be said that some FtT judges would not  have
    reached the same conclusion, but that is not relevant, and not the test
    to be considered.

20. The challenge made by the Secretary of State amounts to a  disagreement
    with the conclusion reached  by  the  FtT,  but  does  not  disclose  a
    material error of law.





Notice of Decision

The FtT decision does not disclose a material error of  law.   The  decision
of the FtT stands and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Anonymity

The FtT made an anonymity direction.  I  continue  that  order  pursuant  to
rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   Unless  and
until a Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his  family.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             7th July 2017

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because the decision of the FtT stands so does the decision not  to  make  a
fee award.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             7th July 2017


