
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29211/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 November 2014                  |On 23 December 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                            ms ivy jane velasquez
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss K Reid of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms I Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines born on  12  August  1985
    and she made an application on 27 June 2013 to vary her leave to remain
    and that application was refused on 6 August 2013  and  a  decision  to
    remove her  from  the  UK  was  made  further  to  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Burns considered the appeal on 30  July  2014
    and refused that appeal on 19 August 2014.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was made by  the  appellant  on
    the basis that the judge had failed to identify the  relevant  standard
    of proof on the balance of probabilities and the judge  had  failed  to
    make findings with respect to the emotional and physical dependency  of
    the father on the appellant.

 4. Further it was  considered  that  the  judge  had  not  considered  the
    principles under Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 and had failed  to  weigh
    the  competing  factors  in  a  balancing  exercise  in   relation   to
    proportionality.  Both her parents  were  British  citizens  and  their
    Article 8 rights should have been considered.   There  was  significant
    evidence of the depression of  the  father  and  the  judge  made  only
    passing reference to this.  There was no assessment of the interference
    with the relationship with the father and the appellant in particular.

 5. At the hearing before me, Ms Reid submitted that the appellant had come
    as a student and  the  judge  had  made  no  further  analysis  of  the
    appellant's relationship with the father.  The determination was  short
    and the judge had simply looked at whether the appellant  could  return
    and had not considered the relevant factors.  The father's wife and the
    appellant's mother was working and supporting the family and there were
    no findings made in respect of that.  Article 8 should  be  considered.
    R(MM (Lebanon)) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985 had established  that  there
    was no separate test to be addressed.

 6. Ms Isherwood submitted  there  was  no  material  error  of  law.   The
    appellant entered as a student and that was the  basis  of  her  claim.
    Since her father had had a stroke she had stated she  was  a  full-time
    carer but the judge had noted that this was a family who  had  embarked
    upon migration to the UK.  Her brother came in  2005.   The  judge  had
    remarked that the appellant cared for the father  but  the  family  had
    shown no other avenues to be explored in respect of seeking assistance.
     The judge was aware that the father had a stroke but  the  submissions
    from  Miss  Reid  were  merely  a   disagreement   with   the   judge's
    determination.  The judge had referred to the medical evidence  and  it
    was not open to the representatives to state that  the  judge  had  not
    considered the evidence of the parent, the judge had done so.

 7.  In  response  Miss  Reid   maintained   there   was   no   appropriate
    proportionality assessment.

Conclusions

 8. The application for permission to appeal sets out that 'it is  for  the
    appellant to prove her  case  on  the  balance  of  probabilities.   By
    failing to direct himself to this the Immigration Judge  has  erred  in
    respect of the findings he has made'.  It is not incumbent upon a judge
    to specifically set  this  out  in  the  determination  and  I  am  not
    persuaded that the determination discloses that the judge departed from
    the requisite burden and standard of proof.

 9. Turning to the further challenges in the application, at paragraph 2 of
    the determination the judge refers specifically to MF (article 8 -  New
    rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 000393 where the Upper Tribunal and recorded
    that if a claim under Article 8  was  rejected  under  the  Immigration
    Rules judges must still consider whether the decision was in compliance
    with a person's human rights under Section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act.
    The judge was therefore alert to the  relevant  law.  At  [17]  of  the
    determination  the  judge  specifically  referred   to   applying   the
    traditional,  pre-appendix  FM  Article  8  analysis  in  relation   to
    proportionality.   I do  not  accept  that  the  decision  applied  any
    'separate test' merely that the judge did consider, and rightly so, the
    immigration rules as part of the assessment.

10. It is suggested that the  judge  had  failed  to  identify  the  public
    interest and a legitimate aim.  The judge does not  specifically  refer
    to Section 117B of the Nationality and Immigration Act 2002 which  sets
    out that the maintenance of effective immigration  control  is  in  the
    public interest and to which the judge should have had regard but  this
    does not disadvantage the appellant.  However, at [17]  the  judge  did
    set out that the legitimate aim is for the economic  wellbeing  of  the
    country and for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others and
    thus  the  judge  does  identify  the  need  for  the  maintenance   of
    immigration control as part of the legitimate aim.   To  that  end  the
    judge sets out the immigration history of the appellant and the family.



11. At paragraph 3 the judge recorded that the appellant entered the UK  on
    1 November 2011 as a student and  made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain on 12 April 2014.  The judge also recorded that  previously  her
    mother, Priscilla Velasquez, a British citizen,  had  applied  for  the
    appellant's entry to the UK as her  dependant  in  2008  but  this  was
    refused.  I note at  the  date  of  this  decision  which  was  clearly
    referred to by the judge that the appellant made an  application  under
    paragraph 1(f) of 317 of the Immigration  Rules  namely  that  she  was
    "over the age of 18 and  living  alone  outside  the  UK  in  the  most
    exceptional,   compassionate   circumstances   and   mainly   dependent
    financially on relatives settled in the UK".  At the time in  fact  the
    appellant was pregnant because she gave birth  in  November  2008.   In
    fact her appeal was dismissed on 21 November 2008, the same month  that
    her son was born.  She married the father in 2013 but it was made clear
    at the hearing before me that this determination was in relation to the
    appellant alone.

12. Subsequently the judge recorded that the appellant came to the UK as  a
    student.  The fact is that she would have confirmed that  she  intended
    to enter the UK on a temporary basis and would leave at the end of  her
    visa.

13. The judge made a full record of the facts  of  this  case  particularly
    with reference to the father and  family  and  these  are  referred  to
    below.  The judge also recorded at paragraph 4 that  unfortunately  the
    appellant's father had had a stroke on 25 October 2013  and  "she  took
    care of him and since then claimed to be his full-time  private  carer.
    Her father wanted her and nobody else to take care of him".

14. The judge noted the extent to which  the  appellant  claimed  that  the
    father was dependent on her and recorded, "she did nursing for  him  in
    the morning helping him to  get  out  of  bed,  wash  and  prepare  for
    breakfast" and "he had difficulty doing all the routine things ordinary
    people are doing because half of his  body  is  paralysed  and  he  was
    unsteady when alone" and that the father would be very anxious "if  she
    were not beside him".   The mother could not take care of him  as  much
    as the appellant because the mother was the one who  provided  for  the
    whole family.  The judge recorded  that  the  father  found  the  stoke
    devastating and that there was nobody else that could help him  as  the
    appellant was doing; however it was noted that both the  appellant  and
    the mother were nurses from the Philippines.

15. Against that the judge noted that the appellant  and  her  mother  both
    intended that the appellant should come to the UK in  order  to  settle
    whilst the appellant's husband's family were still in  the  Philippines
    and he had his mother, father and one brother there and the mother went
    back to the Philippines every two years and also returned on  vacation,
    last returning in 2012.

16. The judge also made a finding that the appellant did not reply when the
    judge enquired about social services and that there was no letter  from
    social services regarding a care assessment.

17. The judge recorded the evidence that in  fact  the  father  had  rented
    premises in Manchester although he had  ceased  working  in  2013  when
    diagnosed with a stroke.  The evidence of  the  mother  was  that  when
    asked about any assessment, she replied "I want her [the appellant]  to
    live here" and the question was asked of her directly in regards to the
    obtaining of the student visa and she confirmed that it was in fact for
    settlement.

18. Against the background of this record of the evidence, which  indicates
    that the judge was fully aware of the circumstances of this  case,  and
    included the relationship between the  appellant  and  her  father  and
    mother, the impact of any removal on the family,  and  the  immigration
    history and attempts (or lack of them) to  obtain  assistance  for  the
    father and the fact that the mother was a nurse, the judge proceeded to
    make specific findings.  It is clear that the judge did  have  in  mind
    the questions posed in Razgar and although  these  are  set  out  in  a
    rather unorthodox fashion the issues are covered.

19. Indeed the judge at paragraph 17 stated that he was  persuaded  by  and
    thus adopted  the  submissions  of  Ms  Vatish  and  I  set  out  these
    submissions below.  Ms Vatish in  turn  referred  to  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter.  The refusal letter stated that the  appellant  claimed
    to live with her partner and child as a family unit  and  she  did  not
    have sole parental responsibility and nor was the parent or child  with
    whom the child ordinarily lived a British citizen in the UK or settled.
     She thus failed to fulfil the Immigration Rules.  Further, there  were
    no insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner continuing
    outside the UK or indeed with the child.

20. I note that there was no emphasis placed on the relationship  with  the
    child or the best interests of the child but  this  was  not  an  issue
    raised in the application for permission to appeal.

21. The Reasons for Refusal Letter also found that  having  spent  over  26
    years in the Philippines and in the absence  of  any  evidence  to  the
    contrary it was not accepted in the period of time that  she  had  lost
    her ties to the home country and therefore she could not  satisfy  Rule
    276ADE(6).  Indeed the judge had recorded that the  husband  still  had
    relatives in the Philippines, not least his mother and father.

22. Of significance is that the judge also recorded the submissions  of  Ms
    Vatish that there were discrepancies between the parties' evidence over
    the number of brothers where the appellant had  said  that  there  were
    five but the mother had said none.  One had said that there was a visit
    by the mother every two years and the other every year.  One  had  said
    the mother stayed in an  apartment,  the  other  said  she  lived  with
    friends.  It was submitted that the appellant had strong ties with  the
    Philippines and there was no information  regarding  the  sale  of  the
    house  in  the  Philippines.   The  judge  clearly  accepted  that  the
    appellant came to enhance her qualifications which  she  had  done  and
    that the child was in the formative years.  They had friends and family
    at home.

23. Ms Vatish submissions which the judge adopted maintained  that  it  was
    clear that no independent assessment had been made for the  father  and
    that the reports indicated that he was "receiving  physiotherapy  until
    November but not since" and further "the medical report said he was now
    going back to work albeit in a slightly different category".

24.

25. The judge went through the medical reports and made a careful  note  of
    the father's stroke but also noted  that  the  father  had  been  given
    exercises and that "a phased return  to  work  was  anticipated".   The
    judge also recorded that there was a  suggestion  that  the  father  be
    "redeployed to one area of the laundry without the need  to  wheel  the
    manual truck".  Thus the judge proceeded on the basis that  the  father
    was to return to work although it was plain that he had been discharged
    from the hospital  and  was  "under  treatment  by  way  of  prescribed
    medications".  The judge clearly proceeded on the basis that the father
    could return to work and also could seek  assistance  from  the  state.
    Not least the judge was well aware that the mother is in the UK and was
    a nurse.  The  mother  and  father  had  clearly  developed  their  own
    independent life and the appellant had married and had her  own  child.
    The judge made a credibility finding  against  the  appellant  and  the
    mother and did not  accept  the  nature  of  the  relationship  claimed
    between the appellant and her father.  I note that the father is  still
    under medical care in Bury, albeit that he is supposed to be living  in
    London.

26. The judge rejected the submissions from Miss Reid  who  submitted  that
    the appellant "enjoyed what was described as a closer relationship that
    might normally be expected as a result of the father's stroke  and  his
    requiring full-time care.  The  appellant's  mother  was  in  full-time
    employment which precluded her from offering the care".

27. Indeed the judge stated specifically  that  she  disagreed  with  those
    submissions and thus rejected that there was a relationship that  might
    normally be expected to be closer than normal.  The judge at 14  to  17
    gave reasons for that.  The judge accepted that  the  appellant  had  a
    high desire to be united with her parents but specifically stated  that
    the appellant did not meet any of the criteria  under  the  Immigration
    Rules. The judge identified that the appellant had placed much reliance
    on her father's condition, but the  judge  rejected  reliance  on  this
    condition on the basis that the father could seek assistance  from  the
    British welfare state and this had not been explored by the parties and
    although there was a preference and desire to settle which informed the
    claimed relationship this was not likely to determine  the  immigration
    application.

28.  It  is  clear  therefore  that  the  judge  found  that  despite   the
    relationship in respect of the father that the appellant as  a  married
    woman with a child could return to the Philippines. The judge proceeded
    on the basis that the husband and child  were  the  dependants  of  the
    appellant in the appeal but in fact this was  not  the  case.   At  the
    hearing Ms Isherwood submitted that the application for leave to remain
    by the husband and child had been rejected  by  the  respondent  as  an
    invalid application through having been made on the wrong form.

29. On a reading of the determination as a  whole  it  is  clear  that  the
    appellant's parents are living in the UK and have settled in the UK and
    that  the  judge  rejected   the   concept   that   the   removal   was
    disproportionate when considering the familial ties and in essence  set
    out her findings on the basis that the  appellant  had  emphasised  her
    care for her father because of her desire to remain  in  the  UK.   The
    judge did make reference to the various and  relevant  factors  in  the
    proportionality exercise and I find that there is no error of law which
    is material.

30. The determination of Judge Burns shall therefore stand.



Signed        Date 23rd December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

