
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29599/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 December 2016                           |On 30 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                Sumon Chanda
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Sumon Chanda, was born on 1 August 1984 and  is  a  male
    citizen of Bangladesh.  On 14 August 2015 a decision was made to refuse
    to vary the appellant's leave to remain in the United Kingdom and  also
    to remove him by way of directions under Section 47 of the Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The appellant appealed to the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge M Davies) which, in a decision promulgated  on  19
    April 2016, dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of appeal are  brief.   The  appellant  asserts  that  "the
    respondent failed to establish a fraud with the  required  standard  of
    proof and this was not adequately dealt with by  the  FTTJ".   Further,
    the judge had failed to give adequate reasons as to why he believed the
    respondent's allegation had been proved.  There had been no finding  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 3. Mr Chanda attended the Upper Tribunal  hearing.   He  was  not  legally
    represented.   He  explained  that  he  had  encountered  a  number  of
    difficulties in his time in the United Kingdom  and  that  he  was  now
    "left with nothing".  He made no further submissions.

 4. The respondent had refused to vary  the  appellant's  leave  to  remain
    because she considered that the appellant had produced false  documents
    concerning attendance upon an approved course of study.  The  appellant
    claimed that he had obtained a  degree  through  London  University  by
    attending a college (which was now closed) in Manchester.  He submitted
    a certificate dated 26 July 2011 purportedly issued by  the  University
    of London indicating that he had completed the approved course of study
    for  the  degree  of  bachelor  of  arts  (business  management).   The
    Secretary of State had made enquiries  of  the  transcripts  office  of
    London University and produced a letter from that office dated 20 March
    2015 part of which reads,

         I would like to  inform  you  that  the  copy  of  certificate  and
         transcripts that  you  have  provided  were  not  produced  by  the
         University  of  London  central  offices  and  bear  a  number   of
         discrepancies  when  compared  to  authentic  documents.    I   can
         therefore confirm that the documents are  not  genuine.   We  would
         also like to confirm we cannot trace the above-named individual  as
         having graduated from the University of London.

 5. Judge Davies had found that he was  "satisfied  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before me that the respondent  can  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof upon him (sic)".  He considered it was,

         More probable than not the  appellant  when  applying  for  further
         leave to remain in the United Kingdom had produced false  documents
         claiming them to  be  genuine  documents  from  the  University  of
         London.  ... [the appellant] has produced no evidence whatsoever to
         counter the allegation made by the respondent.

 6. I consider that the issue in this appeal has been  correctly  addressed
    by Mr Tufan on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  in  the  Rule  24
    statement of 3 November 2016.  It is clear that Judge  Davies  believed
    that the initial burden of proof rested upon  the  respondent  who  was
    making the allegation that the appellant had produced a false document.
     But that allegation required evidence to  support  it  and  the  judge
    found (correctly in law) that the letter from  the  transcripts  office
    constituted such evidence.  Thereafter, it was  for  the  appellant  to
    discharge the burden of proving that he had obtained a degree from  the
    University of London.  The  appellant  acknowledges  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal that he has not produced such evidence; he simply told me that
    he had no reason to believe that the certificate which he had  obtained
    was false.  Further,  the  appellant  did  not  attend  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing; insofar as the appellant has been able to  offer  any
    explanation, the Upper Tribunal has received more evidence  than  Judge
    Davies who was obliged  to  determine  the  appeal  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal having only received submissions and the documentary  evidence
    adduced by the Secretary of State.  I cannot see that Judge Davies  has
    erred in his analysis and, even if he has done so, then, if I  were  to
    remake the  decision  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  I  would  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal.  The Secretary of State has made an allegation  and
    has supported it with evidence which the appellant has not attempted to
    contradict.  In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 7. This appeal is dismissed.

 8. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 20 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date 20 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


