
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29910/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th June 2017                      |On 27th June 2017                    |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               MRS BUSHRA NAZ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge R Scott, promulgated on 28th October 2016, following a hearing at
    Taylor House on 13th September 2016.  In the determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the   Appellant   whereby   the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Pakistan, who was born  on  4th
    April 1983.  She appealed against the decision of the Respondent  dated
    17th August 2015, refusing her further leave to remain in the UK  as  a
    Tier  2  (General)  Student  under  paragraphs  245HD(b)  and  (f)  and
    paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules.  The reason she was  refused
    was that she had  made  a  false  representation  for  the  purpose  of
    obtaining leave to remain.

The Appellant's Case

 3. The Appellant's case is that she was originally granted leave to  enter
    the UK as a student in 2008, and this was extended thereafter when  she
    had made a series of applications.  She accepts that the documents  now
    submitted were fraudulent.  However, she denies  that  she  herself  is
    guilty of  deception.   She  states  that,  without  her  knowledge  or
    agreement, a Mr Masood and/or CK Solicitors, exercised  deception.   Mr
    Masood was an immigration consultant, and he had advised the  Appellant
    that she could qualify as a student migrant.  The Appellant paid him  a
    fee and gave him the documents that he had asked  for,  which  included
    her passport, two photographs, and previous education certificate.   Mr
    Masood also took signatures on the blank page of the  application  form
    for him to complete by himself.  He did not disclose the  name  of  the
    firm of solicitors.

 4. When  in  October  2011,  the  Appellant  received  a  refusal  of  her
    application, the basis of this was that the  documents  submitted  were
    not genuine, and so the Appellant arranged  to  see  Mr  Masood  at  CK
    Solicitors' office.  CK Solicitors said that they had not submitted any
    false documents.  She accepted this explanation.  They  also  told  her
    that the refusal decision carried no right of  appeal.   She  therefore
    submitted a fresh application.   Mr  Masood  then  submitted  this  new
    application through his own consultancy, Ebiz Consulting Limited.  That
    application was also refused.

 5. The decision, however, made no reference to  the  previous  refusal  or
    deception.  She  made  another  application.   This  was  done  through
    another firm of solicitors.  It was also rejected.  When the  Appellant
    challenged that decision by judicial  review,  the  deception  emerged.
    The Appellant states that she has no knowledge of false documents being
    submitted and the  signatures  were  not  her  signatures.   They  were
    arranged and submitted without her knowledge.  She subsequently went on
    to lodge a complaint with the  Solicitors  Regulatory  Authority.   She
    also lodged a complaint with the Immigration Services Commissioner.

 6. At the hearing before Judge Scott, the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    commented on the slowness of the Appellant  to  respond.   She  took  a
    while to complain of the deception in August 2015.  She  did  not  seek
    the documents mentioned until almost a year later in June 2016.   These
    were not the actions of someone who was genuinely a  victim  of  fraud.
    The only evidence that the deception was not wilfully exercised by  the
    Appellant was the Appellant's own word.  It could not be  relied  upon.
    As far as signatures are concerned, these change.  Judge Scott accepted
    that signatures do change after a while (see paragraph 37).

 7. The judge went on to hold that, as  far  as  the  Appellant's  lack  of
    knowledge is concerned in the deception, "even  if  I  were  to  accept
    that, it  does  not  take  the  Appellant  any  further,  since  it  is
    irrelevant whether she personally was  involved  in  or  knew  of,  the
    deception.  What matters is that it was done on her behalf"  (paragraph
    41).

 8. In coming to this conclusion, the judge placed reliance upon  paragraph
    322 of HC 395 which states  that  "a  refusal  can  be  made  on  false
    representations  made  in  an  application,  whether  or  not  to   the
    applicant's knowledge".

 9. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Appeal

10. The grounds of application state that  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  allege
    that, although the Appellant accepts that she cannot succeed under  the
    Immigration Rules because her Sponsor had not  completed  the  Resident
    Labour Market Test, she wished to pursue her appeal in  an  attempt  to
    establish that she  had  no  knowledge  of  the  deception,  which  she
    accepted had taken place, when the  documents  were  submitted  by  her
    representative, falsely representing that she  was  self-employed  when
    she was not.  She claims that she has been an innocent victim of fraud.
     On 5th May 2017, permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis  that
    the case of AA [2010] EWCA Civ 773 required  there  to  be  established
    dishonesty on the part of the applicant.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 15th June  2017,  Mr  Iqbal,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, made the  following  submissions.   First,  he
    stated that it was incumbent upon  the  judge,  in  the  light  of  the
    decision in AA [2010] EWCA Civ 773, to actually make a  finding  as  to
    whether or not the Appellant had been dishonest.   The  judge  had  not
    done so, but had rather concluded that, "even if I were to accept that,
    it does not take the Appellant any  further,  since  it  is  irrelevant
    whether she personally was involved in,  or  knew  of,  the  deception"
    (paragraph 41).

12. Second, Mr Iqbal took me to the development of the jurisprudence  since
    that case, most notably in the Scottish judgment  of  SJL  (AP)  [2012]
    CSOH 93.  In that case, the court held that, "the mere fact that  false
    pay slips were submitted" by the fraudster immigration consultant,  "is
    not in my opinion relevant if the petitioner in fact had  no  knowledge
    of the deception" (see paragraph 23).

13. Third, in this case the Appellant has been so concerned  to  clear  her
    name that she has even reported the fraud to the Solicitors  Regulatory
    Authority and the Immigration Services Commissioner.

14. Fourth, the suggestion that it is not relevant, whether  the  Appellant
    had knowledge of the deception, had already been run as an argument  in
    the case of AA [2010] EWCA Civ 773  (see  paragraph  5)  and  had  been
    rejected, and so should not figure as an argument again hereafter.

15. For his part, Mr Sing submitted that the Rules were clear, namely, that
    the knowledge of the  applicant  was  irrelevant  to  the  exercise  of
    deception.  Second, the case  of  SJL  (AP)  involved  deception  by  a
    convicted fraudster.  This was not the case here.

16. In his reply, Mr Iqbal submitted that it was incumbent upon  the  judge
    to have made a clear finding at paragraph 41 as to whether or  not  the
    Appellant was guilty of fraud.  It was not enough to say that,  "it  is
    irrelevant whether she personally was involved".  There  had  to  be  a
    finding.  The burden of proof in relation to the fraud  rested  on  the
    Secretary of State.  Second,  there  was  an  insufficient  finding  in
    relation to whether the Appellant's signature had been  forged  by  the
    immigration consultant previously.  There was now before this  Tribunal
    an  expert  report  from  a  "forensic  examiner  of  handwriting   and
    questioned documents" by the name of a Michael Handy,  dated  9th  June
    2017 which had been served on the Tribunal yesterday, and  also  served
    on the Home Office Presenting Officer, and this report  made  it  clear
    that, after examination of all the documents, that  there  was  "strong
    evidence to support the proposition that Bushra Naz did  not  sign  the
    three questioned documents (see paragraph 23).  Given  this,  submitted
    Mr Iqbal, the conclusion arrived  at  by  the  judge,  that  signatures
    change anyway and matters are not taken any further,  because  in  this
    case, "the signatures do not appear to be  very  different"  (paragraph
    37), was insufficient.  There was an error of law here as well.

Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  re-make  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

18. First, as has been made clear both in the case of AA  [2010]  EWCA  Civ
    773, and subsequently in SJL (AP) [2012] CSOH 93, there  has  to  be  a
    finding as to whether the Appellant  has  been  involved  in  fraud  or
    deception, because as the judge made  clear  these  "are  very  serious
    allegations, and if proven have potential  to  affect  an  individual's
    future prospects" (paragraph 40).  Given this, the judge ought to  have
    made a finding of there being fraud or not, as  the  case  may  be,  at
    paragraph 41.  The failure to do so, the burden of  which  rested  upon
    the Respondent, led to an error of law.

19. Second, it is not enough to say that the signatures  on  the  documents
    "do not appear to be very different" (paragraph 37).  If the  Appellant
    is denying all culpability in terms  of  fraudulent  conduct,  and  the
    burden rests upon the  Respondent,  and  there  is  moreover,  at  this
    hearing today an expert report  from  Michael  Handy,  confirming  that
    there was "strong evidence to support the proposition that  Bushra  Naz
    did not sign the three questioned documents".

20. Given these errors, the appropriate course of action can only  be  that
    this matter is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for there to be
    a finding on these matters specifically, and in re-making the decision,
    I remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is
    remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under  Practice  Statement
    7.2(b) to be determined by a judge other than Judge R Scott.

22. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th June 2017

