
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29766/2013
     IA/29767/2013
     IA/30140/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 17 February 2015                           |On 19 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           CHIRAG GULABRAI PANDIT
                            RISHITA CHIRAG PANDIT
                       KRUPALKUMAR RAJENDRABHAI PATEL
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr R Rai of Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid
Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   These are appeals against decisions of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Majid
    promulgated on 14 November 2014 allowing each of the linked appeals  of
    Mr Chirag Pandit, Mrs Rishita Pandit and Mr Krupalkumar  Patel  against
    decisions made by the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department,  in
    respect of Mr and Mrs Pandit on 1 July 2013, and in respect of Mr Patel
    on 2 July 2013, to refuse variation of leave to remain  and  to  remove
    each of them pursuant to section 47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

2.   Although before me the Secretary of State  is  the  appellant  and  the
    Pandits and Mr Patel are the respondents, for the sake  of  consistency
    with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I  shall  hereafter
    refer to the Pandits and Mr Patel as the Appellants and  the  Secretary
    of State as the Respondent.

Background

3.   The respective  personal  details  and  immigration  histories  of  the
    Appellants are a matter of record on file  and  accordingly  I  do  not
    propose to rehearse those matters here, but will refer to  them  as  is
    incidental for the purposes of this decision.

4.   The First Appellant and the Third Appellant  form  an  'entrepreneurial
    team', and in that regard made applications for variation of  leave  to
    remain under the Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant category of  the  Points
    Based System under the Immigration Rules on 21 June 2012.   The  Second
    Appellant was included as a dependant in the application of  the  First
    Appellant.

5.   The  Respondent  refused  the  applications  of  the  First  and  Third
    Appellants for reasons  set  out  in  respective  combined  Notices  of
    Immigration Decision and 'reasons for refusal' letters dated  1  and  2
    July.  The Second Appellant was refused variation of  leave  to  remain
    'in line' with her husband for reasons set out  in  a  separate  letter
    also  dated  1  July  2013.   The  removal  decisions  were  taken   in
    consequence.

6.   The Appellants appealed to the  IAC.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    allowed  the  appeals  for  reasons  set  out  in  his  decisions.  (He
    promulgated a decision in respect of the First  and  Second  Appellants
    and a separate decision in respect of the Third Appellant.   I  see  no
    reason or purpose in keeping the decisions separate  any  further,  and
    accordingly this single document will  serve  to  determine  all  three
    cases, which in any event have been linked now for some time.)

7.   The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Robertson on 8 January 2015.  (Judge  Robertson  in
    fact made two decisions,  one  in  respect  of  the  First  and  Second
    Appellants and one in respect of the Third Appellant.)

Consideration

8.   A feature  of  the  Respondent's  decision  in  respect  of  the  First
    Appellant relates to an allegation that a false document was  submitted
    in the context of an  earlier  application.   The  combined  Notice  of
    Immigration Decision and 'reasons for refusal' letter in respect of the
    First Appellant states this:

         "On 11 January 2012 you supplied documents to provide  evidence  of
         holding an account with Dhruv Co-op Bank Ltd,  however  these  were
         found not to be genuine as the bank has not been  actively  trading
         for two years.

         In light of this the Secretary of State has deemed that refusal  is
         appropriate under paragraph 322(2) and is not prepared to  exercise
         discretion in your favour."

9.   The Respondent also considered other elements of the  application,  but
    awarded the First Appellant no points except in respect of Appendix C -
    Maintenance (Funds).  The  Respondent  also  observed,  as  he  did  in
    respect of Mr Patel as well, as follows:

          "In line with paragraph 245DD(l) of the Immigration Rules, we have
         not carried out an assessment as detailed in paragraph 245DD(h)  of
         the Immigration Rules as your application  has  been  refused.   We
         reserve the right to carry out this assessment in any challenge  of
         this decision or in future applications for Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)."

    In other words because the application was being refused in respect  of
    the points to be awarded and also with reference to  paragraph  322(2),
    the Respondent did not undertake a full assessment of the  business  in
    which it was planned that the entrepreneurial team would be investing.

10.  The appeal was listed  in  front  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  24
    December  2013.   On  that  occasion  the  Respondent's  representative
    produced, seemingly for the first time in these proceedings, a document
    verification report  ('DVR')  that  had  been  the  foundation  of  the
    allegation of use of a false document  in  the  context  of  the  First
    Appellant's earlier application.  It is apparent  from  the  Record  of
    Proceedings from that date that the Appellants' representative drew  to
    the Tribunal's attention the fact that the First Appellant had not seen
    the DVR previously, and in the circumstances the appeal was adjourned.

11.  In response to the DVR the First  Appellant  prepared  a  supplementary
    witness statement signed on 10 March 2014 which was  forwarded  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal under cover of letter dated 12 March 2014.  In  the
    body of that witness statement there is engagement with  the  terms  of
    the DVR.

12.  Unfortunately there does not appear to have been  any  due  and  proper
    consideration of this particular issue  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Majid.  Whilst it is correct to say that the Judge  was  alert  to  the
    fact that an allegation had been made  in  the  Notice  of  Immigration
    Decision and 'reasons for refusal' letter, it  is  not  apparent  on  a
    reading of the Judge's decision that he was alert to  the  contents  of
    the DVR.  No express reference is made to it,  and  indeed  no  express
    reference is made to the First  Appellant's  rebuttal  by  way  of  his
    witness statement of 10 March 2014.  Instead  the  Judge  confines  his
    consideration of this, and indeed it seems all issues  so  far  as  the
    testimony of the First Appellant is concerned, to the contents  of  the
    First Appellant's initial witness statement dated 17  December  2013  -
    see for example paragraph  14  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision.
    Necessarily that witness statement pre-dates the production of the DVR,
    and necessarily therefore does not engage with it.

13.  It follows that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  engage  properly
    with an important  issue  that  was  significant  in  the  Respondent's
    decision, and was plainly of material significance in  the  outcome  of
    the appeals.

14.  In those circumstances Mr Rai on behalf of the Appellants accepts  that
    in all the circumstances no aspect of the fact-finding  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal can be said to be 'safe' such that it could be  preserved
    into further consideration of the issues in the appeal.

15.  In the circumstances it is unnecessary for me to consider  other  areas
    of challenge, for example the apparently inadequate way  in  which  the
    Judge approached the English language requirements,  and  the  lack  of
    clarity as to the application of the relevant Immigration Rules to  the
    facts in the case, and indeed whether the judge was allowing the appeal
    pursuant to the Rules or pursuant to Article 8 of the ECHR. Suffice  it
    to say I find that the decisions of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in
    respect of all of the Appellants were flawed for material errors of law
    and must be set aside.

16.  The decisions in the appeals require  to  be  re-made.   It  is  common
    ground before me that the most appropriate form for that is the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decisions

17.  The decisions of First-tier Tribunal Majid  contained  material  errors
    of law and are each set aside.

18.  The decisions in the appeal are to be  re-made  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and before any judge other than First-tier  Judge  Majid  with
    all issues at large.

    Consequent Directions

    I also give the following consequent Directions for the future  conduct
    of the appeal, which in part are an attempt to reproduce  something  of
    the Directions given after a hearing on 19 June 2014.  I should briefly
    observe in this  context  that  by  letter  dated  11  March  2014  the
    Respondent raised some further issues in respect of the source  of  the
    investment to be made by  the  Appellants,  the  relationship  of  that
    investment with  the  nature  of  the  business  and  the  third  party
    investor, and the position of the First and Third Appellants within the
    structure of  the  business.   It  was  suggested  that  there  was  an
    appearance of  disguised  employment.   There  also  appears  to  be  a
    suggestion  that  there  might  have  been  an  element  of  fraudulent
    behaviour.  Mr Rai tells me that those  allegations  were  subsequently
    withdrawn by the Presenting Officer.  Mr Bramble is unable  immediately
    to confirm that from his own records and whilst  I  see  no  reason  to
    doubt what Mr Rai has told me, I have found it  difficult  to  decipher
    the various Records of Proceedings from  different  hearings.   In  any
    event,  irrespective  of  whether  the  matter  has   previously   been
    withdrawn, some clarity would be helpful from the Respondent as to what
    if anything is said about the source of the funds said to be  invested,
    bearing in mind that to date the Respondent has  not  embarked  upon  a
    full assessment of the nature of the  entrepreneurial  team's  proposed
    business.  With those matters in mind it is directed that  this  matter
    will be in the first instance  listed  for  a  case  management  review
    hearing at Taylor House with the following Directions.

         (1)  The Respondent is to file and serve within 28 days of today  a
         brief statement identifying the issues being relied upon,  together
         with  a  supplementary  bundle  incorporating   all   documentation
         relevant to the document  verification  report  and  all  documents
         relevant to any allegation still being pursued -  if  that  be  the
         case - further to  the  letter  of  11  March  2014,  and  also  to
         incorporate any other relevant materials not  otherwise  filed  and
         served.

         (2)  The Appellants, 14 days thereafter or in the event of  default
         on the part of the Respondent  at  least  7  days  before  the  CMR
         hearing, are to file and serve a consolidated bundle  and  Skeleton
         Argument addressing all relevant issues.

         (3)  The CMR is to be listed on the first  available  day  after  7
    April 2015.



    The above represents a corrected transcript of an  ex-tempore  decision
    given at the hearing on 17 February 2015.



Signed        Date:  18 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
