
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29030/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 October 2017                            |On 1 November 2017            |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                           Leke Fua-Nijia Vincent
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Al Arayn (Farani-Javid-Taylor Solicitors LLP)
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of  Cameroon  born  on  1  March  1984.   He
    entered this country on 3 August 2011 with entry clearance as a Tier  4
    (General) Student valid until 31 December 2012 and  extended  until  31
    July 2014.

2.   He applied for a residence card as the spouse of a Portuguese  national
    on 31 March 2014.  Immigration Officers visited  the  appellant's  home
    address on 12 August 2014 but his spouse was not present nor was  there
    any evidence that she lived there.   The  appellant  said  she  was  on
    holiday in Manchester but was  unable  to  provide  her  address  or  a
    telephone number for her.  There  was  another  woman  present  at  the
    appellant's address which was claimed were  family  friends.   However,
    this woman had made a recent application in which  she  had  given  her
    home address as that of the  appellant.   It  was  concluded  that  the
    appellant's marriage was one of convenience and the application  for  a
    residence card was refused on 26 August 2014.

3.   The appellant's appeal initially came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Colvin on 27 May 2015.  The judge noted that  the  appellant  had  been
    served with notice as an overstayer and granted temporary release  with
    weekly reporting conditions.  At the hearing it  was  accepted  by  the
    representatives that the appellant  had  not  been  an  overstayer  and
    accordingly the decision had not been in accordance with the law.

4.   It  was  further  noted  that  the  Home  Office  had  not  served  the
    transcript of the attendance and interview with the appellant and  that
    it was still not available from the relevant Immigration Officer.   The
    Presenting Officer requested an adjournment to comply  with  directions
    that had been given in January 2015 and had  not  been  complied  with.
    The application was refused.  The  judge  allowed  the  appeal  to  the
    extent that the respondent's decision, in relation to  the  serving  of
    the notice on the appellant as an overstayer, was unlawful.

5.   A  new  decision  was  reached  on  5  August  2015  but  no  interview
    transcripts were provided then.  A hearing was listed on 25  July  2016
    following  the  new  decision.   On  21  July  2016   the   appellant's
    representatives applied for an adjournment noting that the  transcripts
    had not yet been provided.  The appeal was adjourned and a new  hearing
    was listed on 28 November 2016.  The transcripts had not been  provided
    and  an  adjournment   was   again   requested   by   the   appellant's
    representatives  on  22  November  2016.   On  25  November  2016   the
    appellant's  representatives  again  requested   an   adjournment   and
    contacted the Tribunal staff  who  informed  the  representatives  that
    their request had been received and an  email  had  been  sent  to  the
    relevant court staff requesting them to respond to the representatives.
     However there had been no response.  On 25  November  2016  a  further
    letter was sent by the representatives  setting  out  the  history  and
    stating that the appellant was unable to attend the hearing due to  his
    medical condition (scoliosis).  He had requested his GP  to  issue  him
    with a certificate.  He could not afford to instruct Counsel  to  apply
    for an adjournment orally.

6.   The matter came before a First-tier Judge on 28 November  2016.   There
    was no appearance by or on behalf of the appellant.  The judge referred
    to the representative's letter of 25  November  2016.   The  respondent
    objected to the application.  The judge noted that no medical  evidence
    had been forthcoming and was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was
    physically unable to attend the hearing.   The  judge  noted  that  the
    Immigration Officer's notebook regarding the visit to  the  appellant's
    house on 12 August 2014 had been provided.  The  refusal  decision  had
    been based on the absence of the appellant's spouse and  his  ignorance
    as to her whereabouts rather than on supposed  inconsistencies  in  the
    interview.  No bundle had been served.  It  was  in  the  interests  of
    justice to proceed.  Having reviewed the evidence the  judge  concluded
    that by failing to produce any evidence the  appellant  had  failed  to
    address  the  evidence  justifying  a  reasonable  suspicion  that  his
    marriage was entered into in order to obtain  a  residence  permit  and
    dismiss the appeal.

7.   There was an application for permission to appeal which was lodged  out
    of time.  It was submitted that the Home Office had  not  provided  the
    appellant with a copy of the transcripts and the  appellant  could  not
    meet the respondent's case  unless  the  evidence  had  been  provided.
    There  had  been  a  failure  by  the  Tribunal  staff  to  convey  the
    adjournment request on 22 November 2016 to the First-tier Judge.

8.   On 21 August 2017 the First-tier Tribunal granted permission to  appeal
    and extended time.  The judge referred to the issue of  the  directions
    and the earlier successful appeal and the case law  and  correspondence
    from the representatives and found that the judge had arguably erred in
    law.

9.   The respondent filed a response on 6 September  2017  noting  that  the
    First-tier Judge had all the evidence necessary  to  proceed  with  the
    hearing and because of the absence of medical evidence at  the  hearing
    or subsequently his decision had not disadvantaged the appellant.

10.  At the hearing Mr  Arayn  lodged  the  case  of  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
    fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).

11.   He  submitted  that  the  appellant  had  not  been  provided  with  a
    transcript as directed and the appeal raised issues of unfairness.   It
    was not in the interests of justice for the appeal to have proceeded as
    the Judge  had  stated.   In  relation  to  the  medical  evidence  the
    appellant had attempted to get his GP to provide the  medical  evidence
    but he had not been given it.  There had been difficulties in preparing
    a witness statement for the appeal because of a change of circumstances
    between the appellant and his partner - divorce  proceedings  had  been
    instituted.  These proceedings were handled  by  other  solicitors.   A
    substantial number of pages needed to be added to the bundle.  Moreover
    the representatives had not had a copy of the notebook  that  had  been
    handed in at the First-tier hearing.

12.  Mr Nath submitted that  no  new  evidence  had  been  provided  to  the
    Tribunal.  Nothing had been done despite the directions that  had  been
    issued.

13.  Mr Arayn submitted that there had been a long  history  of  transcripts
    being directed  to  be  produced  and  served  on  the  appellant.   An
    adjournment request had been made in advance of the hearing.  It  would
    be difficult to prepare for a hearing without the  transcripts.   There
    were also the medical issues.  The appellant was present at the hearing
    before me.

14.  At the conclusion of the  submissions  I  requested  Mr  Nath  to  make
    available the copies of the Immigration  Officer's  notebook  which  Mr
    Arayn had not seen and reserved my decision.

15.  This is very much a borderline case.  In ordinary circumstances,  where
    there is a failure to appear on behalf of an  appellant  which  is  not
    satisfactorily explained and unsupported by medical evidence, it  would
    be hard to fault the decision  of  a  First-tier  Judge  to  refuse  an
    adjournment application.

16.  However there are features in this  case  which  bring  into  play  the
    question of fairness and Counsel refers  me  to  the  decision  of  the
    president in Nwaigwe.

17.   While  the  judge  notes  that  the  Immigration  Officer's   notebook
    regarding the visit to the appellant in August 2014 "had been provided"
    a transcript had been directed to be  produced  in  2015  and  frequent
    requests  had  been   made   without   success   by   the   appellant's
    representatives for that transcript.  It is possible that the judge had
    been under the impression that the copy of the notebook that is in  the
    court file had been provided to the representatives  but  it  is  clear
    that it had not been.  The first opportunity  the  representatives  had
    for seeing a copy of the Immigration  Officer's  notebook  was  at  the
    hearing before me.

18.  It is not  at  all  clear  whether  the  copies  in  the  court  bundle
    represent the entirety of the notes and records of interview that  were
    seen by the First-tier Judge.  All that appears in the Tribunal  bundle
    are two photocopied pages.  It may be that the material made  available
    by Mr Nath to the representatives is more extensive.

19.  This was a case where the respondent was in breach of court  directions
    to  supply  material  which  had  been  repeatedly  requested  by   the
    appellant's representatives.  There was  no  excuse  whatever  for  not
    furnishing the representatives with the material that had  been  placed
    before the First-tier Judge.  The principles set  out  in  Nwaigwe  and
    reflected in the headnote are applicable in the circumstances  of  this
    case.  As is said in the headnote:

         "In practice, in most  cases  the  question  will  be  whether  the
         refusal deprived the affected party of his right to a fair hearing.
          Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds, it
         is important to recognise that the question for the Upper  Tribunal
         is not whether the First-tier Tribunal acted  reasonably.   Rather,
         the test to  be  applied  is  that  of  fairness:   was  there  any
         deprivation of the affected party's right to a fair  hearing?   See
         SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."

20.  It is worthwhile emphasising that the court directions were to  provide
    transcripts of the interview.  Even assuming that what was provided  at
    the hearing were such transcripts it would not have been reasonable  to
    expect the representatives, let alone an  unrepresented  appellant,  to
    deal with the points raised.  As Mr Arayn said it would have  necessary
    to take instructions before proceeding.  In the circumstances it  would
    be difficult to envisage how an adjournment could  properly  have  been
    refused given the belated response by the respondent to the  direction.
    As I have suggested, it is far from clear that the material insofar  as
    it appears in  the  court  bundle  amounts  to  compliance  with  those
    directions  but  that  will   be   a   matter   for   the   appellant's
    representatives to pursue.

21.  As was indicated when permission to appeal was  granted,  there  are  a
    number of factors in play in this  decision.   Of  these  factors,  the
    breach of directions  is  the  most  troubling.   There  was  also  the
    Tribunal's  failure  to  respond  adequately  to  the  representative's
    request for an adjournment.  I find that applying the test  in  Nwaigwe
    and asking the question "was there  any  deprivation  of  the  affected
    party's right to a fair hearing?" the answer is regrettably  yes.   The
    decision is affected by a material error of law.  Having regard to  the
    extent of the fact-finding required (bearing in mind recent changes  in
    the appellant's marital circumstances)  it  is  appropriate  that  this
    appeal should be heard afresh before a different First-tier Judge.  The
    appeal is accordingly remitted for a fresh hearing.

22.  The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and I make none.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.





Signed                                  Date  25 October 2017


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal


