
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29041/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th January 2016                 |On 24th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                              mr Mehrooz Shafi
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Briggs (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 21st  March  1988.   The
    Appellant entered the UK on 31st July 2010 with entry  clearance  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student valid until 4th December 2011.   He  was  then
    granted further leave on the same basis, but due to non-attendance, the
    last period was curtailed to 27th April 2014.  On 26th  April  2014  an
    application was made on his behalf which was refused on 1st July  2014.
    That application was for further leave to remain  and  the  Appellant's
    application was considered under Appendix FM with regard to his private
    life under paragraph 276ADE(iii) to (vi).  Notice of Refusal was issued
    on 1st July 2014.  In that Notice of Refusal letter  the  Secretary  of
    State acknowledged representations had been  made  that  the  Appellant
    suffered from hepatitis C and Von Willebrand disease.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Oliver sitting at Richmond  on  24th  June  2015.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 27th July 2015 the Appellant's appeal  was
    dismissed under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 3. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  3rd
    August 2015.  It was contended therein that the First-tier Tribunal had
    materially erred in failing to consider and apply  the  relevant  legal
    principles to Article 8 medical claims.  It was noted that there was no
    consideration of Akhalu (Health claim: ECHR Article 8)  Nigeria  [2013]
    UKUT 400 (IAC).  It was also contended  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's conclusion and application  of  the  exceptionality  test  when
    considering Article 8 was erroneous and that the judge  had  failed  to
    consider the Article 8 step-by-step approach and had not carried out  a
    proportionality assessment.  Further it was contended that the Tribunal
    had erred in failing to consider  and  apply  Rule  276ADE(vi),  namely
    whether there were very significant obstacles to reintegration.

 4. On 6th November 2015 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hollingworth
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Hollingworth noted that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had not considered Akhalu and that it was  arguable
    that the judge  had  fallen  into  error  in  applying  an  exceptional
    circumstances test.  Further he acknowledged that an arguable error  of
    law had taken place with regard to the absence of  the  proportionality
    exercise in the circumstances and the application of Section 117 of the
    2002 Act and that it was arguable that the consideration  of  paragraph
    276ADE was insufficient.

 5. In a detailed response to the Grounds  of  Appeal  under  Rule  24  the
    Secretary of State opposes the Appellant's appeal, submitting that  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  directed  himself  appropriately  and
    made reasonable or sustainable findings that were properly open to  him
    on the evidence.  It was submitted that the Appellant's grounds  amount
    to  nothing  more  than  an  opportunistic  claim  advanced   in   mere
    disagreement with the negative outcome of  the  appeal.   The  Rule  24
    response notes that the Appellant was granted permission for  leave  to
    appeal on the basis that it was arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had materially erred in failing to make reference to the decision
    in Akhalu.   The  Respondent  submits  that  contrary  to  the  grounds
    advanced, although the First-tier Tribunal Judge chose not to cite this
    authority, it is clear from the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge, both in terms of structure and reasoning, that he  had  in  mind
    the key legal principles summarised in this  case.   The  Secretary  of
    State submitted that Akhalu was an Appellant whose appeal on Article  8
    grounds was successful on a very different factual basis and  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was clearly sympathetic to the Appellant  but
    nevertheless on the basis of the evidence before him he made reasonable
    sustainable findings properly  open  to  him  on  proportionality.   As
    regards the Appellant's ground that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had
    erred regarding the absence of the  proportionality  exercise  and  the
    application of Section 117, the Secretary of  State  submits  that  the
    judge had made adequate findings and that the grounds do  not  disclose
    any arguable legal error of law that would  be  considered  capable  of
    having a material impact upon the outcome of the appeal.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Mr Briggs.   I  note  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
    represented before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   The  Secretary  of
    State is now represented by  her  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    Tufan.

Submissions/Discussion

 7. Mr Briggs submits that it is well-settled law  that  medical  treatment
    can impact upon family life and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has
    failed to carry out that analysis or  refer  to  the  authorities.   He
    submits that the  best  the  judge  does  is  to  consider  exceptional
    circumstances outside the Rules at paragraph 10  of  his  decision.   I
    note therein that he has made reference to the authority of GS  (India)
    but I also note that that reference is to the Upper  Tribunal  decision
    and not that within the  Court  of  Appeal.   Mr  Briggs  submits  that
    Article 8 considerations are of course relevant but there must be a pre-
    existing Article 8 case and the  judge  has  failed  to  consider  this
    issue.  He submits that the focus of the determination is  confined  to
    Article 3 overlooking Article 8 and submits that this is a  case  where
    the Appellant has a chronic medical condition which impacts on his pre-
    family life.  Secondly he contends  that  there  has  been  no  serious
    consideration  of  the  Appellant's  obstacles  in  reintegrating  into
    society if he is returned to Pakistan and does not  consider  that  the
    judge's treatment of the Immigration Rules as set out at paragraph 7 is
    sufficient and that it was imperative upon the judge  to  consider  and
    determine this properly in the light of the Appellant's  condition  and
    the treatment he receives  here  and  in  light  of  the  evidence  the
    Appellant gave about difficulties in accessing treatment.

 8. In response Mr Tufan poses the question as to what is  the  materiality
    here even if there are any errors of law which he does not concede that
    there are.  He submits that the current guidelines  in  medical  claims
    are to be found within GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40 and that the facts
    of Akhalu are very different to this one where the Appellant would have
    had nobody to live with in Nigeria.  However he  points  out  that  the
    test now to be found in GS (India) is actually more stringent and  that
    there must be an Article 8 family life in the first case  and  that  it
    would only be in very  exceptional  circumstances  thereunder  that  an
    Appellant could succeed.  He takes me to paragraph 7 of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's determination pointing out that the Appellant has  not
    made any claim to family life in the UK and therefore he has  not  even
    reached the starting point by which a claim could be pursued under  the
    guidance of the test in GS (India).

 9. He states that the judge has given due and proper consideration to  the
    medical issues taking me to paragraphs 3 to  5  of  the  decision.   He
    further points out that  so  far  as  reintegration  is  concerned  the
    Appellant has only been in the UK since 2010 and has spent most of  his
    life therefore in Pakistan and that he could hardly  therefore  contend
    that he would have difficulty in reintegrating.

10. In brief response Mr Briggs acknowledges that there is no  family  life
    but points out the reference to private life as set out in  GS  (India)
    and that the gist of the case is to be found within paragraphs 4 and  5
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  Therefore even if  looked
    at with private life he submits it falls within the Article 8 paradigm.
     He emphasises he is not saying that  the  case  will  succeed  but  he
    submits that the judge has not looked at this factor.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Case Law

13. Consideration of an Appellant's medical and care needs are material  to
    establishing the existence  of  exceptional  circumstances  capable  of
    preventing removal under Article 3.  In N v SSHD [2005]  UKHL  31  Lord
    Hope discussed the threshold of "very  exceptional  circumstances"  for
    Article  3  claims  based  on  medical  and  social  facilities.    The
    materiality  of  an  Appellant's  medical  and  care  needs  considered
    together is evident by analogy to the exceptional circumstances.

14. Further an Appellant's medical and care needs are highly  important  to
    an Article 8 claim.  The matter was considered by the Court  of  Appeal
    in GS (India) and Others v SSHD [2015] 1 WLR  3312.   Therein  Laws  LJ
    observed that Article 8 has two linked paradigms: the capacity to  form
    and enjoy relationships and the right  to  privacy.   The  test  to  be
    applied and an analysis of the approach to be adopted by the court  was
    considered in great detail by Laws LJ in particular at paragraphs 85 to
    87 of GS (India).  Therein Laws LJ affirmed at  paragraph  86  that  in
    medical cases if an Article 3 claim fails:-

         "Article 8 cannot  prosper  without  some  separate  or  additional
         factual element which brings the case within the Article 8 paradigm
         - the capacity to form and enjoy relationships  -  or  a  state  of
         affairs having some affinity with this paradigm."

Findings

15. It is against that background that I have to determine whether  or  not
    there has been a material error of law in the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  I am satisfied that there has not  been.   It  is
    important that I give my reasons.  It is submitted by  Mr  Briggs  that
    the focus of the First-tier Tribunal has been  confined  to  Article  3
    overlooking Article 8.  It is necessary to look at the way in which the
    determination is set out.  The application in 2014  was  for  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules because of the medical condition for which the
    Appellant was receiving treatment in the UK.  He had not made any claim
    to family life and therefore could  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM.  The judge thereafter went on to consider claims  pursuant
    to Article 3 and Article 8.  He has given very  detailed  consideration
    to the position of the Appellant's medical health at paragraphs 3 to  5
    of his decision.  The judge has noted that the Appellant  has  suffered
    from haemophilia since he was a young child and that after  testing  in
    2012, his health having deteriorated, he was  told  that  he  had  been
    previously misdiagnosed and was actually  suffering  from  type  3  Von
    Willebrand disease.  The judge noted that the onus was on the Appellant
    to prove his case on the balance of probabilities.  He had  noted  that
    the Appellant had strong ties with his home country and that  the  only
    basis for his claim to remain was his  assertion  that  whilst  medical
    treatment for his physical condition  was  available  in  Pakistan,  he
    would be unable, for reasons of  transport  and  cost,  to  access  it.
    Thereafter the  judge  went  on  to  consider  the  threshold  for  the
    application in medical cases under Article 3 and  consider  Article  8.
    The judge's analysis was thorough.

16. I acknowledge that the judge did not make reference to the decision  in
    GS (India) in the Court of Appeal albeit that it was published some six
    months earlier.  That however does not constitute a material  error  of
    law and indeed, as is  submitted  by  Mr  Tufan  and  endorsed  by  the
    reference to the test set out by Laws LJ,  the  test  currently  is  if
    anything more stringent than that that was considered by the First-tier
    Tribunal.   The  judge  has  considered  all  the  evidence  and   made
    appropriate findings pursuant to Article 3.   As  Laws  LJ  affirms  at
    paragraph 86 (set out above) in GS (India) the Article  8  claim  could
    not prosper without some separate or additional factual  element  which
    brings the case within the Article 8 paradigm.  The judge has given due
    consideration to these factors and whilst accepting that  his  analysis
    under Article 8 is brief at paragraphs  9  and  10,  there  is  nothing
    within his decision for all the above reasons to show that he has erred
    in law or certainly that he has made any error in law that is material.
     The judge has looked at the medical issues, considered the appropriate
    Articles and has made findings of fact that he was  perfectly  entitled
    to.

17. In such circumstances the decision discloses no material error  of  law
    and the appeal of the Appellant is dismissed and the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

18. No application is made for an anonymity direction and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

