
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Numbers: IA/29990/2015

                                                         IA/29987/2015

                                                         IA/29978/2015

                                                         IA/29989/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 23rd November 2017                      |  On 4th  January 2018           |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                       CSA (first respondent/CLAIMANT)
                      MCCL (second Respondent/CLAIMANT)
                      JaJA (third respondent/CLAIMANT)
                      JCSA (fourth respondent/CLAIMANT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                       Respondents/Claimants


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Miss K Anifowoshe of Counsel instructed by Raj Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    O'Brien made following a hearing at Taylor House on 23rd November 2016.



Background

 2. The claimants are all citizens of  Mauritius.   The  first  and  second
    claimants are husband and wife and  the  third  and  fourth  are  their
    children.

 3. The first claimant arrived in the UK in April 2004, accompanied by  his
    family.  He then applied for leave to remain as  a  student  which  was
    granted and subsequently extended until 2009.   Thereafter  the  family
    overstayed.  JAJA, who was born on 9th July 1999, arrived when he was 4
    years old, and his brother JCSA, born on 20th July 2002,  when  he  was
    nearly 2 years old.  The couple also now have a 2 year old daughter.

 4. JAJA suffers from spina bifida and neuropathic ulceration of both feet.
     He has complex medical needs and has been  under  treatment  at  Great
    Ormond Street for many years.

 5. The judge set out the relevant law and reached the following findings:-

         "36. It is not argued that the Appellants satisfy  Appendix  FM  or
             that the First and Second Appellant's (sic) satisfy  paragraph
             276ADE.  Instead, it is argued that  each  of  the  Third  and
             Fourth  Appellants  satisfy  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv).    Each
             provided a signed witness statement but was not required to be
             called for cross-examination.

         37.  It was their unchallenged evidence, therefore, that the  Third
             and Fourth Appellants  have  been  educated  entirely  in  the
             United Kingdom, speak little Creole and cannot read  or  write
             in the language.  They know nobody in Mauritius  and  remember
             little if anything of the country.  I have  no  hesitation  in
             finding that both boys are fully integrated into this  country
             and  that  their  best  interests   favour   remaining   here.
             Moreover, they each entered the United Kingdom on 4 April 2004
             and had therefore lived in this country nearly 11 years at the
             date of the application.  Even putting to one side J's medical
             condition, I would have considered it unreasonable  to  expect
             the boys now  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   However,  J's
             medical situation makes it even more unreasonable.

         38.  He suffers from spina bifida and has had a  relatively  recent
             spinal cord untethering.  He remains under the care of  tissue
             viability practitioners and under  review  by  his  consultant
             orthopaedic surgeon.  I am not persuaded that J could  not  be
             treated in Mauritius or that he would necessarily be unfit  to
             return there.  However,  I  am  persuaded  that  it  would  be
             unreasonable to interrupt the care he has had from the present
             medical team since approximately 2009."

 6. The judge allowed the  appeal  in  respect  of  the  first  and  second
    claimants on the basis that it would  be  manifestly  contrary  to  the
    children's best interests for the family to be separated and there were
    therefore compelling reasons to consider their Article 8 rights outside
    the Rules.  He allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

The Grounds of Application

 7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had materially erred in law in finding  that  the  third  and
    fourth  claimants  satisfied  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv).   He  made  the
    finding without having regard to the fact that the family had  been  in
    the UK unlawfully since 2010.  The consideration of the  reasonableness
    test was inadequate and he had failed to properly  balance  the  public
    interest.  He also failed to have regard to the  legal  principles  set
    out in MA Pakistan [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  when  the  Court  of  Appeal
    observed that the principle that the sins of the father should  not  be
    visited upon the children was not intended to lessen the importance  of
    immigration control.

 8. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge Ford on  25th  July
    2017.

 9. The Secretary of State renewed her grounds maintaining that  the  judge
    had materially erred in failing to consider the public interest in  the
    consideration of the reasonableness test.

10. Permission was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  O'Connor  on  27th
    September 2017.  Judge O'Connor observed that there was no  recognition
    of the ratio of the decision in MA in this  decision,  and  whilst  the
    proper application of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) might not have led  to  a
    different decision,  it  could  not  be  said  that  the  result  would
    certainly have been the same.

Submissions

11. Mr Melvin relied upon his grounds and submitted that the judge did  not
    consider the reasonableness test holistically.  Mauritius was  a  fully
    functioning state and the situation of the family there  had  not  been
    properly reviewed.  There was no reason why the family could not access
    appropriate healthcare there.

12. Miss Anifowoshe defended the decision.  The children have been  in  the
    UK for over three-quarters of their lives and are now 15 and 17.  Their
    situation was properly considered by the judge who reached  a  decision
    open to him.

13. By way of reply Mr Melvin observed that there was no recognition of the
    economic detriment to the UK by this family remaining.   He  considered
    that it may even have been that the family came to the UK in  order  to
    access care for JAJA. He maintained that the decision was flawed.

Findings and Conclusions

14. This decision would certainly have been less vulnerable  to  appeal  if
    the judge had articulated in terms what the public interest was in  the
    removal of the  family.   However  in  this  case,  the  error  is  not
    material.

15. First, the judge  set  out  the  law  correctly  at  paragraph  27,  in
    particular Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
    and Section 117B(1) which provides that the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest.  He set  out  both  the
    reasons for refusal and the Presenting Officer's submissions. There  is
    no real basis for concluding that the judge did not  properly  bear  in
    mind the significant public interest in  removing  those  who  overstay
    their visas and remain unlawfully, when reaching his decision.

16. Second, this is a case where the facts are not in dispute and are  very
    unusual.  The children in this case had been in the UK for some  twelve
    years at the date of the hearing.  The unchallenged evidence  was  that
    they speak little Creole having been educated entirely in  the  UK  and
    remember little, if anything, of their country of nationality.

17. Most importantly, JAJA suffers from a difficult medical condition which
    has required extensive treatment at the leading children's hospital  in
    the UK.

18. Mr Melvin's submission that treatment could be  available  for  him  in
    Mauritius is beside the point.  The judge allowed  the  appeal  on  the
    basis that it would be unreasonable to interrupt the care which he  has
    had from the medical team since 2009.  Moreover  his  observation  that
    the family may have come to the UK for medical treatment is simply  not
    borne out by the facts.  They came five years before they were referred
    to Great Ormond  Street  and  until  2009  paid  for  JAJA's  treatment
    privately.

19. Accordingly, whilst the  judge's  findings  could  have  been  no  more
    detailed, the grounds do not disclose an error of law and amount  to  a
    disagreement with the decision.

Notice of Decision

20. The original judge did not err in law.  The Secretary of State's appeal
    is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless  and   until   a   Tribunal   or   court   directs   otherwise,   the
respondents/Claimants  are  granted   anonymity.    No   report   of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  them  or  any  member  of
their family.  This direction applies both to the  respondent/Claimants  and
to the appellant.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date 1 January 2018
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
