
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29770/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 January 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     K K
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. M. S. Islam, Solicitor, Law Dale Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Juss promulgated on 17 July 2015 in which  he  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to  refuse  to
    issue a residence card as confirmation of her right to  reside  in  the
    United  Kingdom  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "However it is arguable that the Judge erred, bearing in mind  that
         the burden of establishing this was a marriage of convenience rests
         with the Secretary of State (Papajorgji (EEA spouse -  marriage  of
         convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC)).  It is arguable  that
         the Judge erred in finding this to be  a  marriage  of  convenience
         without giving proper consideration to the fact that the  Appellant
         was a victim of domestic abuse at the hands of her husband and  had
         suffered a miscarriage caused by that violence.  The Upper Tribunal
         indicated in Papajorgji that evidence of a child can be evidence of
         a genuine marriage as, presumably can cohabitation."

 3. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives, following which I announced that I found the  decision
    involved the making of an error of law.  I set the decision  aside  and
    remitted it to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.  My full  reasons
    are set out below.

Error of law

 4. The Appellant was unrepresented  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    there was no  appearance  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent.   There  was
    therefore no cross-examination of the Appellant.  It is accepted in the
    skeleton argument that the Appellant had  not  really  dealt  with  the
    refusal letter in her statement.   However,  the  Appellant  gave  oral
    evidence at the hearing of the domestic violence she had suffered.  She
    also provided documentary evidence.  In paragraph [11] of the  decision
    the judge records that the Appellant was badly beaten up and kicked  in
    the stomach "which led to the miscarriage of  her  baby".   He  records
    that the police were called and that her husband  has  been  prosecuted
    for domestic violence.

 5. However when coming to his findings the judge makes no reference to the
    evidence of domestic violence, or to the pregnancy [13].  He  makes  no
    findings on either of these issues.  It was  accepted  by  Ms  Fijiwala
    that the judge had failed to  address  the  issue  of  the  Appellant's
    pregnancy in his findings.  I find  that,  following  Papajorgji,  this
    evidence was relevant to the issue of whether or  not  the  Appellant's
    marriage was a marriage of convenience.  I find that the decision fails
    to deal with it.  The judge's findings are very brief.  There are  only
    three paragraphs  which  contain  findings,  [13]  to  [15],  and  only
    paragraph [13] contains material which can be  described  as  relevant.
    The reasons given in paragraph [14] relating to the Appellant's brother
    marrying a Czech national are irrelevant to whether or not her marriage
    was one of convenience.  Similarly the reasons given in paragraph  [15]
    are not relevant to the issue of marriage of convenience.

 6. In failing to make findings as to the  Appellant's  pregnancy,  I  find
    that the judge has failed to take into account  relevant  matters,  and
    has failed to make findings on material matters.  I find that the error
    is material, given that the application was refused on the  basis  that
    the marriage was one of convenience.

 7. In relation to the  disposal  of  this  appeal,  as  discussed  at  the
    hearing, the Appellant's situation has changed since  her  application,
    and continues to change.  However, the Tribunal can  consider  any  and
    all bases on which an Appellant has a right to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom under the Regulations.  As I have stated above,  this  decision
    is very brief, the reasoning consisting of only three paragraphs.   The
    judge has  failed  to  take  into  account  all  relevant  matters.   I
    considered that there had been a failure fully and adequately to assess
    the evidence sufficient for the Upper Tribunal to be able to remake the
    decision.  In the interests of justice,  it  was  right  to  remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a full hearing of the evidence.

Notice of Decision

The appeal involves the making of a material error  of  law  and  I  set  it
aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.


Signed   Date 8 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
