
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29315/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 December 2014                           |On 9 January 2015            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                             UZOMA BRIGHT NWAIWU
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Ikegwuruka of Almond Legals
For the Respondent:    Miss A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Hillis) who in a Determination and Reasons on  the
    papers, promulgated on 23 September 2014, dismissed the appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's decision refusing to issue a residence card as
    confirmation of a right of residence in the UK.

2.   The appellant whose date of birth is  5  December  1975  and  he  is  a
    citizen of Nigeria.

3.   The Secretary of State refused the application on the grounds that  the
    appellant failed to show that he qualified either as a spouse or as  an
    extended family member and  that  the  sponsor  was  exercising  treaty
    rights.   In  a  Decision  and  Reasons  the  Tribunal  considered  the
    application of Regulation 8 as it was concede that Regulation  7  could
    not be met.  The documentary evidence is referred to at paragraph 15 in
    the determination.

4.   The Tribunal found that the tenancy agreement was  unreliable  evidence
    and that the Thames  Water  Bills  to  be  in  separate  names  of  the
    appellant  and  his  wife.   The  documentary  evidence   was   overall
    insufficient as stated at paragraph 19.  At paragraph 21  the  Tribunal
    considered the evidence of the exercise of treaty rights and found  the
    same to be insufficient to show that the sponsor was working in the UK.

Grounds

5.   The grounds of application assert that the Tribunal  erred  in  finding
    that there was no tenancy agreement when in  fact  there  was  one  and
    further erred in finding that the utility bills were in the  sole  name
    of Miss Sita Toumba-Selima when in fact it  was  in  the  name  of  the
    appellant and thirdly, that it was wrong to expect that there should be
    evidence of service of documents on the respondent.

6.   Permission was granted by Judge Dehaney on  10  November  2014  on  all
    grounds.

7.   This morning I have heard submissions  from  both  representatives,  Mr
    Ikegwuruka relied on the grounds of appeal and conceded that there  was
    no point to be taken with regard to the  documentary  evidence  as  the
    Tribunal clearly had all of  the  documents  that  were  submitted  and
    included in the respondent's bundle.  There was  no  other  documentary
    evidence relied on that was excluded.  He  argued,  however,  that  the
    Tribunal had failed to take into account the evidence  of  the  tenancy
    agreement and that the Tribunal was wrong as regards the names  on  the
    utility bills.

8.   Miss Holmes relied on the Rule 24 response and further argued that  the
    findings with regard to the exercise  of  EEA  Treaty  rights  remained
    unchallenged.

Decision

9.   I am satisfied that the errors complained of do not  materially  affect
    the Tribunal's consideration of the evidence nor its conclusions.   The
    Respondent had not infact considered Regulation 8 in the refusal letter
    as the decision focused on the failure to meet  Regulations  6  and  7.
    There  was  documentary  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  relevant   to
    Regulation 8 which was relied on in the Appellant's grounds  of  appeal
    before the First -tier Tribunal.
10.   I take the view that the Decision may have been lacking in clarity  in
    parts but overall I find that the Tribunal engaged  with  the  evidence
    and made findings that were properly open to it to make.  The  Tribunal
    considered the applicability of Regulations  6  and  8  EEA  Regs.  The
    Tribunal although stating that there was no tenancy agreement then went
    on to find that was evidence of the tenancy agreement but found  it  to
    be unreliable.  The evidence as to the utility bills was considered  at
    [17] and found to be insufficient evidence of  a  durable  relationship
    [19].   There is nothing in the Appellant's  arguments  that  show  any
    error of law.

11.  It is unclear whether at [20] the Tribunal is referring  to  additional
    documentary evidence or that considered.  The  evidence  relied  on  is
    included in the Respondent's bundle for the hearing.   I  am  satisfied
    that the Tribunal did consider all of the documents before it and  none
    was excluded.  The Tribunal made clear findings at paragraph 19.   This
    ground was not pusrsued at the hearing.

11.  In any event no issue  taken  with  the  Tribunal's  finding  that  the
    Sponsor/EEA member was not exercising  her  Treaty  rights.   This  was
    neither challenged by the Appellant at the hearing before me nor raised
    in any grounds of appeal. The finding that the Appellant failed to meet
    Regulation 6 stands.


12.  I find no material error of law and the Decision shall stand.





Signed                                  Date 5.1.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



No anonymity order
No fee award as the appeal is dismissed.




Signed                                  Date 5.1.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
