
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29786/2014
                                                               IA/29787/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 July 2015                      |On 5 August 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                            MUHAMMAD YASIR HAMEED
                                 MAJID IQBAL
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Miah, counsel, instructed by MA Consultants
(London)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This are appeals against the decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Monson who, in a  determination  promulgated  on  30  March
        2015, dismissed the appellants' appeals against  a  refusal  by  the
        respondent to grant them leave to  remain  outside  the  immigration
        rules as a result of their claimed same-sex relationship.

Background

     2. The appellants are both nationals of  Pakistan.  The  1st  Appellant
        entered the UK with valid entry clearance as a student on 14 January
        2010. During the currency of his leave he returned to  Pakistan  and
        re-entered on 25 September 2010 accompanied by the 2nd appellant who
        also entered pursuant to a validly issued student entry clearance.

     3. On 18 November 2010 the 1st appellant submitted an application for a
        Certificate of Approval to  marry  a  female  Czech  national.  This
        application  was  refused  on  02  February  2011  because   another
        Certificate of  Approval  had  already  been  lodged  by  the  Czech
        national in relation to someone else.

     4. On 20 August 2013 the 1st appellant applied for leave to  remain  on
        the basis of his same sex relationship with the 2nd appellant. On 05
        July 2014 the respondent refused this application, one in which  the
        2nd appellant was identified as a dependent. The respondent was  not
        satisfied that the appellants met the requirements of Appendix FM of
        the immigration rules, or that they had viable private  life  claims
        under paragraph  276ADE  of  the  immigration  rules.  Nor  was  the
        respondent satisfied the appellants were in a genuine  relationship.
        Although the appellants raised concerns in respect of  their  safety
        were they to be removed to Pakistan and were they to continue  their
        relationship in public, neither made an asylum claim. The respondent
        did not believe removal would breach Article  8  in  any  event  as,
        according to background evidence identified by the  respondent,  the
        appellants could live together as a couple, albeit discreetly.

The First-tier Tribunal's decision

     5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard evidence  from  both  appellants
        and from a Mr Tariq, the landlord  of  the  property  in  which  the
        appellants resided. The Judge noted that  no  Article  3  claim  was
        being advanced by the appellants. The sole ground of appeal was that
        the decision to remove them would breach their Article 8 family  and
        private life rights. The Judge found that  the  appellants  did  not
        meet the requirements of Appendix-FM or paragraph 276ADE. The  Judge
        noted that it was not the  appellants'  claim  that  they  would  be
        subjected to persecution or any Article 3 ill-treatment were they to
        live as a  gay  couple  in  Pakistan.  The  Judge  stated  that  the
        appellants had  not  shown  that  they  would  not  choose  to  live
        discreetly as gay men in Pakistan, as opposed  to  being  forced  to
        live discreetly from fear of persecution (paragraph 24).

     6. The Judge was satisfied  that  the  appellants  had  discharged  the
        burden of proof that they had  'followed  a  gay  lifestyle  in  the
        United Kingdom, and that they present to their friends in the UK  as
        a gay couple' (paragraph 25). It is not all together clear what  the
        Judge meant by this, but, as with the Grounds of Appeal to the Upper
        Tribunal and the grant of permission to appeal, I take it  that  the
        Judge was satisfied both appellants were gay.

     7. The Judge was not however satisfied that the appellants  were  in  a
        genuine or subsisting relationship. The Judge  relied  on  the  fact
        that  the  1st  appellant  had  submitted  an  application   for   a
        Certificate of Approval  to  marry  a  female  Czech  national,  the
        evidence that accompanied that application, and inconsistencies  and
        impluasibilities in the evidence presented to him in  rejecting  the
        claimed relationship. The Judge consequently dismissed the appeals.

The Grounds of Appeal

     8. The Grounds argue that the Judge failed to set out the discrepancies
        he referred to and failed to explain why  those  discrepancies  were
        material to his decision. It was further argued that the Judge erred
        in his Article 8 assessment, and that he failed to properly consider
        or  apply  the  test  in  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  which   imposed   a
        significant obstacles test.

     9. Permission was granted on the basis that it was  arguable  that  the
        Judge erred by failing to consider  whether  there  would  be  'very
        significant  obstacles'   to   the   appellants   reintegration   as
        homosexuals  in  Pakistan  under   paragraph   276ADE(vi)   of   the
        immigration rules, or to have regard to the impact on their  private
        lives as homosexuals if removed to Pakistan.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

    10. Mr Miah, who ably represented the  appellants,  submitted  that  the
        Judge failed to consider the impact on the appellant's private lives
        if removed. It was argued that it was incumbent on the Judge tp have
        considered, in  the  alternative,  the  impact  on  the  appellants'
        private lives given the Judge's acceptance that the appellants  were
        gay. Mr Miah was  at  pains  to  point  out  that  he  was  not  the
        representative who appeared before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  he
        did not have a copy of the record of proceedings as recorded by  the
        representative. He was not therefore  aware  of  what  evidence  was
        given by the appellants in respect  of  how  they  manifested  their
        sexual identity in the UK, how different this was to the  manner  in
        which they manifested their sexual identity in Pakistan, whether  or
        not  they  now  publically  displayed  their  affections,  or   what
        arguments were advanced by the  representative  in  respect  of  the
        impact on their private lives  as  gay  men  in  Pakistan.  Mr  Miah
        accepted that it was open to the Judge to make his factual  findings
        in respect of the alleged relationship between  the  appellants.  It
        was submitted on behalf of the appellants that they would  encounter
        difficulty  in  freely  manifesting  their  sexual   identities   in
        Pakistan, although Mr Miah accepted there was no evidence other than
        the appellants' statements and the determination in respect  of  how
        they would manifest their sexual identity in Pakistan.

    11. Mr Tufan pointed out that  the  appellants  placed  no  reliance  on
        Article 3 or asylum. The Judge gave clear reasons as to why  he  was
        not satisfied the relationship between the appellants  was  genuine.
        At paragraph 24 of the determination the Judge noted the absence  of
        any evidence as to whether  the  appellant's  would  choose  to  act
        discreetly in Pakistan. There was no evidence before the Judge as to
        how the manner in which the appellants  publically  expressed  their
        sexuality had altered since their entry into the UK.

Discussion

    12. I will first consider the Ground of Appeal alleging that  the  Judge
        failed to set out the discrepancies he relied on  in  rejecting  the
        appellants claim to be in a genuine relationship and why  they  were
        material. At paragraph 26 the Judge relied on  the  1st  appellant's
        application for  a  Certificate  of  Approval  to  marry  the  Czech
        national. This application included a statement from  the  appellant
        saying he and the Czech national were in love  and  could  not  live
        without each other. The Judge gave sufficient reasons for  rejecting
        the 1st Appellant's explanation for this untruth (the Judge did  not
        find it plausible that the Czech national would  have  deceived  the
        1st appellant as her immigration status was secure and  it  was  not
        credible, in these circumstances, that she  would  have  pressurised
        the 1st appellant to marry her, nor was it  credible  that  the  1st
        appellant would agree to marry her if they were just friends and  he
        was in a long-term relationship with the 2nd appellant who had  just
        arrived in the UK, allegedly to carry  on  that  relationship).   At
        paragraph 27 the Judge identified inconsistent evidence  in  respect
        of when and where the appellants were  living,  and  differences  in
        explanations given for these inconsistencies. At  paragraph  28  the
        Judge identified inconsistent evidence between the 1st appellant and
        his landlord in respect of whether the Czech national lived with the
        1st appellant. The Judge properly identified inconsistencies in  the
        evidence before him and explained why he felt these  inconsistencies
        undermined the account given by the appellants in respect  of  their
        relationship. These were  conclusions  the  Judge  was  entitled  to
        reach. I am therefore satisfied the Judge's rejection of the claimed
        relationship between the appellants discloses no error of law.

    13. I will now consider whether the Judge erred in his consideration  of
        paragraph 276ADE(vi). The respondent's decision was made on 05  July
        2014. At this time paragraph 276ADE(vi) required, in order for leave
        to remain to be granted,  that,  assuming  an  applicant  had  lived
        continuously in the UK for less than 20 years, that they had no ties
        (including social, cultural or family) with  the  country  to  which
        they would have to go if required to leave the UK. It is clear  that
        the appellants  would  have  been  entirely  unable  to  meet  these
        requirements as they had only entered the UK in 2010 as  adults  and
        still had family in Pakistan.

    14. Paragraph 276ADE(vi) was amended with effect on 28 July  2014.  This
        amendment removed the 'no ties' test and imposed a requirement  that
        the  applicant  demonstrates  there  would  be   'very   significant
        obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country  to  which
        he would have to go if required to leave the  UK'.  This  alteration
        however post-dated the date of decision. There were no  transitional
        arrangements indicating that the change in paragraph 276ADE  was  to
        have retroactive effect. The Judge was therefore fully  entitled  to
        his conclusion in respect of paragraph 276ADE(vi) as it was when the
        decision under appeal was made.

    15. The Grounds go on to criticise the Judge's assessment in respect  of
        the appellants' free-standing private life claims. It is argued that
        the Judge failed to engage in any assessment as to how  the  private
        lives of the appellants, as gay men, would be affected  should  they
        be required to return to Pakistan.

    16. The difficulty with this argument is that there does not  appear  to
        have been any significant evidence before the Judge as  to  how  the
        appellants, as individual gay men,  manifested  or  expressed  their
        sexual identity in the UK, how, if at all, this was different to the
        manner in which they lived in Pakistan, and how their behaviour  may
        have been modified as a result of the time they lived in the UK such
        that their removal would have a  disproportionate  impact  on  their
        personal  identity  and  personal  integrity  sufficient  to  breach
        Article 8. There was, for example, little  evidence  in  respect  of
        whether the appellants publically displayed affection as gay men  or
        whether they still manifested their sexual  identity  discreetly  in
        the UK. I note in this regard that the Judge stated, at paragraph 24
        of his decision, that the appellants had not shown that  they  would
        not choose to live discreetly as gay men in Pakistan.

    17. Although in their joint statement the appellants claimed  they  were
        able to live openly in the UK and this  would  not  be  possible  in
        Pakistan, this was in the context of their claimed  relationship,  a
        relationship that the Judge found did not subsist. I also note  that
        the appellants provide  the  respondent's  Country  Information  and
        Guidance document on Pakistan in respect of Sexual  orientation  and
        gender identity. This indicated that homosexuality  was  illegal  in
        Pakistan, and that it would not be reasonable for  an  applicant  to
        conceal  their  homosexuality  in  order  to  avoid  the   risk   of
        persecution. There was however no evidence before the Judge that the
        appellants would seek to conceal their homosexuality as a result  of
        persecution  or  whether  they   would   seek   to   conceal   their
        homosexuality as a result of  other  factors,  and  how  this  would
        affect their personal identity in terms of Article 8.

    18. In these circumstances I am not satisfied the Judge materially erred
        in his approach  to  the  Article  8  private  life  claims  of  the
        appellants.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make a material error of law.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]    31 July 2015
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
