
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29901/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 April 2015                               |On 30 April 2015              |
|Prepared on 21 April 2015                     |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                            MR ABIOLA ABDULKAREEM
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Howorth, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitehead, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria  born  on  12  March  1979.   He
    appealed against a  decision  dated  8  July  2014  which  revoked  his
    indefinite leave to remain and replaced it with limited  leave  for  30
    months.  His appeal was allowed at first instance by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Hopkins sitting at Birmingham on 3  November  2014.   The
    Respondent appeals with leave against that decision but for the sake of
    convenience I shall continue to refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    referred to at first instance.

2.   The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 24  October  1999  as  a
    student.  On 3 March 2004 he was granted a residence card on the basis
    of his marriage  to  a  Portuguese  citizen.   In  2007  the  Appellant
    bigamously married a  French  citizen  but  on  the  strength  of  that
    relationship was issued in October 2007 with a further residence  card.
    On 11 March 2010 he was granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom but on 7 January 2011 he was convicted at  Oxford  Crown
    Court of one  count  of  bigamy,  five  counts  of  assisting  unlawful
    immigration and one of possessing criminal property.  He was  sentenced
    to three years'  imprisonment.   The  offences  of  assisting  unlawful
    immigration involved arranging travel to Oxford of a number  of  French
    women so that they  could  enter  into  sham  marriages  with  Nigerian
    citizens who had otherwise no  permanent  right  of  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom.   The  criminal  property  was  the  proceeds  of  this
    unlawful activity.  He had denied that he had acted for commercial gain
    but the jury convicted him.

3.   On 28 February 2013 the Respondent decided to make a deportation  order
    against the Appellant.  He appealed and his  appeal  was  allowed,  the
    Tribunal finding that the Appellant had a genuine parental relationship
    with three  children  who  did  not  live  with  him.   Thereafter  the
    Respondent gave notice on 5 August 2013 of her intention to revoke  the
    Appellant's indefinite leave.   The  Appellant  appealed  against  that
    decision, arguing that the revocation of his  indefinite  leave  was  a
    disproportionate interference with the Article 8 rights of himself  and
    his children.  He  lived  with  Ms  Mobolaji  Abdulkareem,  a  Nigerian
    citizen, and the couple's three children.  He was dependent  on  public
    funds.  The Appellant also argued that in the absence of evidence  from
    the Respondent that the Appellant's deportation was  conducive  to  the
    public good there was no power to revoke the existing indefinite  leave
    to remain.

The Decision at First Instance

4.   Section 76(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    provides that the Respondent may revoke a person's indefinite leave  to
    enter or remain if the person is liable to deportation  but  cannot  be
    deported for legal reasons. "Liable  to  deportation"  means  that  the
    Respondent deems the Appellant's deportation to  be  conducive  to  the
    public good (Section 3(5) of the Immigration Act 1971).  Judge Hopkins,
    following the case of Ali [2011] UKUT 250, drew a  distinction  between
    the expression that "the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive
    to the public good" on  the  one  hand  and  on  the  other  hand  that
    deportation is conducive to the public good,.  The Judge held that what
    was required was an express  indication  by  the  Respondent  that  the
    Appellant's deportation was conducive to the public good  and  as  that
    had not happened the Judge was not satisfied that the power  to  revoke
    indefinite leave granted by Section 76(1) of  the  2002  Act  had  been
    lawfully exercised by the Respondent.

5.   The Respondent had not actually deemed the Appellant's  deportation  to
    be conducive to the public good.  The  Judge  felt  there  would  be  a
    problem if the Respondent subsequently decided to deem the  Appellant's
    deportation to be conducive  to  the  public  good  and  make  a  fresh
    decision under Section  76(1).   A  deportation  order  had  been  made
    against the  Appellant  in  2012  but  subsequently  withdrawn  by  the
    Respondent.  The question was whether the withdrawal by the  Respondent
    of that deportation order meant that it had never existed (which  would
    mean that the Respondent could theoretically go on to make a revocation
    of leave order under Section 76) or it had  existed  for  a  period  of
    time, in which case it had revoked the Appellant's indefinite leave  to
    remain by operation of law and the previous indefinite leave would  not
    have revived when the deportation order was withdrawn, see the case  of
    George [2014] UKSC 28.  If the Appellant's indefinite leave had already
    been  invalidated  the  Judge  pointed  out  at  paragraph  27  of  his
    determination: "The revocation of leave decision on 8  July  2014  [the
    decision against which the Appellant was  appealing]  is  ineffective".
    He allowed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

6.   The Respondent appealed against that decision, arguing that  the  Judge
    had made a material misdirection of law.  The Respondent's  grounds  of
    onward appeal in effect argued with the Judge's interpretation of  Ali,
    stating, "In the instant case  the  [Respondent]  made  a  decision  to
    deport pursuant to Section 32 of the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  and  thus
    deemed the deportation of the Appellant to be conducive to  the  public
    good for the purposes of Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971".

7.   The Respondent also took issue with the First-tier's finding  that  the
    Appellant's  indefinite  leave  to  remain  may   already   have   been
    invalidated by the first deportation order.  The Respondent  disagreed,
    stating that indefinite leave to remain was  not  invalidated  where  a
    foreign national offender succeeded at an  in  country  appeal  as  the
    deportation order could not be said to have come into force and so  had
    not  invalidated  leave.   Under  Section  79(4)  of  the  2002  Act  a
    deportation order made in reliance on Section 32(5)  of  the  2007  Act
    does not invalidate leave in accordance with Section 5(1) of  the  1971
    Act if and for so long as an appeal under Section 82 of the 2002 Act is
    pending.  The First-tier had failed to resolve the matter before it  by
    finding the decision not in  accordance  with  the  law  such  that  it
    remained outstanding before the Respondent to take.

8.   The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer  on  26  January  2015.   In  granting
    permission to appeal he wrote that the Respondent had made  a  decision
    to deport the Appellant under Section 32 of the 2007 Act and  had  thus
    lawfully exercised  her  power  of  revocation  and  arguably  lawfully
    exercised her powers under Section 76(1) of the 2002 Act.




The Hearing before Me

9.   Shortly before the hearing before me the Appellant's solicitors sent  a
    fax to the Tribunal dated 7th April 2015 stating that the Appellant had
    left  the  United  Kingdom  the  previous   weekend   to   attend   his
    grandmother's funeral.  He was expected to be in Nigeria for five  days
    or so from the following Monday but in the solicitors'  view  this  did
    not mean that he had abandoned his appeal. The case  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal was now the Respondent's appeal rather than  the  Appellant's.
    They asked for the hearing to be adjourned or confined to error of  law
    only.

10.  At the hearing before me the Appellant's  solicitor  confirmed  that  a
    fax had been sent (in fact the fax itself  arrived  shortly  after  the
    hearing before me but I accept that it was sent in time.) It was argued
    on the Appellant's behalf that as he had indefinite leave to remain and
    had succeeded in his appeal the fact that he was out of the country did
    not operate as an abandonment of the appeal. The solicitors were acting
    under their professional obligation  to  inform  the  Tribunal  of  the
    whereabouts of their client.

11.  After allowing both parties some time to consider this  matter  in  the
    light of the Immigration Rules, I indicated that in my view the  result
    of the Appellant's voluntary departure from the  United  Kingdom  meant
    that the appeal had been abandoned and I would give full reasons in  my
    determination which I now do.

Findings

12.  Section 104(1) of the 2002 Act provides that an  appeal  under  Section
    82 is pending during the period beginning when  it  is  instituted  and
    ending when it is finally determined,  withdrawn  or  abandoned.   Sub-
    Section (2) provides that an appeal under Section 82(1) is not  finally
    determined  for  the  purposes  of  sub-Section  (1)  above  while   an
    application for permission to appeal under Section  11  or  13  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 could be made or is awaiting
    determination, permission to appeal under either of those Sections  has
    been granted and the appeal is awaiting determination or an appeal  has
    been remitted under Section 12 or  14  of  that  Act  and  is  awaiting
    determination.

13.  In this case the Respondent's application for permission to appeal  the
    First-tier decision was awaiting determination by the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The Appellant's appeal therefore, whilst successful at first  instance,
    had not been finally determined for the purposes of Section  104.   The
    decision of the First-tier was that the Respondent's decision  was  not
    in accordance with the law and therefore remained outstanding.  If that
    decision stood it would bring the Appellant's appeal to an end  because
    having  succeeded  at  first  instance  there  would  no  longer  be  a
    Respondent's decision to appeal against.  However, the  effect  of  the
    Respondent's onward appeal and the obtaining of permission  from  Judge
    Mailer was that the application for  permission  to  appeal  under  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 was awaiting determination.

14.  By reason of Section 92(8) of the 2002 Act, where an  Appellant  brings
    an appeal from within the United Kingdom but leaves the United  Kingdom
    before the appeal is finally determined the appeal is to be treated  as
    abandoned unless the  claim  to  which  the  appeal  relates  has  been
    certified under Section 94(1),  94(7)  or  94B.   Those  certifications
    relate to certifications by the Respondent that the claims are  clearly
    unfounded, which is not relevant in this case.

15.  Thus as a result  of  the  Appellant  voluntarily  leaving  the  United
    Kingdom his appeal falls to be treated as  abandoned  by  operation  of
    Section 92(8).  It does not matter that at the time the Appellant  left
    the United Kingdom it was the Respondent who  had  appealed  the  First
    Tier decision. That concludes the matter.  I did not invite submissions
    from the parties in these circumstances as to the  true  interpretation
    of the case of Ali and the perhaps somewhat fine distinction between  a
    statute providing that a foreign criminal's deportation is conducive to
    the public good and the view of  the  Respondent  that  the  particular
    foreign criminal's deportation is conducive to the public good. In  the
    circumstances the  Appellant's  appeal  must  fail  by  reason  of  his
    abandonment thereof.  The Respondent's onward appeal does not of itself
    succeed and there is no need to make any adjudication thereon.

16.  I would merely add that  on  the  assumption  that  the  Appellant  was
    granted 30 months' leave to remain  following  the  revocation  of  his
    indefinite leave to remain, it would appear that he still has leave  to
    remain in this country and can therefore re-enter the  United  Kingdom.
    He would be out of time to make a fresh appeal against the Respondent's
    decision to revoke his indefinite leave to remain which  in  any  event
    has been abandoned as I have found.  However, it does not  appear  that
    the Respondent has made  any  decision  to  remove  the  Appellant  and
    presumably therefore at the end of his period  of  leave  he  would  be
    entitled to appeal again against any such decision.  That, however,  is
    not a matter for me and I leave the matter there.


Notice of Decision

The Appellant  having  left  the  United  Kingdom  his  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision is treated as abandoned.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.



Signed this 27th day of April 2015


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable in this case and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 27th day of April   2015

.......................................................

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


