
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29387/2014
                                                               IA/29389/2014
                                                               IA/29392/2014
                                                               IA/29396/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th September 2017                        |On  3rd October 2017          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                          Mr SACHIN RASIKBHAI PATEL
                         Mrs NIMISHABEN SACHIN PATEL
                          MASTER DHRUV SACHIN PATEL
                          MISS PREEMA SACHIN PATEL
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr H Kannangara, instructed by Malik Law Chambers
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer





                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellants are a husband,  wife  and  two  children  born  on  12th
    November 1967,  14th  February  1974,  21st  September  1996  and  22nd
    September 1998 respectively. Their appeal against the refusal of  leave
    to remain on Article 8 grounds was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Whalan in a decision promulgated on 21st April 2015.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce  on  the
    following grounds: "It would appear from paragraph 36 that the  parties
    agreed that had the Fourth Appellant applied for leave to remain  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) at the date of the appeal  hearing,  she  would
    have been successful. This factor does not feature at all in the First-
    tier Tribunal's reasoning on Article 8, which is all predicated on  the
    Appellants'  failure  collectively  and  individually   to   meet   the
    requirements of the  Rules,  see  for  instance  the  reference  to  EV
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 879.  Nor has consideration been given to
    paragraph 276A0(iii) of the Immigration Rules which expressly  obviates
    the need to make a valid application if 276ADE is argued on appeal.

3.   The matter came before Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton on 12th  February
    2016. He found that, in  the  Respondent's  decision  letter,  specific
    consideration was given to the circumstances of  the  fourth  Appellant
    including an acknowledgement that she had lived in the UK for at  least
    seven years. However, to meet the Rules there would also need to  be  a
    finding or a concession that it would not be reasonable  to  expect  an
    applicant who had been here for  that  period  to  leave  the  UK.  The
    decision letter set out why  the  Respondent  considered  that  it  was
    reasonable to expect the fourth Appellant to leave the UK  because  she
    would be returning to India  with  her  parents  who  are  both  Indian
    citizens and they would be returning as a family unit.  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Pinkerton concluded at paragraph 13:

         "In the light of the decision letter it would be surprising  indeed
         if a  concession  was  made  by  the  respondent  that  the  fourth
         appellant was able to satisfy the requirements of the Rules  as  at
         the date of hearing and I do not accept that such a concession  was
         made. The respondent had already argued that it would be reasonable
         to expect the fourth appellant to leave  the  UK.  The  F-tT  judge
         considered the position as at the date of the hearing and  reasoned
         also why it would be reasonable for the fourth appellant  to  leave
         the UK in the company of her parents.  None of this points  to  the
         fourth appellant being able to meet the requirements of  the  Rules
         either at the date of decision or at the date of hearing".






4.   The Appellants appealed to the  Court  of  Appeal  and  permission  was
    granted by Silber J on the following grounds:

         "Permission is granted because there was no proper consideration of
         the approach advocated by the Court of Appeal in the recent case of
         MA (Pakistan) v UT and Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ 705 that:


             '49. ... However, the fact that the child has been in  the  UK
                  for seven years would need to be given significant  weight
                  in the proportionality exercise for two  related  reasons:
                  first, because of its relevance to determining the  nature
                  and strength of the child's best  interests;  and  second,
                  because it establishes as  a  starting  point  that  leave
                  should be granted unless there are powerful reasons to the
                  contrary'.


         Was this significant weight  given  in  this  case  to  the  fourth
         appellant's residence in the UK for seven years and  its  relevance
         to  determining  her  best  interests?   In  addition,  were  there
         powerful reasons to the contrary?"


5.   By consent it was ordered that the Appellants' appeal was  allowed  and
    the matter remitted to the Tribunal on the basis of the limited grounds
    on which permission was granted.

6.   It was noted in the statement  of  reasons  that  the  decision  of  MA
    (Pakistan) was promulgated on 7th June 2016 which postdated  the  Upper
    Tribunal decision under challenge.  Therefore, it was not possible  for
    the Tribunal to consider the case of MA (Pakistan) at the time  of  the
    decision.

7.   Accordingly, the appeal comes  before  me  on  a  very  limited  basis.
    Unfortunately, the situation has changed somewhat since the appeal  was
    remitted by the Court of Appeal.  Both the third and fourth  Appellants
    are now adults.  They are soon to turn 21 and 19 years old at  the  end
    of this month. The situation therefore is that they would  be  able  to
    satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) of the Immigration Rules if they made an
    application today because they have lived in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    over half of their lives.  However, the appeal is limited to Article  8
    because at the date the application was made neither of the  two  minor
    Appellants at that time had seven years' residence in the UK and  could
    not at the time of application satisfy the requirements of 276ADE.


Submissions

8.   Mr Kannangara submitted that, in carrying out an Article  8  assessment
    today, considerable weight should be attached  to  the  fact  that  the
    third and fourth Appellants can satisfy  276ADE(1)(iv)  when  assessing
    proportionality. Even though  they  were  now  adults,  they  were  not
    leading independent lives.  Mr Kannangara relied on Singh  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 630: "A young adult living with  parents  and  siblings  will  have
    family life and it does not automatically cease at the age of  18."  He
    submitted that the Appellants had family life in the UK and  the  issue
    was one of proportionality. MA (Pakistan) was relevant  to  the  extent
    that  significant  weight  should  be  attached  to  the  seven  years'
    residence as a child and there had to be strong reasons to refuse leave
    where the seven year requirement was met. He submitted  that  the  poor
    immigration history of the parents was not sufficient because the Rules
    provided for applications to be made by overstayers and  the  threshold
    was not as high as that applied to criminal offenders. Before the minor
    Appellants became adults, it was not reasonable to have  expected  them
    to leave the UK because their significant length of residence  was  not
    outweighed by the poor immigration history of their parents. The fourth
    Appellant would have met the Immigration Rules  throughout  the  appeal
    process. The family's ties to the UK  have  become  stronger  with  the
    passage of time and, therefore, the first and second Appellants  should
    be granted leave in line with the third and fourth Appellants.

9.   Mr Tufan relied on the following paragraphs of MA (Pakistan):
         "47. Even if we were applying the narrow reasonableness test  where
         the focus is on the child alone, it would not  in  my  view  follow
         that leave must be granted whenever the child's best interests  are
         in favour of remaining.  I reject Mr  Gill's  submission  that  the
         best interests assessment automatically resolves the reasonableness
         question.  If Parliament had wanted the child's best  interests  to
         dictate the outcome of the leave application, it  would  have  said
         so.   The  concept  of  'best  interests'  is  after  all  a   well
         established one.  Even where the  child's  best  interests  are  to
         stay, it may still be not unreasonable  to  require  the  child  to
         leave.  That will depend upon a careful analysis of the nature  and
         extent of the links in the UK  and  in  the  country  where  it  is
         proposed he should return.  What could not be considered,  however,
         would be the conduct and immigration history of the parents".
          "54. There are three issues which arise in these cases relating to
         the best interests of the children.  First, as I have said, Mr Gill
         submits that once the best interests  have  been  determined,  that
         necessarily resolves the reasonableness  question.  For  reasons  I
         have  given,  I  reject  that   submission.    There   is   nothing
         intrinsically illogical in the notion that whilst the child's  best
         interests are for him or her to stay, it  is  not  unreasonable  to
         expect him or her to go.  That is so  even  if  the  reasonableness
         test  should  be  applied  so  as  to   exclude   public   interest
         considerations bearing upon the parents".


10.  Mr Tufan also relied on the following paragraphs of  Treebhawon  [2017]
    UKUT 13 (IAC):
         "27. We remind ourselves of the composition of the family unit  and
             to reflect the passage of  time,  certain  updated  data.   Mr
             Treebhawon ('the father') is aged 45  years  and  has  resided
             unlawfully in the United Kingdom during  the  past  13  years.
             The mother of their four children, from whom he is  separated,
             has not formed  part  of  the  family  unit  since  2008,  the
             separation having begun and progressed some years  previously.
             There are four children of the family:
             (i)  The oldest child of the family, a girl now aged 18 years,
                  has resided continuously in the UK during the past 9
                  years, having the status of unlawful overstayer during the
                  bulk of that period.
             (ii) The second and third children, twins now  aged  16,  have
                  resided in the UK during the past six and  a  half  years,
                  unlawfully throughout.
             (iii)    The youngest child, now aged 13, has resided  in  the
                  UK during the past five years, unlawfully during  most  of
                  that period."


         "50.  Next,  we  are  mandated  by  section  55  of  the   Borders,
             Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 to give  primacy  to  the
             best interests of the third, fourth and  fifth  Appellants  as
             all are children.  We consider  that  the  best  interests  of
             these children will primarily be served by the maintenance  of
             the family unit:  as  already  noted,  this  will  predictably
             occur.  The second dimension of these three  Appellants'  best
             interests is that, on balance, they would  be  better  off  in
             certain respects, in particular economically,  if  the  family
             were to remain in the UK.  This we must take into  account  in
             the balancing exercise as a primary consideration".


11.  Mr Tufan  submitted  that  these  paragraphs  demonstrated  that,  even
    though the eldest child case had lived in the UK continuously for  nine
    years and was now an adult, the panel dismissed the Appellants'  appeal
    on Article 8 grounds.

12.  In the present case, the first and  second  Appellants  had  a  blatant
    disregard  for  immigration  law,  the  family  were  not   financially
    independent and had no right to work in the  UK.  Mr  Tufan  relied  on
    Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    803. The children had been educated at public expense  and  the  family
    had access to the National Health  Service  at  public  expense.   This
    appeal  should  be  dismissed  for  the  same  reasons  given  by   the
    presidential panel in Treebhawon.  It was open to the second and  third
    Appellants to make an  application  to  remain  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Even if I concluded that the third and fourth Appellants  could
    succeed under the Rules and it was not proportionate to  refuse  leave,
    then I could not allow the appeals of the first and  second  Appellants
    because there were no unjustifiably  harsh  consequences.  It  did  not
    follow that the first and second Appellants could succeed  given  their
    blatant disregard for immigration law.

13.  Mr Kannangara submitted that there was an undisturbed  finding  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal that it was in the best interests of the third  and
    fourth Appellants to remain in the UK.  The fact  that  the  first  and
    second Appellants had worked  illegally  and  not  paid  tax  were  not
    countervailing factors because this was part  of  their  status  as  an
    overstayer. They had not claimed public benefits and they  could  speak
    English. There was nothing to prevent their integration  into  the  UK.
    This case  was  finely  balanced  and  it  should  be  decided  in  the
    Appellants' favour. The only point against the Appellants was that they
    were overstayers and that in itself was not sufficient.
14.  The parents' conduct cannot be held against the children. At  the  time
    of the First-tier Tribunal decision, had the judge applied Section 117B
    correctly, then the first  and  second  Appellants'  claim  would  have
    succeeded under Article 8. Unfortunately, the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    did not look at Section 117B(6). Given that he  had  acknowledged  that
    the fourth Appellant could satisfy the  Immigration  Rules,  he  should
    have allowed the appeal of all four  Appellants.  This  was  consistent
    with the decision of Treebhawon in which the Appellants  would  win  or
    lose, all together, as a family  unit.  There  were  no  countervailing
    factors identified  in  Section  117B.   Proportionality  required  the
    parents to remain in the UK with the young adults  and  the  first  and
    second Appellant should be allowed to remain until the third and fourth
    Appellants became independent.

15.  Mr Kannangara submitted that the Appellants entered the UK as  visitors
    and overstayed, the first Appellant entering in September 2003 and  the
    remaining  Appellants  entering  in  August  2006.  They  submitted  an
    application for leave to remain in August 2012  and  this  application,
    having been refused, eventually came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Whalan who dismissed the appeal on the basis that the refusal of  leave
    was proportionate. There is some dispute as to whether a concession was
    made before the First-tier Tribunal. The judge stated at  paragraph  36
    that:

         "It is also acknowledged that if the Fourth Appellant  was  to  re-
         apply under paragraph 276ADE, she would now satisfy the  provisions
         of 276ADE(iv)".



16.  There are two parts to 276ADE(iv);  one  is  that  a  child  has  seven
    years' residence in the UK, and the second is  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  At the date of hearing
    the fourth Appellant had seven years' residence as a child in  the  UK,
    however the question of reasonableness was not addressed by the  judge.
    He dealt with the best interests of the  third  and  fourth  Appellant,
    given that the third Appellant had only recently attained  the  age  of
    18, and concluded that it was in their best interests that they  should
    not return to  India.   However,  he  found  that  the  proportionality
    exercise was finely balanced and that the best interests of  the  third
    and fourth Appellant did not tip the balance in their favour. The  poor
    immigration history of the first and second Appellants meant  that  the
    balance was in favour of the need to maintain immigration control.  The
    judge considered Section 117B(1) to (5), but made no mention of Section
    117B(6). This may well be because he acknowledged at paragraph 36  that
    the provisions of 276ADE(iv) were satisfied,  namely  that  the  fourth
    Appellant had seven years' residence and it would not be reasonable  to
    expect her to leave the UK.

17.  Mr  Kannangara  argued  that,  had  Judge  Whalan  properly  considered
    Section 117B(6),  he  would  have  allowed  the  appeals  of  all  four
    Appellants because,  having  acknowledged  that  the  fourth  Appellant
    satisfied paragraph 276ADE(iv), then  the  removal  of  the  first  and
    second Appellants was not in the public interest.
Preserved findings

18.  The findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal are  not  disputed  and
    are as follows.  The Appellants were born and grew up  in  India  until
    leaving for the UK  in  September  2003  and  August  2006.  The  first
    Appellant worked in India while the second Appellant was  a  housewife.
    The third and fourth Appellants both attended school in India. They are
    all fluent in Hindi.  The third and fourth Appellants, like  the  first
    and second Appellants, are fluent in English. They  all  have  existing
    family ties to India; the parents of the first  and  second  Appellants
    are all living in India,  and  indeed  the  first  Appellant's  parents
    provided a home for the family before they moved to the  UK.  All  four
    Appellants entered  the  UK  legally  as  visitors  but  then  remained
    illegally as overstayers. The first Appellant overstayed for over eight
    years, and the second, third and fourth Appellants overstayed for  over
    five years before lodging applications to regularise their status. Both
    the first and second Appellants worked illegally in the UK.  This  work
    has been fairly consistent since at least 2009 when the family left the
    home of the first Appellant's sister and neither have paid or  had  any
    intention to pay tax or NI.  All four Appellants have received NHS care
    to which they are not entitled. The third and  fourth  Appellants  also
    received an education in the UK. Since 2012 the family  have  lived  in
    their own rented accommodation costing �750.

19.  The First  and  Second  Appellants  have  pursued  from  the  outset  a
    calculated plan  of  economic  migration  designed  to  circumvent  the
    normal, regular immigration channels. The First Appellant's'  intention
    from the outset was to establish a life for himself and his  family  in
    the UK.  It was never his intention  to  return  to  India.  The  first
    Appellant, and abetted by the second Appellant, has  pursued  from  the
    outset a planned and determined economic migration, albeit one  pursued
    without status or permission since March  2004.   Their  children,  the
    third and fourth Appellants, cannot be blamed for this. The  first  and
    second Appellants,  deliberately  delayed  making  applications  whilst
    accruing necessary evidence of family and private life in the UK  until
    the status of their children became more critical.


Discussion and conclusions

20.  The Court of Appeal has remitted this matter to  be  decided  following
    MA (Pakistan).  It is interesting that the  paragraph  relied  upon  by
    Silber J,  paragraph  49  of  MA  (Pakistan),  makes  no  reference  to
    reasonableness but states that seven years' residence in  itself  would
    have to be given significant weight in  the  proportionality  exercise,
    and that it establishes as  a  starting  point  that  leave  should  be
    granted unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary. Accordingly,
    whether there was a concession or not, it would appear that neither the
    First-tier Tribunal or  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  identified  powerful
    reasons against granting leave to remain to the fourth Appellant.

21.  The situation before me is now somewhat  different.  I  find  that  the
    third and fourth Appellants would satisfy paragraph 276ADE(v)  if  they
    made an application today.  They have lived in  the  UK  for  over  ten
    years, albeit illegally because of the actions of  their  parents.  The
    third Appellant came to the UK at the age of 9 and is  now  almost  21.
    The fourth Appellant came to the UK at the age of 7 and is  now  almost
    19. They have been in the UK for more than half their lives. They would
    be able to satisfy paragraph 276ADE if an application was  made  today.
    On that basis, it would be disproportionate to refuse leave  to  remain
    because it cannot be said to be in the public  interest  to  refuse  an
    application when the Immigration Rules are satisfied.  Accordingly, for
    that reason I allow the appeal of  the  third  and  fourth  Appellants'
    under Article 8.

22.  I now turn to consider the appeals of the first and second  Appellants.
    They have lived in the UK illegally  for  over  ten  years.  They  have
    worked illegally and they have never paid tax.  However,  they  do  not
    appear to have had significant health needs and although they have  had
    access to the  NHS  they  have  not  received  any  benefits  and  have
    supported themselves from their illegal working.  The  parents  of  the
    first and second Appellants still live in India.

23.  In relation to family life, I accept that they still have  family  life
    with the third and fourth Appellants.  The  situation  really  has  not
    changed since the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, save that the
    third Appellant has gone to university and  the  fourth  Appellant  has
    started A levels, but they are still, as  young  adults,  dependent  on
    their parents which amounts to more than normal emotional ties. I  find
    that the first and second Appellants have established family life  with
    the third and fourth Appellants. A refusal  of  leave  would  interfere
    with family life if the third and fourth Appellants chose to remain  in
    the UK, and not return to India, as they would be  entitled  to  do  if
    granted leave to remain.

24.  I also find that the  first  and  second  Appellants  have  established
    private life in the UK over the  course  of  the  last  ten  years  and
    removal to India would interfere with that private life.  The  decision
    is in accordance with the law. The first and second  Appellants  cannot
    satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules.



25.   The  issue  is  therefore  whether  the  refusal  of  leave  would  be
    proportionate. I must take into account the matters listed  in  Section
    117B. The ability to speak English  is  a  neutral  factor.  I  am  not
    persuaded by Mr Tufan's submission that they cannot be considered to be
    financially independent  because  they  have  been  working  illegally.
    However, they have not been a burden on the taxpayer in that they  have
    not claimed benefits, neither have they contributed and paid tax. There
    is nothing to suggest that they have  been  unable  to  integrate  into
    society. I attach little  weight  to  their  ten  years'  private  life
    because it was established when they were in the UK unlawfully.

26.  Taking into account all these factors, including the Article  8  rights
    of the third and fourth Appellants, to be able to  remain  in  the  UK,
    continue their studies, and to be able to remain  living  as  a  family
    unit with their parents, I find that the balance falls in favour of the
    first and second Appellant being granted leave to remain. I have  taken
    into account the undisturbed findings of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    that they both came as visitors  and  overstayed  and  that  the  first
    Appellant's intention on coming to the UK was in order to make a better
    life for himself and his family. They have therefore  shown  a  blatant
    disregard for immigration law and have remained in the UK illegally for
    a significant amount of time, working illegally and not  paying  taxes.
    However, on the other side of the balance is  the  fact  that  the  two
    adult children are able to satisfy the Immigration Rules. The third and
    fourth  Appellants  are  still  dependent  on  the  first  and   second
    Appellants, and whilst their wrongdoing cannot be  condoned,  it  could
    not be said that for the majority of their lives the third  and  fourth
    Appellants could be held responsible for the actions of their parents.

27.  There is also the point made by Mr Kannangara that, had the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge specifically considered Section 117B(6) and  whether  it
    was reasonable for the fourth Appellant to leave the UK, he should have
    concluded that it was not reasonable for her  to  do  so  following  MA
    (Pakistan). The First-tier Tribunal judge found that her best interests
    were  served  in  remaining  in  the  UK  and  therefore  in  assessing
    reasonableness he would need to  look  at  whether  there  were  strong
    countervailing factors to the contrary. Given that the fourth Appellant
    cannot be  blamed  for  the  actions  of  her  parents,  their  illegal
    overstaying and illegal working had limited impact on whether it  would
    be reasonable for her to leave the UK.  It was clear  from  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's findings that the fourth Appellant was  about  to
    take GCSEs and was of an age where she would have formed  relationships
    outside the family unit. At the time of  that  decision  she  had  been
    living in the UK for nine years. Applying MA (Pakistan), it  could  not
    be said that they  were  strong  countervailing  factors  justifying  a
    refusal of leave.

28.  I agree with Mr Kannangara that this case is  finely  balanced,  but  I
    find on the particular facts of this case, the balance falls in  favour
    of the first and second  Appellants.  Therefore,  I  also  allow  their
    appeals under Article 8 on the basis that  the  refusal  of  leave  was
    disproportionate.

29.  Accordingly, I find that,  on  the  particular  circumstances  of  this
    case, the refusal of leave to remain was disproportionate. I allow  the
    appeals of all four Appellants on Article 8 grounds.







Notice of decision

Appeals allowed

No anonymity direction is made.




              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 29th September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.



              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 29th September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


