
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29071/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Sheldon Court Birmingham               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th May 2013                                |On 7th June 2013           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                Sudhir Malik

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E Norman of Counsel instructed by Bassi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Pleass, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Parkes promulgated on 19th March 2013.

 2. The Appellant is an Indian citizen born 14th August  1986  who  applied
    for indefinite leave to remain as the dependent relative  of  a  person
    present and settled in the United Kingdom, pursuant to paragraph 317 of
    the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant also relied upon Article 8 of the
    1950 European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 3. The application was refused on 29th November 2012, and  the  Respondent
    issued a combined Notice of Immigration Decision refusing to vary leave
    to remain, and  deciding  to  remove  the  Appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

 4. The Appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by Judge Parkes on  6th
    March 2013.  The judge recorded that at the start of  the  hearing,  it
    was conceded on behalf of the Appellant,  that  he  could  not  succeed
    under the Immigration Rules, and  he  was  pursuing  his  appeal  under
    Article 8 of the 1950 Convention only.  The appeal was dismissed.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and in grounds settled by counsel, it was contended that the judge  had
    erred in law in the following way;

         "Making a misdirection of law.  At  paragraph  2  of  the  skeleton
         argument submitted before the judge it was stated (in bold);
         The section 47 aspect of the decision is unlawful and the  Tribunal
         must find it so; Adamally and Jaferi (section 47 removal decisions;
         Tribunal Procedures) [2012] UKUT 00414 (IAC).  The  appeal  against
         the removal decision must be allowed.
         It was confirmed orally before the judge that  the  appeal  against
         the  removal  decision  should  be  allowed  and  the  Respondent's
         representative did not demur from this  approach.   The  judge  has
         failed to deal with the unlawful removal decision  and  has  merely
         dismissed the appeal.  This is an error of law.
         The Upper Tribunal should substitute a decision allowing the appeal
         against the removal decision."

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Macdonald who found it arguable that the judge may be said  to
    have failed to deal with the removal decision as he ought to have done.



Submissions

 7. At the hearing  before  us  both  representatives  were  succinct,  and
    accepted that the issue before us was narrow.   Miss  Norman  submitted
    that the judge had erred as contended in the grounds  contained  within
    the application for permission to appeal and Miss  Pleass  agreed.   We
    were invited to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  and
    substitute a fresh decision allowing the appeal to the extent that  the
    Respondent's decision to remove the Appellant  was  not  in  accordance
    with the law.





Our Conclusions and Reasons

 8. The judge erred by failing to determine that the  Respondent's  removal
    decision  made  under  section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum   and
    Nationality Act 2006 was not in accordance with the  law.   The  appeal
    should have been allowed on that basis.

 9. There was no challenge to the well reasoned  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appeal with reference to paragraph 317,  and  Article  8  of  the  1950
    Convention, and those findings stand and are preserved.

10. The Upper Tribunal decided in Adamally and Jaferi that when  a  removal
    decision purportedly under section 47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006 is made  concurrently  with  a  decision  refusing
    further leave, the section 47 decision is unlawful,  but  the  decision
    refusing leave is a  separate  decision  that  requires  determination.
    Section 85(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    brings the two decisions into one appeal, but section 86  of  that  Act
    allows  and  requires  the  determination  to  reflect  differences  in
    outcomes.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
is set aside.  We substitute a fresh decision.

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on
human rights grounds.

The appeal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the  Respondent's  decision  to
remove him is not in accordance with the  law,  and  that  decision  remains
outstanding before the Respondent.

Anonymity

There was no anonymity direction made in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   There
was no application for anonymity and no anonymity direction is made  by  the
Upper Tribunal.






Signed                              Date 20th May 2013


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  human
rights grounds but allowed in  respect  of  the  decision  to  remove  under
section 47 of the 2006 Act.  However no fee is payable to appeal  a  section
47 decision and therefore no fee award is made.






Signed                              Date 20th May 2013


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
