
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ/DN-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29884/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 10th October 2014                 |On 21st November 2014                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                           miss Evette Anola Simms
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Corban, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 5th September 1976.   The
    Appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  24th  October  1999.   Her
    immigration history is recited  in  great  detail  in  the  first  main
    paragraph of the Notice of Refusal dated 9th July 2013.  On 25th  June
    2013  the  Appellant's  case  was  reconsidered  under   the   European
    Convention of Human Rights it having been contended  that  her  removal
    would be a breach of her human rights because of  her  relationship  to
    Calvin Scott.  In considering her claim regard was given to Appendix FM
    of the Immigration Rules specifically in relation to the partner route.
     By a Notice of Refusal dated 9th July  2013  the  Secretary  of  State
    concluded that the Appellant had failed to show any evidence  that  she
    had children in the United Kingdom and  consequently  did  not  benefit
    from EX.1(a).  Further it was  accepted  that  although  the  Appellant
    might face a degree of hardship if returning to Jamaica there would  be
    no insurmountable obstacles preventing her relationship with  Mr  Scott
    continuing outside the United Kingdom and consequently she did not meet
    EX.1(b).

 2. Further her application  was  assessed  against  the  parent  route  of
    Appendix FM.  The Secretary of State concluded that the  Appellant  has
    lived in Jamaica for 23 years before coming to the United  Kingdom  and
    it was accepted that she still had cultural and social ties to Jamaica.
     It was noted that she spoke a  language  which  is  recognised  within
    Jamaica and that she had a 16 year  old  daughter  in  Jamaica  who  is
    currently cared for by her father and as such the  Secretary  of  State
    was satisfied that the Appellant had family ties and therefore did  not
    meet part VI of paragraph 276ADE.  In addition consideration was  given
    to the factors listed in paragraph 353B of the  Immigration  Rules,  as
    were her family and private life which were considered in the round.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Archer sitting at Hatton Cross on 21st February 2013.  Thereafter
    a further application was accepted and the appeal  came  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Oliver sitting at Richmond on  20th  January  2014.
    In a determination promulgated on 14th February 2014  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed, both under the immigration grounds and  on  human
    rights grounds.

 4. On 18th February 2014 Grounds of Appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  were
    lodged.  On 13th March 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Chohan  granted
    permission to appeal.  The judge noted  that  in  essence  the  grounds
    submitted that the judge had failed to undertake the balancing exercise
    in respect of Article 8 of the ECHR and further argued that  the  judge
    had given inadequate reasons in respect of his findings that there were
    no insurmountable  difficulties  to  family  life  outside  the  United
    Kingdom.  It was noted that the judge's findings set out at  paragraphs
    14 to 16 were relatively short although  within  those  paragraphs  the
    judge had dealt with the issue of insurmountable obstacles and  Article
    8.  Whilst the judge made reference to the relevant case law  regarding
    insurmountable obstacles it was not clear  from  his  determination  on
    what basis that he found there were no insurmountable obstacles and  in
    respect of Article 8 a proportionality exercise did not appear to  have
    been undertaken as set out in  the  test  in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.
    Finally Judge Chohan found that if anything  the  determination  lacked
    adequate reasoning and considered that there were  arguable  errors  of
    law and that all grounds could be argued.

 5. By letter dated 31st March 2014 the Secretary of State responded to the
    Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24 and submitted  that  having  considered
    recent jurisprudence the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made
    findings on insurmountable obstacles which were  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence before him at the hearing and at the time of hearing and  that
    the Grounds of Appeal were merely an attempt to reargue the appeal.

 6. On 14th April 2014 this matter came before me to determine  whether  or
    not there had been a material error of law.  I acknowledged in  finding
    that there was an error of law that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had
    not addressed paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  nor  had  he
    addressed the situation of the Appellant's personal  and  private  life
    only that of her partnership with Mr Scott.  I had noted  that  it  was
    the contention of the Appellant that she did not  have  ties  now  with
    Jamaica and that whether she did or did not was an issue that needed to
    be addressed in the determination.  I acknowledged that the case had to
    be looked at on its own facts and in its entirety and that approach had
    not been adopted by the Immigration Judge nor had the judge given  full
    and proper consideration to  the  position  in  which  Mr  Scott  found
    himself and as to whether or not there  were  insurmountable  obstacles
    that would prevent the Appellant and Mr Scott relocating to Jamaica.

 7. I found that there was a material error of law  then  gave  directions.
    Those directions recorded that the factual history in this  matter  was
    agreed.  It is on that basis that the appeal comes back before me to be
    dealt with by way of submissions.  Mr Corban  continues  to  appear  on
    behalf of the Appellant.  The Secretary of State appears  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mr Shilliday.

 8. The Sponsor is unwell and unable to attend.  However it is agreed  that
    the matter proceed by way of submissions and  consequently  the  appeal
    can proceed in his absence.   Mr  Corban  advises  that  there  are  no
    additional documents to be lodged.

Submissions/Discussions

 9. Mr Corban starts by taking me to Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules
    Section EX1(b) namely that this paragraph applies if:

         The applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen, settled  in  the
         UK ..., and there are insurmountable obstacles to family life  with
         that partner continuing outside the UK.

10. Mr Corban submits that that applies in this instant case and  that  the
    Secretary of State has conceded that the Appellant and  Mr  Scott  have
    lived together for some two years and that  the  Sponsor  is  currently
    aged 59, a UK citizen who will be 60 in December and that he  would  be
    likely to face the difficulty of establishing himself if he had to move
    with the Appellant to Jamaica.  He points out that Mr Scott is a  self-
    employed panel beater  with  his  own  property  which  is  subject  to
    mortgage and that if he moved he would have to sever  his  family  ties
    with relatives in the UK.

11. Mr Corban submits that the Appellant meets the requirements to  be  met
    by an applicant for leave to remain on  the  grounds  of  private  life
    referring me to the established statutory  authority  to  be  found  in
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.   He  points  out  that  the
    Appellant has been in the UK for fifteen years contending that that  is
    only five years less than the period of continuous  residence  required
    to satisfy paragraph 276ADE.  He states that  the  presence  of  having
    relatives in the country to where an Appellant would be returned is not
    fatal to an application and submits that the Appellant  has  no  longer
    ties with her home country submitting that this was a finding  of  fact
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made.

12. Mr Corban submits  that  the  parties'  circumstances  are  exceptional
    relying on the fact that they have resided together/cohabited  for  two
    years, the Appellant's  age  when  she  arrived  in  the  UK  (which  I
    calculate to be 23) and the nature of her family ties to  the  UK.   He
    reminds me of the test to be found under Razgar  and  submits  that  it
    would be proportionate, and not adverse to the interests of immigration
    control, to allow this appeal.

13. He further seeks to rely on the authority of Edgehill [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    402.  And that the principles to be  adopted  under  Razgar  should  be
    looked at independently of those to be found in paragraph 276ADE of the
    Immigration Rules.  He submits that the Appellant applied prior to  the
    new Rules coming into force and that  to  use  Mr  Corban's  words  the
    Appellant has "clocked up" fourteen years'  continuous  residence.   He
    acknowledges the public interest factor and that the Appellant  was  an
    overstayer but points out that the Appellant has no criminal record and
    that the public interest factor is outweighed.   He  submits  that  the
    appeal should be allowed.

14. Mr Shilliday submits that Edgehill is of no applicability in this  case
    and that whilst the Appellant's application was before  the  new  Rules
    application was thereafter made to judicially review the decision.   He
    submits that the judicial review (which is not in the file  before  me)
    materially changed the factual matrix in this case  and  therefore  the
    case is totally distinguishable from  the  findings  in  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Edgehill and he refers me to the new Immigration Rules.

15. He further submits that Mr Corban is wrong  to  seek  to  rely  on  the
    Appellant having had fourteen years' continuous residence under the old
    Rules.  He takes me to paragraph 1 of the determination of Judge Oliver
    pointing out that in November 2011 the Appellant was served with notice
    IS151A and therefore "the clock stopped" in November 2011 and that  the
    Appellant could never accrue fourteen years' continuous residence under
    the old Rules.

16. He takes me to  the  authorities  under  Article  8  starting  with  MF
    (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393 as then expanded  and
    applied in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules -  correct  approach)  [2013]
    UKUT  00640  (IAC).   He  correctly  states  the  law  that  the   term
    "insurmountable obstacles" in provisions such as Section  EX1  are  not
    obstacles which are impossible to surmount but  concern  the  practical
    possibility  of  relocation  and  that   in   the   absence   of   such
    insurmountable obstacles it is necessary to show other non-standard and
    particular features demonstrating that removal  will  be  unjustifiably
    harsh.  He refers me to the factual detail of the authority  of  R  (On
    the Application of) Kussin [2009] EWHC 358  (Admin)  where  Mr  Justice
    Blake made findings on very similar facts and  that  the  authority  of
    Chikwamba v the Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008]  UKHL
    40 was quite specific and would not apply in  this  instant  case.   He
    emphasises that Mr Scott would not have to leave everything behind  and
    that whilst Mr Corban had already indicated that "for Mr Scott to leave
    would cause some difficulties" the Secretary of State  admits  that  it
    would cause a degree of hardship but points out  that  that  degree  of
    hardship shown as long ago as 2009 in Kussin would be  insufficient  to
    interfere with the Secretary of State's right to  maintain  immigration
    control and that the degree of hardship cannot possibly be such  as  to
    show that the case would succeed in this instant case.  The law is,  as
    Mr Shilliday reminds me, set out albeit that it has  subsequently  been
    expanded by further case law, at paragraph 24(b) of Gulshan namely:

         "After applying the requirements of the rules, only if there may be
         arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside them  is
         it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on  to  consider  whether
         there are  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised
         under them: Nagre;"

17. Mr Shilliday points out that this is an Appellant who contends that she
    has long resided in the UK and had  a  lengthy  relationship  with  her
    Sponsor but that both these aspects are  aspects  that  are  considered
    under the Rules and that if the Appellant fails  to  satisfy  the  test
    under the Rules there is nothing else left upon which she  can  appeal.
    He points out further that even if he is wrong there are no  compelling
    circumstances in this instant case and that there is no  suggestion  of
    any health problem either for the Appellant or the Sponsor.  As far  as
    private life is concerned the Court of Appeal has  made  it  abundantly
    clear that there is no concept of a "near miss" and he also  refers  me
    to paragraph 117B of the 2014 Immigration Act pointing out that that is
    binding upon me and  that  parliament  has  decided  unless  there  are
    exceptional circumstances outside the Rules, (which  he  submits  there
    are not in this instant case,) that  the  appeal  cannot  succeed.   He
    asked me to dismiss the appeal.

18. Mr Corban asked me  to  note  the  difference  between  ISA151A  and  B
    pointing out that A is only a warning and that it  is  the  service  of
    ISA151B that requires a party to leave.  Further he contends that it is
    open for me to find that there are grounds for granting leave to remain
    outside the Rules and that therefore it would be appropriate to  go  on
    to consider whether there are compelling circumstances not sufficiently
    recognised under them.

19. Mr Shilliday points out when looking at  ISA151  that  Part  1  is  not
    appealable, that Part 2 is appealable out-of-country and  that  ISA151B
    is appealable  in-country  and  nobody  is  certain  exactly  what  Mrs
    Edgehill received and therefore effectively to look  at  that  argument
    under Edgehill is not relevant.  He reminds me that the point  is  that
    the Appellant can never satisfy the fourteen year Rule and that  a  151
    notice stops the clock anyway and as he has  submitted  previously  the
    Appellant cannot meet that part of the Rules.

Findings

20. There have been very detailed arguments and submissions in this matter.
     Whilst I will hereinafter address the position under  Edgehill  it  is
    further appropriate to note that it is only at this hearing that issues
    relating to that authority have been raised.  It was not raised  before
    me when the issue relating to an error of law was  raised  albeit  that
    the authority had been published prior to that date.

21. It is important to give this determination structure.   Prior  to  July
    2012 the Immigration  Rules  contained  provisions  relating  to  human
    rights applications.  In December 2012 the Rules were  changed  by  the
    introduction of paragraph A277C.  In Edgehill the Tribunal had  applied
    the provisions  of  the  post-July  2012  Rules  in  ignorance  of  the
    Transitional Provisions in a case in  which  the  pre-July  2012  Rules
    contained a specific provision under which the applicant may have  been
    able to succeed.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  submission  made  by  Mr
    Shilliday in this matter is the correct one and that the factual matrix
    of this case substantially distinguishes it from Edgehill and that  the
    provisions in Edgehill do not apply.  Consequently as set  out  clearly
    in Judge Oliver's determination from the service of the  notice  IS151A
    the Appellant remained  in  this  country  unlawfully,  that  time  had
    stopped and that she could never have acquired under the old Rules  the
    fourteen years' continuous residence  that  was  necessary  to  succeed
    under the Rules and that she certainly does not succeed under  the  new
    Rules.

22. The factual history of the First-tier Tribunal has been maintained  and
    by that I mean that the findings set out at  paragraphs  19  to  25  of
    Judge Oliver's determination are agreed and accepted.  It is the  claim
    pursuant to Article 8 that I am looking at  afresh  and  reconsidering.
    The Appellant as set out at paragraph 26  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's  determination  seeks  to  rely  on  paragraph  EX1(b)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  It is true that the Appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a partner who  is  in  the  UK  and  is  a
    British citizen settled in the UK.  The question  therefore  arises  to
    whether or not there are insurmountable obstacles to family  life  with
    that partner continuing outside  the  UK.   That  issue  was  initially
    addressed at paragraph 26 of the First-tier  Tribunal's  determination.
    The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  considered  VW  and  MO  (Article  8  -
    insurmountable obstacles) Uganda [2008] UKAIT 00021, a decision of  the
    then president of the Tribunal Mr Justice Hodge.  That  case  confirmed
    that there was a need to a structured approach to Article 8 and subject
    to the need to avoid applying too high a  threshold  to  the  issue  of
    interference and not applying a legal test of "truly  exceptional"  the
    five stage approach set out in Razgar remained correct.   The  test  or
    criterion  of  "insurmountable  obstacles"  remained  part  of  UK  and
    Strasbourg jurisprudence on Article 8 and the fact that both the UK and
    Strasbourg's decisions sometimes  formulated  this  test  in  terms  of
    "reasonableness" or "seriousness" showed that it was not a test subject
    to strict definition.  Mr Justice Hodge found that whichever  of  these
    formulations was used an applicant must show  more  than  a  degree  of
    hardship.  Mr Corban submits these degrees of hardship in this  instant
    case includes the fact that the Sponsor is almost 60,  a  self-employed
    panel beater and has his own property.  I find as  a  finding  of  fact
    that none of these factors justify insurmountable obstacles which would
    come within the definition.  Indeed the fact that the Appellant is self-
    employed would, it seems to me, place him on a slightly better  footing
    than if he were in employment in that he can set up  his  own  business
    wherever he likes.  I do emphasise however  for  the  purpose  of  this
    determination that even if he had been in employment I would  not  have
    found that that created an insurmountable obstacle.  The fact  that  he
    has a property subject to mortgage and that he would have to sell  that
    property again cannot in any way  be  shown  to  be  an  insurmountable
    obstacle.  The Sponsor knows exactly where he stands with the Appellant
    and that she has no status to be in the UK and that  if  he  wishes  to
    live with her there is nothing whatsoever of a practical nature to stop
    him moving with her back to her country of origin.  It is a free choice
    that he has to make.

23. Consequently if  there  are  no  insurmountable  obstacles  or  serious
    difficulties in the way of family  members  accompanying  an  applicant
    abroad, and in this case I find  that  there  are  not,  and  that  the
    Sponsor can be treated as a family member, then special reasons need to
    be  shown  for  why  an  adverse  decision  is  not  to  be  considered
    proportionate.  The submission Mr Corban makes  that  the  Sponsor  has
    family ties in the UK which he would have to leave does not even  begin
    to approach the necessary threshold.  Consequently I am satisfied  this
    is an Appellant who cannot avail herself of the benefits  of  paragraph
    EX1 of the Immigration Rules.

24. The approach to private and family life addressed by  Mr  Shilliday  in
    particular with regard to his reference to MF  Nigeria  is  correct  in
    law.  Insurmountable obstacles provisions such as Section EX1  are  not
    obstacles  which  were  impossible  to  surmount.   They  concern   the
    practical possibility of relocation.   There  is  no  practical  reason
    other than a lack of  a  desire  to  do  so  which  would  prevent  the
    Appellant and Sponsor relocating back to Jamaica.

25. In any consideration of an Article 8 claim the starting  point  is  the
    law itself.  Article 8 states:

      i) everyone has the right to respect for his private and family  life,
         his home and his correspondence;

     ii) there should be no interference by a public body with the  exercise
         of this right except such as is in accordance with the law  and  is
         necessary in a democratic  society  in  the  interest  of  national
         security, public safety or the economic well-being of the  country,
         for the prevention of disorder or  crime,  for  the  protection  of
         health or morals, or for the protection of the rights  and  freedom
         of others.

26. The general approach to Article 8 cases is that in Nhundhu and  Chiwera
    (01/T/H/0613).  In those cases the  Tribunal  said  that,  in  deciding
    claims under Article 8, there is  a  five  stage  test  which  must  be
    applied in order to determine whether a breach has occurred:

         a) does family life, private life, home  or  correspondence  exist
            within the meaning of Article 8;

         b) if so, has the right to respect for this been interfered with;

         c) if so, was the interference in accordance with the law;

         d) if so, was the interference in pursuit of one of the legitimate
            aims set out in Article 8(2); and

         e) if so, is the interference proportionate to the pursuit of  the
            legitimate aim?

    Those were essentially the five questions  endorsed  by  the  House  of
    Lords in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

27. It is, of course, well-established that, where the Appellant is in  the
    UK and removal will interfere with the family life/private life he (and
    since Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39 his family)  already  enjoy  in
    the UK, then Article 8 can be engaged.  In Ullah and Do [2004] UKHL  26
    the House of Lords accepted that Article  8  could,  in  principle,  be
    relied upon if the effect was that the infringement of the  Appellant's
    rights would occur in the country to which he was to be removed.

28. The Secretary of State has addressed Article 8 family  aspects  of  the
    Respondent's position through the Rules, in  particular  EX1,  and  the
    private life aspect through paragraph  276ADE.   I  am  satisfied  that
    there are no insurmountable obstacles preventing  the  continuation  of
    the family life outside the UK for all the reasons set out above.  Only
    if there are arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside
    the Rules is it necessary for me to consider  for  Article  8  purposes
    whether there are compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised
    under the Rules.  That was  the  approach  adopted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge at paragraph 15 of his determination.  He found that all
    the Appellant's Article 8 rights had developed whilst her residence had
    either been temporary or unlawful and whilst return will interfere with
    that life she has developed with her partner it would be in  accordance
    with the law.  I endorse that approach.

29. The Tribunal in Gulshan made clear and  has  repeated  subsequently  in
    Shahzad  (Article  8:  legitimate  aim)  [2014]  UKUT  00085  (IAC)  at
    paragraph (31):

         "Where an  area  of  the  rules  does  not  have  such  an  express
         mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) ([29]-[31]  in  particular)
         and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT
         640 (IAC) should be followed: i.e. after applying the  requirements
         of the rules, only if  there  may  be  arguably  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them."

30. The Court of Appeal in MM (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985 at paragraph 128 went on to state:

         "Nagre does not add anything to the debate save for  the  statement
         that if a particular person is outside the  Rule  then  he  has  to
         demonstrate, as a preliminary to a consideration outside  the  Rule
         that he has an arguable case that there may  be  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside the  Rules.   I  cannot  see  much
         utility  in  imposing  this  further  intermediary  test.   If  the
         applicant cannot satisfy the Rule, then there either is or there is
         not a further Article 8 claim.  That will have to be determined  by
         the relevant decision maker."

31. It is necessary for the Appellant to show exceptional circumstances  in
    order  to  succeed  on  Article  8  outside  the   Immigration   Rules.
    Exceptional does not mean unusual or unique.  Whilst all cases  are  to
    some extent unique those unique factors do not  generally  render  them
    exceptional.  Having considered all the relevant factors raised by  the
    Appellant  and  weighed  them  against  the  public  interest  I   have
    determined  that  in  this  instant  case  there  are  no   exceptional
    circumstances upon which the Appellant can rely.

32. Further it is now appropriate for  me  to  give  due  consideration  to
    paragraph 117B of the Immigration Act  2014.   The  Appellant  remained
    unlawfully in the UK from 14th August 2003 until served with her notice
    IS151A on 17th November 2011.  She claims to have met Mr Scott  and  to
    have cohabited with him since 2007.  Under paragraph 117B of  the  2014
    Act little weight should be given to  (a)  a  private  life  or  (b)  a
    relationship formed with a qualifying partner that is established by  a
    person at a time when the person is in  the  UK  unlawfully  and  under
    117B(5) little weight should be given to a private life established  by
    a person at a time when the person's immigration status is  precarious.
    Both of these factors affect the current Appellant.

33. In conclusion therefore what I am faced with is that an  Appellant  who
    cannot meet the Immigration Rules, has shown  no  reason  for  all  the
    above reasons that she should come within EX1 of the Immigration  Rules
    and  has  shown  no  reason   whatsoever   to   establish   exceptional
    circumstances that would enable me to consider this  case  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  For all the above reasons the appeal fails and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is reinstated.

Decision

34. The Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal is reinstated.

35. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.



Signed        Date 21st November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

