
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/29950/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                     |Determination Promulgated  |
|On: 29 August 2014                        |On:  10 September 2014     |
|                                          |                           |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             RICHARD BAMUZIBIRE
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:             Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:            In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert in which he allowed the appeal  of
    Mr Bamuzibire, a citizen of Uganda, against the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse to vary leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student migrant. I shall refer  to  Mr  Bamuzibire  as  the  Applicant,
    although he was the Appellant in the proceedings below.
 2. The application under appeal was made on 17 May 2013 and was refused by
    reference to paragraph 245ZX(ha) of the Immigration Rules (HC395) on  2
    July 2013.  The Applicant exercised his right of appeal to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  This is the appeal which came before Judge  Herbert  on
    16 May 2014 and was dismissed by virtue of the  Immigration  Rules  but
    allowed by reference to Article 8 of the Human Rights  Convention.  The
    Secretary of State applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The application was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge T R
    P Hollingworth on 9 July 2014 in the following terms

       The findings in paragraphs 12 and 13 of the determination are  given
       insufficient weight.


       The reality is the Appellant could not satisfy the  requirements  of
       the  rules.  No  consideration  of  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  correct
       approach) 2013 UKUT 640 appears to have taken place.




 3. At the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Whitwell  appeared  to  represent  the
    Secretary of State. The  Applicant  appeared  in  person  and  was  not
    legally represented. The Applicant's nominated legal representative, Mr
    Okech of Ukimas Consultancy Limited, contacted the Court  by  telephone
    to say that he was detained in a First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  at  the
    Hatton Cross hearing centre. The Applicant requested an adjournment  of
    the proceedings and I heard representations in this respect  from  both
    parties. The Applicant said that he  had  not  been  able  to  get  any
    document from his representative to request an adjournment  or  explain
    his failure to attend. His representative told him that he  started  at
    Hatton Cross at 10:00 and when he called the Applicant at 13:24 he told
    him that his case at Hatton Cross was floating. He said that  he  would
    send a text message but this still has not arrived. I  pointed  out  to
    the Applicant that his representative had not  made  contact  with  the
    Tribunal prior to the hearing listed at 14:00 and no  papers  had  been
    submitted in response to the grant of leave to  appeal.  The  Applicant
    said that he had been told by his representative that there was no need
    to submit any documents. Mr Whitwell opposed the application.  He  said
    there was no good reason for an adjournment. It  was  unclear  why  the
    Applicant's representative had chosen to prioritise a float case in the
    First-tier Tribunal at a different venue. There had been no response to
    the grounds of appeal or grant of leave. Looking at the situation  with
    a cynical  eye  this  could  be  seen  as  a  vehicle  to  prolong  the
    Applicant's status.

 4. I decided that an adjournment was not justified. In the first place the
    conduct of the Applicant's legal representative is at best discourteous
    and  falls  short   of   the   professional   standards   expected   of
    representatives before this Tribunal. Where a representative has  cases
    listed before different courts or tribunals  on  the  same  day  he  is
    expected to make proper arrangements to cover all venues. Where, as  is
    sometimes inevitable, circumstances are such that a  representative  is
    unable to  attend  the  very  least  that  is  expected  is  a  written
    explanation and application and where the individual representative  is
    unable to access facilities to do so it should come  from  his  office.
    This case was listed for 14:00, it was not called until 15:00  and  was
    not concluded until 15:30. There  was  an  ample  time  for  a  written
    explanation to be given. In the second place this  application  for  an
    adjournment must be seen in the specific context of the decision  under
    appeal. The application made on 17 May 2013 was for leave to remain  to
    continue a course ending on 27 December 2013. The Notice of  Appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal stated  "My  final  examination  for  the  last
    papers will be in December 2013. I  therefore  need  to  sit  for  that
    examinations and collect my certificate before I return  to  Uganda  in
    February 2014". At the appeal hearing on 16  May  2014  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge having found that the Applicant

         "clearly does not qualify under the Immigration Rules"

     and dismissing his appeal in this respect  (a  decision  that  is  not
    challenged before me)  noted that his examinations


         "are due to take place ... on 3 June 2014, 5 June 2014 and 10 June
        2014 with results expected in September 2014".


    The Judge found (at paragraph 17

        "Effectively the results come out in September 2013  (sic)  and  it
        would be advantageous to the Appellant if  he  was  in  the  United
        Kingdom  when  those  results  are  published,  but  he   envisages
        returning to Uganda and coming back to the United Kingdom  for  any
        graduation ceremony in December"

    It was for this reason that the Judge found


        "the balance falls for this limited period  until  September  until
        the results are out in favour of the Appellant"


     and allowed the appeal by reference to Article 8.

 5.  In my judgement, and given the context detailed above,  it  cannot  be
    justified to adjourn an error of law hearing listed on the last day  of
    August where the consequence of decision complained of could only be  a
    grant of discretionary leave until the last day of September.


Background

 6. The background  to  the  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the Applicant was born in Uganda 19 February 1978.
    He came to the United Kingdom with leave to enter as a  student  on  12
    July 2004 and has been granted a  series  of  extensions  of  leave  to
    remain to enable him to continue his studies. The last grant  of  leave
    expired on 18 May 2013 and his application to extend leave having  been
    made in time he remains lawfully present in  the  United  Kingdom  with
    leave extended by virtue of section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.
.

 7. The Applicant's circumstances have changed  since  he  gave  notice  of
    appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  that  his  final  examinations
    scheduled to take place in December 2013 did not take place until  June
    2014 with the consequence that results and certificate due to be issued
    in February 2014 are now due in September 2014. In any  event,  and  as
    stated  above,  the  Applicant  does  not  challenge   the   First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to dismiss his appeal by virtue of the  Immigration
    Rules.


Submissions

 8. On behalf the Secretary of State Mr Whitwell relied on the  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal and referred to the decisions  in  Gulshan
    (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT  640  (IAC)  and
    Patel and others [2013] UKSC 72. He said that there were two errors  of
    law. In the first place the determination makes no finding of arguable,
    exceptional or compelling circumstances justifying the consideration of
    the appeal outside the terms of the  Immigration  Rules  in  accordance
    with Gulshan. The Judge embarks upon a free-wheeling Article 8 analysis
    of the type envisaged in paragraph 27 of  Gulshan.  He  gives  no  good
    reason for doing so. Secondly and  in  any  event  the  proportionality
    finding in paragraph 22 of the determination is inadequately  reasoned.
    In paragraph 22 the Judge directs himself to relevant case law and then
    goes on to make a finding contrary to that case law without giving any,
    or any adequate, reason for doing so.

 9. The Applicant said that the human rights issue is the fact that he  has
    been here for about 10 years. If his visa was refused he would  not  be
    able to travel anywhere. He is leaving in September anyway but  he  may
    not work in Uganda in the future and does not want  anything  to  block
    him being able to travel elsewhere.  He  said  that  he  needed  to  be
    present for the results because there may well  be  difficulty  getting
    his results and his certificates posted to Kampala.


Error of law

10. In my judgement the decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses clear
    and material errors of law. Having found (at paragraphs 12 and 13) that
    the Applicant did not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
    the determination moves on (paragraph 14) to a consideration of Article
    8 ECHR without any explanation of why it was necessary to  do  so.  The
    determination does not make any reference to Gulshan or indeed Nagre  v
    SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin),  upon  which  Gulshan  was  founded,  and
    whilst it is not necessary for a Judge to make  specific  reference  to
    the source of the case law that he follows it is necessary to show that
    he is following the principles of  that  case  law.  The  determination
    patently does not do that. The necessity to do so it  readily  apparent
    where the rules provide a complete code. In the circumstances  of  this
    appeal they do. The Appellant failed to meet the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and that fact is not challenged. In Patel and  others
    [2013] UKSC 72 Lord Carnworth said

        57. It is important to remember that article 8  is  not  a  general
        dispensing power. It is to be distinguished from the  Secretary  of
        State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules,
        which may be unrelated to any protected human right. The merits  of
        a decision not to depart from  the  rules  are  not  reviewable  on
        appeal: section 86(6). One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call  in
        Pankina for "common sense" in  the  application  of  the  rules  to
        graduates who have been studying in the UK for some years (see para
        47 above).  However,  such  considerations  do  not  by  themselves
        provide grounds of appeal under article 8, which is concerned  with
        private or family life, not education as such. The opportunity  for
        a promising student to complete his course in this country, however
        desirable in general terms, is not  in  itself  a  right  protected
        under article 8.

11. In the particular circumstances of this case there  was  no  Article  8
    application and the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal do not
    raise Article 8 merely stating, as quoted  above,  that  the  Applicant
    needs to sit examinations in December  2013.  There  is  no  indication
    either in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal or otherwise that any
    application was made to amend the grounds of  appeal.  It  was  in  all
    these circumstances an error of law for the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    to embark on a consideration of  Article  8  in  paragraph  14  of  his
    determination.

12. It is not in my judgment necessary to go on to consider  the  issue  of
    proportionality at this stage because the errors of law in  considering
    and allowing the appeal on the basis of a matter that was  not  pleaded
    as a ground  of  appeal,  embarking  on  a  'free-wheeling'  Article  8
    exercise and failing to follow established case law are all material to
    the decision to allow the appeal. I set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.


Remaking the decision

13. In remaking the decision the first aspect to consider is whether  there
    are sufficient  reasons  to  conduct  an  Article  8  exercise.  In  my
    judgement there are not. Firstly this was not an Article 8  application
    and the grounds of appeal do not suggest that the decision under appeal
    is unlawful as  being  incompatible  with  the  Applicant's  Convention
    rights. Secondly as confirmed by the Court of Appeal  in  MM  (Lebanon)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 985- if the rule or rules constituted a  complete  code
    then there is no need for an Article 8 proportionality test.

        133.   . ... a particular IR does not, in each case, have to result
             in a person's Convention rights being "guaranteed". In a
             particular case, an IR may result in a person's Convention
             rights being interfered with in a manner which is not
             proportionate or justifiable on the facts of that case. That
             will not make the IR unlawful. But if the particular IR is one
             which, being an interference with the relevant Convention
             right, is also incapable of being applied in a manner which is
             proportionate or justifiable or is disproportionate in all (or
             nearly all cases), then it is unlawful.


        134.  Where  the  relevant  group  of  IRs,   upon   their   proper
             construction, provide a "complete code"  for  dealing  with  a
             person's Convention rights in the context of a  particular  IR
             or statutory provision,  such  as  in  the  case  of  "foreign
             criminals", then  the  balancing  exercise  and  the  way  the
             various factors are to be taken into account in an  individual
             case must be done  in  accordance  with  that  code,  although
             references to "exceptional circumstances"  in  the  code  will
             nonetheless entail a  proportionality  exercise.  But  if  the
             relevant group of IRs is not such a "complete code"  then  the
             proportionality test will be more at large, albeit  guided  by
             the Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg case law.


14. The question therefore will not normally  be  whether  the  Immigration
    Rules are compliant with the requirements of Article 8 ECHR but  rather
    whether the application of those rules in a particular case results  in
    a breach of Article 8. Where a judge finds that the requirements of the
    rules are not met then before going on to conduct what was described in
    Gulshan as a freewheeling Article 8 exercise the question  of  why  the
    application of the rules is insufficient must at least be considered.

15. So far as the particular circumstances of this matter are concerned  it
    is apparent that the rules do constitute a complete code and  that  the
    Applicant failed to meet the requirements  of  that  code.  Apart  from
    there being no grounds pleaded to suggest that the Secretary of State's
    decision  to  apply  the  Immigration  Rules  was  in  breach  of   the
    Applicant's Convention rights there was nothing put forward to  suggest
    there was any reason to embark on a consideration  of  the  Applicant's
    claim outside the terms of the  Immigration  Rules  and  by  virtue  of
    Article 8 ECHR.

16. If it were necessary to consider the Applicant's situation outside  the
    terms of the Immigration Rules then, as identified  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge the starting point is the five stage  test  set  out  by
    Lord Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. Although this is  identified  by
    the First-tier Judge as the starting point (paragraph 15) the Secretary
    of State's assertion that the reasoning is inadequate is made out.  The
    finding in paragraphs 18 and 19 that a private "and  family"  life  has
    been established is absent any qualitative  analysis  of  that  private
    life. Without there being such analysis it is impossible not to  follow
    the guidance given by Lord Carnworth quoted above.

17. It must follow for all of these reasons that the Article 8 ECHR  appeal
    must fail. In dismissing the appeal  it  is  proper  to  add,  for  the
    benefit of the Applicant, that section 3C  leave,  referred  to  above,
    extends until the time allowed for an  application  to  appeal  against
    this decision expires. The Applicant's stated intention  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom in September  is  therefore  likely  to  result  in  his
    presence throughout the time that he has spent in  the  United  Kingdom
    having been lawful and in these circumstances there  is  no  reason  to
    believe that his future travel plans may be thwarted.


  Summary

18. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law. I set aside that decision.

19. I remake the decision by dismissing  the  Applicant's  appeal  both  by
    virtue of the Immigration Rules and  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.


Signed:                                                  Date:





J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
