
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29619/2013
                                                               IA/27041/2013
                                                               IA/29241/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 October 2014                             |On 26 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ASIM WAHAB
                            MUHAMMAD KAMRAN AMEEN
                                  SANA ASIM
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr S Bellara, Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Although the appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,
    I refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. This appeal comes back before me following a hearing on 11  April  2014
    which culminated in my finding that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    law in its decision in respect of the appeals of these appellants.   At
    that hearing I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    decided that the decisions needed to be re-made in the Upper  Tribunal.
    The appeal was adjourned, with directions, for a further hearing.   The
    error of law decision entitled "Decision and Directions" sets  out  the
    full circumstances and background to these appeals and my  reasons  for
    finding an error of law.  The error of law decision is attached  as  an
    annex to this determination.

 3. It is, nevertheless, helpful to quote directly some paragraphs  of  the
    error of law decision at this point to  set  the  present  decision  in
    context.  In the error of law decision I said as follows:

       "2.    ...the appellants  are  citizens  of  Pakistan,  born  on  10
           December 1976, 11 June 2009 and 18 February 1986,  respectively.
           The third appellant is the wife of the first appellant.

       3.     The first appellant applied for leave to remain as a  Tier  1
           (Entrepreneur) Migrant. The date for that application  is  given
           in the notice of  decision  as  11  January  2014  although  the
           application form itself is date-stamped  14  January  2014.  The
           application was refused in a decision dated 28  June  2013.  The
           basis of the refusal was that he had not established that he met
           what is described in the decision as the "genuineness  test"  at
           paragraph  245DD(h)  of  the  immigration  rules  (HC  395   (as
           amended)).  He had  also  not  provided  a  Current  Appointment
           Report,  and  the  advertising  material  did   not   meet   the
           requirements of the Rules (it did not show his name).

       4.     The second appellant made a similar application, the date  of
           which is given in the notice of decision  as  13  January  2014,
           although again the application  form  has  a  date-stamp  of  14
           January 2014. His application was refused because  the  evidence
           provided did not meet the requirements of the rules in terms  of
           advertising material (name not shown), and had  not  provided  a
           Current Appointment Report.

       5.     The third appellant's application for  leave  to  remain  was
           dependant on that of the first appellant and was correspondingly
           refused.

       6.     In relation to all three appellants,  at  the  same  time  as
           refusing to vary leave to remain, there were decisions to remove
           them under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality
           Act 2006 ("the 2006 Act").

       7.     The appeals of all three appellants were heard by  First-tier
           Tribunal judge Afako who wrote two determinations, one  for  the
           first and third appellants and one for the second appellant.  In
           relation to all three appellants he found that the decisions  to
           remove them under section 47 of the 2006 Act were unlawful.

       8.      In  relation  to  the  second  appellant,  at  [7]  of   the
           determination Judge Afako  concluded  that  the  respondent  had
           wrongly failed to explain why no points were awarded  for  funds
           held in a regulated  financial  institution  or  for  disposable
           funds. In terms of 'evidential flexibility'  he  concluded  that
           this rendered unsafe the respondent's conclusion that  it  would
           have made no  difference  to  the  outcome  of  the  application
           whether the  appellant  had  been  invited  to  provide  further
           information in relation to advertising and directorship  of  the
           business.

       9.     Judge Afako concluded that the respondent's decision was  not
           in accordance with the law, not only in relation to  section  47
           of the 2006 but also in terms, it would seem,  of  the  decision
           making process. He found that the  appellant's  application  was
           still outstanding before the Secretary of State.

       10.    In relation to the first and third  appellants  he  concluded
           that in considering the "genuineness" test, the  respondent  had
           wrongly  failed  to  refer  to  the  application  of  the  first
           appellant's business partner, Mr Ameen. He also  concluded  that
           insufficient reasons had been given for  concluding  that  there
           was  no  genuine  commitment  to  the  business  by  the   first
           appellant, and no query had been raised as to  the  availability
           of funds. Again, it was decided that the decisions in respect of
           the first and third appellants were not in accordance  with  the
           law, in addition  to  [the]  section  47  point,  and  that  the
           applications were still  outstanding  before  the  Secretary  of
           State, requiring to be considered afresh.

       11.    Permission to appeal against the decision of  the  First-tier
           Tribunal was granted in respect of  all  three  appellants,  the
           grant of permission being contained in two decisions  which  are
           in identical terms."

 4. At the hearing before me on 11 April 2014 it was conceded on behalf  of
    the appellants that there was an error of law in the First-tier judge's
    decisions in respect of section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006 (see [17] of the error of law decision).

 5. As can also be seen from the error of law decision, in respect  of  the
    first appellant the Secretary of State concluded that he  had  not  met
    the requirements of paragraph 245DD(h) of the immigration rules (HC 395
    (as amended)); what can be described as the  "genuineness  test".   The
    precise rules are set out in the error of  law  decision,  but  a  very
    rough summary is to the effect that an applicant must establish that he
    genuinely intends and is able to establish himself in the business,  or
    has done so, and genuinely intends to invest the  relevant  sums.   The
    money must be genuinely  available  to  the  applicant.   A  number  of
    factors are taken into account in making the assessment.

 6. Certain assertions in respect of the first appellant were made in  that
    context in the notice of  immigration  decision  dated  28  June  2013.
    However, as was pointed out in the error of law decision and  canvassed
    at the previous hearing, in none of the respondent's bundles is there a
    complete copy of the interview record which took place with  the  first
    appellant, the copy provided  being  incomplete,  with  pages  missing.
    Crucially, that included the questions  and  answers  that  formed  the
    basis of the refusal  of  the  first  appellant's  application  on  the
    "genuineness" ground.

 7. In those circumstances, I made certain directions.  What I had in  mind
    is best illustrated by reproducing  here  [29]  of  the  error  of  law
    decision as follows:

             "I have given separate directions for the  resumed  hearing  of
             this appeal. In summary, they require the respondent (Secretary
             of State) to provide a complete copy of  the  interview  record
             that took place  with  the  first  appellant  on  2  May  2013,
             including the manuscript record. In default  of  that  complete
             record being provided, I shall proceed  on  the  basis  of  the
             available evidence as to what was said, which will include  the
             first  appellant's  witness  statement.  Both  parties  are  to
             provide copies of the documentary evidence that it is said  was
             submitted with each application."

 8. What is said at [29] is repeated in the specific directions at the  end
    of the error of law decision,  requiring  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    provide a complete copy of the interview record that  took  place  with
    the first appellant on 2 May 2013, including the manuscript record.  As
    can be seen, directions were also given in respect of the appellants.

 9. When the hearing came back  before  me  on  3  October  2014,  although
    directions had been complied with  on  behalf  of  the  appellants,  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State they had  not.   If  I  understood  Mr
    Duffy correctly, it was the case that the file in respect of the  first
    appellant had not been located.  It was accepted  that  the  directions
    had not been complied with by the respondent.

10. One of the reasons that the hearing  could  not  be  completed  on  the
    previous occasion was because of the lack of supporting  evidence  from
    the respondent in terms of what was said by the first appellant in  the
    interview.

11. At this hearing on 3 October 2014 I  canvassed  with  the  parties  the
    question of whether it would be appropriate, yet again, to adjourn  the
    hearing, in the light  of  the  respondent's  failure  to  provide  the
    information that I directed should be provided.  Mr Duffy did not  seek
    an adjournment and Mr Bellara resisted one.  In  the  circumstances,  I
    considered that it was appropriate to proceed with the hearing.

12. It is necessary at this point to home in on  the  issues  that  require
    resolution.  In respect of the first appellant, the issue concerns  the
    "genuineness test", as already identified, and also  that  he  had  not
    provided a Current Appointment  Report,  as  the  rules  require.   The
    advertising material that he provided did not meet the requirements  of
    the rules because it did not show his  name.   So  far  as  the  second
    appellant  is  concerned,  the  evidence  provided  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the rules  in  terms  of  advertising  material,  again
    because his name was not shown,  and  also  in  his  case  he  had  not
    provided a Current Appointment Report.

13. 'Evidential flexibility' is relevant to the failure  to  have  met  the
    immigration rules in terms of the advertising material and the  Current
    Appointment Report.  In the case of the first  and  second  appellants,
    they had provided information in support  of  the  application  to  the
    effect that they had been registered as directors of the  company,  but
    that information did not meet the requirements of the rules because  it
    did not amount to a Current Appointment Report.

14. Here again, I refer to what I said in the  error  of  law  decision  at
    [16].  It was accepted by Mr Avery at the last hearing that  a  request
    for further information in relation to directors of the  company  would
    not have been speculative, as the information  provided  did  give  the
    names of the first and second appellants as directors.  At the  hearing
    before me  on  3  October  2014  Mr  Duffy  accepted  that  'evidential
    flexibility' could be said to be applicable to the issue of the Current
    Appointment Report.  Initially at least, he did not  accept  that  that
    was so in terms of the advertising material, but I shall return to that
    in due course.

15. Paragraph 245AA, as it applied at the date of the  decisions,  provided
    as follows:

             "245AA. Documents not submitted with applications

             (a) Where Part 6A or any appendices  referred  to  in  Part  6A
             state that specified documents must be provided, the UK  Border
             Agency will only consider documents that  have  been  submitted
             with  the  application,  and  will  only   consider   documents
             submitted after the application where  they  are  submitted  in
             accordance with subparagraph (b).

             (b) If the applicant has submitted:

             (i) A sequence of documents and some of the  documents  in  the
             sequence have been omitted (for example, if one bank  statement
             from a series is missing);

             (ii) A document in the wrong format; or

             (iii) A document that is a copy and not an  original  document,
             the  UK  Border  Agency  may  contact  the  applicant  or   his
             representative in writing, and request the  correct  documents.
             The requested documents must  be  received  by  the  UK  Border
             Agency at the address specified in the request within 7 working
             days of the date of the request.

             (c) The UK Border Agency will not  request  documents  where  a
             specified document has  not  been  submitted  (for  example  an
             English language certificate  is  missing),  or  where  the  UK
             Border Agency does not anticipate that addressing the  omission
             or error referred to in subparagraph (b) will lead to  a  grant
             because the application will be refused for other reasons.

             (d) If the applicant has submitted a specified document:

             (i) in the wrong format, or

             (ii) that is a copy and not an original document,

             the application may be granted exceptionally, providing the  UK
             Border Agency is satisfied that  the  specified  documents  are
             genuine and the applicant meets all the other requirements. The
             UK Border Agency reserves the right to  request  the  specified
             original documents in the correct format in all cases where (b)
             applies, and to refuse applications if these documents are  not
             provided as set out in (b)."

16. It is clear enough from the terms of  paragraph  245AA  that,  as  then
    drafted,  it  did  not  cover  a  situation  where  there  was  missing
    information from an application.  In this case, the missing information
    in the circumstances of the first and second appellants was their names
    on the advertising material.  Mr Bellara referred me to  the  terms  of
    paragraph 245AA as it  now  is,  introduced  after  the  dates  of  the
    applications of these appellants and after the dates of the  decisions.
    The 'new' 245AA provides as follows:

             "245AA. Documents not submitted with applications

             (a) Where Part 6A or any appendices  referred  to  in  Part  6A
             state that specified documents  must  be  provided,  the  Entry
             Clearance Officer, Immigration  Officer  or  the  Secretary  of
             State will only consider documents  that  have  been  submitted
             with  the  application,  and  will  only   consider   documents
             submitted after the application where  they  are  submitted  in
             accordance with subparagraph (b).

             (b) If the  applicant  has  submitted  specified  documents  in
             which:

             (i) Some of the documents in a sequence have been omitted  (for
             example, if one bank statement from a series is missing);

             (ii) A document is in the  wrong  format  (for  example,  if  a
             letter is not on letterhead paper as specified); or

             (iii) A document is a copy and not an original document; or

             (iv)  A  document  does  not  contain  all  of  the   specified
             information;

             the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  Immigration  Officer  or   the
             Secretary  of  State  may  contact   the   applicant   or   his
             representative in writing, and request the  correct  documents.
             The  requested  documents  must  be  received  at  the  address
             specified in the request within 7 working days of the  date  of
             the request.

             (c) Documents will not be requested where a specified  document
             has  not  been  submitted  (for  example  an  English  language
             certificate is missing), or where the Entry Clearance  Officer,
             Immigration  Officer  or  the  Secretary  of  State  does   not
             anticipate that addressing the omission or error referred to in
             subparagraph (b) will lead to a grant because  the  application
             will be refused for other reasons.

             (d) If the applicant has submitted a specified document:

             (i) in the wrong format; or

             (ii) which is a copy and not an original document; or

             (iii) which does not contain all of the specified  information,
             but the missing information is verifiable from:

             (1) other documents submitted with the application,

             (2) the website of the organisation which issued the  document,
             or

             (3) the website of the appropriate regulatory body;

             the application may be  granted  exceptionally,  providing  the
             Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer or  the  Secretary
             of State is satisfied that the specified documents are  genuine
             and the applicant meets all the other requirements.  The  Entry
             Clearance Officer, Immigration  Officer  or  the  Secretary  of
             State reserves the right  to  request  the  specified  original
             documents in the correct format in all cases where (b) applies,
             and to refuse applications if these documents are not  provided
             as set out in (b)."

17. In fact, Mr Duffy accepted that the new 245AA  is  in  terms  that  are
    identical to an evidential flexibility policy that, he stated,  ran  in
    tandem with the rules as previously set  out.   Thus,  the  policy  did
    include  within  its  terms  provision  for  a  request   for   further
    information where there  was  missing  information  from  the  evidence
    provided.

18. As I have said, his initial submission was  that  even  so,  evidential
    flexibility would not have rescued  the  applications  because  of  the
    missing  information  in  relation  to  the  advertising  material.  He
    submitted that although that is the sort of information that could have
    been requested, there was no basis from which the  Secretary  of  State
    could have concluded that requesting the information  would  have  made
    any difference.  The advertising material did not have the  appellants'
    names on it and that was a situation that could not be rectified.  As I
    understood his initial submissions, they were to the  effect  that  one
    could not 'read across' information  from  other  documentary  sources,
    thus triggering the need for a request for further information.

19. However, at the hearing before me on 3 October 2014,  when  I  explored
    the advertising material with the parties in a little more  detail,  it
    emerged that there was in fact information in that material from  which
    the first  and  second  appellants  could  be  identified.   Thus,  the
    'Gumtree' advert, at page 21 of the bundle submitted for the hearing on
    3 October  2014  in  response  to  directions,  contains  mobile  phone
    numbers.  Those two mobile phone numbers can be identified as belonging
    to the  first  and  second  appellants,  as  can  be  seen  from  their
    application forms for  further  leave  to  remain.   In  addition,  the
    address of 76 Blythswood Road, Ilford,  Essex,  shown  on  the  Gumtree
    advert, is the same address as given by the  second  appellant  on  his
    application form.  Similarly, on the 'vivastreet' advert (page 22), the
    second appellant's mobile phone number can be seen.  There is a  second
    mobile phone number, although on the copy of the advert provided in the
    appellants' bundle, it is incomplete.

20. In the circumstances, it does seem to me that  a  request  for  further
    information,  that  is  to  say  the  missing  information  being   the
    appellants' names  from  those  advertisements,  would  not  have  been
    speculative.  The evidential flexibility policy which it  was  accepted
    on  behalf  of  the  respondent  ran  in  tandem  with  the  evidential
    flexibility as set out in the rules, in my judgment could, and  should,
    have been applied in respect of not only the failure to meet the  rules
    in terms of the Current Appointment Report, but also in  terms  of  the
    advertising material.

21. There remains therefore, the issue of the 'genuineness' test,  referred
    to above.  In my error of law  decision  at  [29],  I  stated  that  in
    default of the respondent providing a complete record of the  interview
    that took place with the first appellant, and on which the lack of  the
    genuineness of the business enterprise was assessed, I would proceed on
    the basis of the available evidence as to what was  said,  which  would
    include the first appellant's witness statement.

22. In the notice of decision in respect  of  the  first  appellant  it  is
    stated that in the interview on 2 May 2013,  when  asked  about  set-up
    costs for the business, he produced a sales forecast  instead  and  did
    not have much knowledge  of  the  business  plan  which  he  helped  in
    developing.  In  addition,  it  is  stated  that  as  a  financial  and
    accounting technician it is imperative that he would be on top  of  the
    financial planning in the business.

23. Aside from the bare fact of the respondent not having  supported  those
    assertions with evidence as to what was said, in the first  appellant's
    witness statement dated 17 December 2013, he stated at [12]  that  when
    in the interview he was asked about set-up costs he did  mention  those
    costs in accordance with the business plan and did provide detail as to
    how the amount of the set-up costs would be distributed  under  various
    heads.  His statement continues that theirs is a genuine  business  and
    the funds are available to them.

24. There is nothing to undermine either  firstly,  the  first  appellant's
    account of what he said at the interview, and secondly, his  assertions
    as to the genuineness of the business.

25. In those circumstances, I am satisfied that  the  first  appellant  has
    established that he meets the requirements of paragraph  245DD(h).   As
    will by now be clear, that was not a paragraph of the rules that was in
    issue so far as the second appellant is concerned.

26. It is as well to state,  for  the  avoidance  of  any  doubt,  that  my
    conclusion in relation to the 'genuineness' test so far  as  the  first
    appellant is concerned is not a conclusion that flows from a desire  to
    'admonish' or 'punish'  the  respondent  for  failing  to  comply  with
    directions.  The simple fact is that the  respondent  was  required  to
    make good the assertions or objections under the immigration  rules  in
    relation to this aspect of the rules so far as the first  appellant  is
    concerned.  I have come to the view that I have on this  issue,  simply
    on the basis of the evidence that has been put before me.

27. In terms of 'evidential flexibility' Mr Duffy did refer in  passing  to
    the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  Durrani  (Entrepreneurs:  bank
    letters; evidential flexibility) [2014] UKUT 00295 (IAC), but as I have
    indicated, he  did  accept  that  there  was  a  policy  of  evidential
    flexibility running in tandem with the immigration rules as  they  then
    were. However, the decision in the appeals with which  I  am  concerned
    should not be seen as casting any doubt on what was said in Durrani  at
    [15] on this issue, it not being a  matter  about  which  I  heard  any
    detailed submissions, and in respect of which my decision does not call
    for any reasoned judgment in the circumstances of this appeal.

28. The result  of  my  assessment  of  the  evidence  and  the  applicable
    immigration  rules  therefore,  is  that  the   first   appellant   has
    established that he meets the requirements of the  rules  in  terms  of
    paragraph 245DD(h).  In respect of both appellants I am satisfied  that
    the Secretary of State should have sought further information from them
    under the terms of the evidential flexibility policy,  in  relation  to
    the Current Appointment Report and advertising material.   The  failure
    to have done so renders  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  not  in
    accordance  with  the  law  in  respect   of   both   appellants,   and
    correspondingly in relation to the third appellant.

29. The question of 'funds' under the immigration rules,  not  having  been
    assessed because of the perceived failure by the appellants to meet the
    other requirements of the rules, will need to be considered as part  of
    the new decision on the applications.

30. In summary therefore, the appeals of each appellant are allowed on  the
    basis that  the  decisions  of  the  Secretary  of  State  are  not  in
    accordance with the law.  The appeals are allowed to the limited extent
    that  there  remains  outstanding  before  the   Secretary   of   State
    applications which require a lawful decision.  As I have indicated, and
    for the avoidance of doubt, the 'genuineness' aspect of the immigration
    rules is resolved in favour of the appellants.

31. In the circumstances, no separate consideration is required in  respect
    of the section 47 decisions in respect of which  the  First-tier  judge
    erred in law, as already explained, and whereby his decisions  in  that
    regard have also been set aside.

Decision

32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside
    and the decisions in the case of each appellant are  re-made,  allowing
    the appeals of each appellant on the basis that the  decisions  of  the
    Secretary of State are not in accordance with the law.  The appeals are
    allowed to the limited extent that there remains outstanding before the
    Secretary of State applications which require a lawful decision.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  5/11/14


                                    ANNEX

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29619/2013
     IA/27041/2013
     IA/29241/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 April 2014                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Asim wahab
                            muhammad kamran ameen
                                  sana asim
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents: Mr S. Bellara, Counsel

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    1. The appellant in  these  proceedings  is  the  Secretary  of  State.
       However, for convenience I refer to the parties as they were  before
       the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. Thus, the appellants are citizens of Pakistan, born on  10  December
       1976, 11 June 2009 and 18 February  1986,  respectively.  The  third
       appellant is the wife of the first appellant.

    3. The first appellant  applied  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
       (Entrepreneur) Migrant. The date for that application  is  given  in
       the notice of decision as 11 January 2014 although  the  application
       form itself is date-stamped 14 January  2014.  The  application  was
       refused in a decision dated 28 June 2013. The basis of  the  refusal
       was that he had not established that he met what is described in the
       decision as the "genuineness test"  at  paragraph  245DD(h)  of  the
       immigration rules (HC 395 (as amended)).  He had also not provided a
       Current Appointment Report, and the  advertising  material  did  not
       meet the requirements of the Rules (it did not show his name).

    4. The second appellant made a similar application, the date  of  which
       is given in the notice of decision  as  13  January  2014,  although
       again the application form has a date-stamp of 14 January 2014.  His
       application was refused because the evidence provided did  not  meet
       the requirements of the rules in terms of advertising material (name
       not shown), and had not provided a Current Appointment Report.

    5. The third appellant's application for leave to remain was  dependant
       on that of the first appellant and was correspondingly refused.

    6. In relation to all three appellants, at the same time as refusing to
       vary leave to remain, there were  decisions  to  remove  them  under
       section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 ("the
       2006 Act").

    7. The appeals  of  all  three  appellants  were  heard  by  First-tier
       Tribunal judge Afako who wrote two determinations, one for the first
       and third appellants and one for the second appellant.  In  relation
       to all three appellants he found that the decisions to  remove  them
       under section 47 of the 2006 Act were unlawful.

    8. In relation to the second appellant, at  [7]  of  the  determination
       Judge Afako concluded that the  respondent  had  wrongly  failed  to
       explain why no points were awarded for funds  held  in  a  regulated
       financial  institution  or  for  disposable  funds.  In   terms   of
       'evidential flexibility' he concluded that this rendered unsafe  the
       respondent's conclusion that it would have made no difference to the
       outcome of the application whether the appellant had been invited to
       provide  further  information  in  relation   to   advertising   and
       directorship of the business.

    9. Judge Afako concluded that the  respondent's  decision  was  not  in
       accordance with the law, not only in relation to section 47  of  the
       2006 but also in terms,  it  would  seem,  of  the  decision  making
       process.  He  found  that  the  appellant's  application  was  still
       outstanding before the Secretary of State.

   10. In relation to the first and third appellants he concluded  that  in
       considering the  "genuineness"  test,  the  respondent  had  wrongly
       failed to refer to the application of the first appellant's business
       partner, Mr Ameen. He also concluded that insufficient  reasons  had
       been given for concluding that there was no  genuine  commitment  to
       the business by the first appellant, and no query had been raised as
       to the availability  of  funds.  Again,  it  was  decided  that  the
       decisions in respect of the first and third appellants were  not  in
       accordance with the law, in addition to section 47 point,  and  that
       the applications were still  outstanding  before  the  Secretary  of
       State, requiring to be considered afresh.

   11. Permission to appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
       was granted in  respect  of  all  three  appellants,  the  grant  of
       permission being contained in two decisions which are  in  identical
       terms.

   Submissions

   12. Mr Bellara, who appeared before me as well as before the  First-tier
       Tribunal, accepted that there was an error of law in the  First-tier
       judge's decisions in terms of the section 47.

   13. It was also accepted that in seeming to allow the appeals  outright,
       as distinct from allowing them on the basis that the  decisions  are
       not in accordance with the law, the First-tier judge also  erred  in
       law.

   14. Mr Bellara submitted that as between the first and second  appellant
       this was a team application  and  that  in  relation  to  the  first
       appellant the decision in terms of 'genuineness'  was  made  without
       reference to the application of the other team  member,  the  second
       appellant.

   15. It was however, accepted that in relation to both applications there
       was a failure to provide a Current Appointment Report from Companies
       House, and that there was a defect in the content of the advertising
       material. However, it was submitted that the judge  was  correct  to
       conclude that  the  Secretary  of  State  should  have  applied  the
       evidential flexibility policy.

   16. Mr  Avery  submitted  that  the  issue  in  relation  to  funds  was
       irrelevant, the primary issue being the two documents that were  not
       provided. As I understood his submissions, they were to  the  effect
       that there was no requirement on the  Secretary  of  State  to  seek
       further information under the evidential flexibility policy, and the
       policy had been considered by the decision maker. There  were  clear
       issues with the documents that were submitted. In the light  of  the
       guidance of the Court of Appeal in Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2,  the
       judge's approach was correct. On the other hand, it was also said by
       Mr Avery that a request  for  further  information  in  relation  to
       directors of the company would not  have  been  speculative  as  the
       information provided did give the names of the directors.

   My assessment

   17. The concession by Mr Bellara before me in relation to the section 47
       removal decisions was correctly made given that since 8 May 2013 and
       the coming into force of section 51 of  the  Crime  and  Courts  Act
       2013, it is not longer unlawful for the Secretary of State  to  make
       simultaneous refusal to vary and section 47  removal  decisions.  In
       this respect the First-tier judge erred in law and that part of  his
       decisions must be set aside.

   18. However, it seems to me that the acceptance that the judge was wrong
       to allow the appeals outright goes too far in  that  although  Judge
       Afako did state that the appeals in each case were allowed,  he  had
       previously indicated that his view was that the decisions  were  not
       in accordance with the law, and he did  go  on  to  state  that  the
       applications were thus still outstanding. I do not consider that his
       determination does mean, or have the effect that, the  appeals  were
       allowed outright.

   19. As regards the first appellant, the notice of decision  states  that
       when asked about  set  up  costs  for  the  business  the  appellant
       produced a sales forecast instead and did not have much knowledge of
       a business plan which he had helped in developing. In  addition,  it
       was said that  as  a  financial  and  accounting  technician  it  is
       imperative that he would be on top of the financial planning in  the
       business. That assessment  relates  to  paragraph  245DD(h)  of  the
       immigration rules. So far as relevant, the rule provides as follows:

             "(h) Except where the applicant has, or was last granted, leave
             as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrant,  a  Businessperson  or  an
             Innovator and is being assessed under Table 5  of  Appendix  A,
             the Secretary of State must be satisfied that:

             (i) the applicant genuinely:

             (1) intends and is able to establish, take  over  or  become  a
             director of one or more businesses in the UK  within  the  next
             six months, or

             (2) has established, taken over or become a director of one  or
             more businesses  in  the  UK  and  continues  to  operate  that
             business or businesses; and

             (ii) the  applicant  genuinely  intends  to  invest  the  money
             referred to in Table  4  of  Appendix  A  in  the  business  or
             businesses referred to in (i);

             (iii) that the money referred to in Table 4 of  Appendix  A  is
             genuinely available to the applicant, and will remain available
             to him until such time as  it  is  spent  by  his  business  or
             businesses.

             ...

             (i) In making the assessment in (h),  the  Secretary  of  State
             will assess the balance  of  probabilities.  The  Secretary  of
             State may take into account the following factors:

             (i) the evidence the applicant has submitted;

             (ii) the viability and credibility of the source of  the  money
             referred to in Table 4 of Appendix A;

             (iii) the viability and credibility of the applicant's business
             plans and market research into their chosen business sector;

             (iv)  the  applicant's  previous   educational   and   business
             experience (or lack thereof);

             (v) the applicant's immigration history and  previous  activity
             in the UK;

             (vi) where the applicant has already registered in  the  UK  as
             self-employed or as the director of a business, and the  nature
             of the business requires mandatory accreditation,  registration
             and/or  insurance,  whether  that  accreditation,  registration
             and/or insurance has been obtained; and

             (vii) any other relevant information.

             (j) The Secretary  of  State  reserves  the  right  to  request
             additional information and evidence to support  the  assessment
             in (h), and to refuse the application  if  the  information  or
             evidence is not  provided.  Any  requested  documents  must  be
             received by the Secretary of State at the address specified  in
             the request within 28 working days of the date of the request.

             (k) If the  Secretary  of  State  is  not  satisfied  with  the
             genuineness of the application in relation to a  points-scoring
             requirement in Appendix A, those points will not be awarded.

             (l) The Secretary of State may decide  not  to  carry  out  the
             assessment in (h) if the application already falls for  refusal
             on other grounds, but reserves the  right  to  carry  out  this
             assessment in any reconsideration of the decision.

             (m)  The  applicant  must,  unless  he  provides  a  reasonable
             explanation, comply with any request made by the  Secretary  of
             State to attend for interview."

   20. Although the applications of the first and  second  appellants  were
       related, I consider that the First-tier judge was wrong to  conclude
       that because the application of the first appellant was not assessed
       with reference to that of the  second  appellant,  this  necessarily
       meant that the decision in  relation  to  the  first  appellant  was
       unlawfully made, as  the  judge  appears  to  have  decided.  It  is
       perfectly rational to conclude that one of the team  has  a  genuine
       intent and ability to pursue the business enterprise  but  that  the
       other does not. It was seemingly the first  appellant's  answers  in
       interview which led the respondent to conclude that he had  not  met
       the requirements of the rules in this respect.

   21. Again, with reference to the first appellant, I  note  that  in  his
       witness statement he refutes the assertion in the notice of decision
       to the effect that his answers in interview on 2 May 2013  indicated
       the he could not meet the 'genuineness' test in the rules.  However,
       the First-tier judge did not resolve that evidential issue by making
       any findings on the point.

   22. In relation to both appellants, the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds
       note that the judge referred to additional evidence produced at  the
       hearing by the appellants, in the form of documents  from  Companies
       House. At [3]  of  the  determination  in  relation  to  the  second
       appellant, the judge  stated  that  he  accepted  that  this  was  a
       document that was in existence at the time of the  application,  and
       appears to have taken that evidence into account. There is  however,
       no finding in the case of either appellant in terms of whether  that
       evidence was submitted with the application. If it was not,  it  was
       not evidence that could be taken into account under the  immigration
       rules, in the light of section 85A of the  Nationality,  Immigration
       and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002  Act").  In  apparently  taking  this
       evidence into account I am satisfied that the First-tier judge erred
       in law.

   23. Furthermore, I also consider that he erred in law in his conclusions
       in relation to the  respondent's  assessment  of  funds  held  in  a
       regulated financial institution and funds disposable in the case  of
       the second appellant. That application was refused for want  of  the
       specified  evidence  in  relation  to  advertising  and  a   Current
       Appointment Report. The decision notice states in  relation  to  the
       requirements of 'funds held in regulated financial institution' that
       "As you have been awarded 0 points for Applicant has access to funds
       as  required,  you  have  been  awarded  0  points  for  all   other
       attributes. We have therefore been unable to award points,  in  line
       with the published  guidance  and  Appendix  A  of  the  Immigration
       Rules." The same reason is given under the heading 'Funds disposable
       in the United Kingdom'.

   24. It was not correct therefore, for the First-tier judge to state that
       no reasons had been given for awarding  no  points  in  relation  to
       'funds  held  in  a  regulated  financial  institution'  and  'funds
       disposable in the United Kingdom'. The reasons were that  no  points
       had been awarded in relation to 'access to funds'. The  requirements
       of funds  held  in  a  regulated  financial  institution  and  funds
       disposable relate to "The money" being held in one or more regulated
       financial institutions" and "The money" being disposable in the  UK,
       to quote from the applicable Table 4 in Appendix A.  The  respondent
       concluded that the applicant did not have access to those funds  and
       it was logical therefore  to  conclude  that  no  points  should  be
       awarded  in  respect  of  the  other,  in   a   sense,   subsidiary,
       requirements.

   25. In terms of evidential  flexibility,  in  the  case  of  the  second
       appellant, the judge concluded that there was merit in the  argument
       about  the  need  for  the  respondent  to  have  requested  further
       information (see [8] and [9]), but there  was  no  analysis  of  the
       immigration rules in terms of paragraph  245AA  and  the  extent  to
       which the rule could be said to have been applicable.

   26. In summary, I am satisfied that the First-tier judge erred in law in
       relation to each of the appellants in the respects to which  I  have
       referred. Those errors of law are such as to require  the  decisions
       to be set aside in each case, and for the decisions to be re-made.

   27. This is not a case where it is appropriate to remit the  appeals  to
       the First-tier Tribunal for the re-making of the decisions. In  this
       case that is more appropriately done in the Upper Tribunal.

   28. However, that process cannot be completed at this stage for at least
       two reasons. Firstly, I  do  not  have  before  me  evidence  as  to
       precisely  what  documentary  evidence  was   submitted   with   the
       applications.  The  potential   application   of   the   'evidential
       flexibility' rule cannot be assessed without  this  information.  In
       addition, in none of the respondent's bundles is  there  a  complete
       copy of  the  interview  record  that  took  place  with  the  first
       appellant. The copy that has been provided  is  incomplete  in  that
       there are missing pages, crucially including the question and answer
       that formed the basis  of  the  refusal  of  the  first  appellant's
       application on the 'genuineness' ground.

   29. I have given separate directions for the  resumed  hearing  of  this
       appeal. In summary, they require the respondent (Secretary of State)
       to provide a complete copy of the interview record that  took  place
       with the first appellant on 2 May  2013,  including  the  manuscript
       record. In default of that complete record being provided,  I  shall
       proceed on the basis of the available evidence as to what was  said,
       which will include the first  appellant's  witness  statement.  Both
       parties are to provide copies of the documentary evidence that it is
       said was submitted with each application.

   30. The appellant is to provide a skeleton argument which  includes  the
       relevant  immigration  rules  applicable  at  the  date   of   these
       applications and decisions, and includes the provisions of paragraph
       245AA as in force at the date of the decisions. That  is  likely  to
       require some research into what changes  to  the  rules  there  have
       been, so that information is provided to me of what the  rules  were
       at the relevant time.

                                 DIRECTIONS

    1. No later than 14 days before the next date of hearing, the following
       are to be provided:

       (i)    The respondent (Secretary of State) is to provide a  complete
           copy of the interview record that  took  place  with  the  first
           appellant on 2 May 2013, including the manuscript record.

       (ii)   Both  parties  are  to  provide  copies  of  the  documentary
           evidence that was submitted with each application.

         (iii) The appellants are to  provide  a  skeleton  argument  which
           includes the relevant immigration rules applicable at  the  date
           of these applications and decisions, and includes the provisions
           of paragraph 245AA as in force at the date of the decisions.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                                    20/06/14

