

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29111/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5th June 2014                              |On 19th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                                          mrs nighat bi
                                              (Anonymity direction not
made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Noor (instructed by Heritage, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:  Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  2nd  April  1985  who
    appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,   with   permission,   against   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge R A Cox) promulgated on
    31st January  2014  by  which  he  dismissed  her  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse to grant her  indefinite  leave
    to remain in the UK as the victim of domestic violence  and  to  remove
    her to Pakistan.

2.   My first task is to decide whether or not Judge Cox made  an  error  of
    law in his determination and if so  whether  and  to  what  extent  his
    determination should be set aside.

3.   Only one of the grounds upon which permission to appeal was sought  was
    relied upon by Mr Noor, namely the single issue of  whether  the  Judge
    applied the correct  test  when  assessing  the  date  upon  which  the
    marriage had permanently broken down. It was his submission that he had
    not.

4.   The circumstances of this appeal are that the  Appellant  came  to  the
    United Kingdom with temporary leave as a spouse on 21st July 2007. That
    leave expired on 28th  June  2009.  An  out  of  time  application  for
    settlement as a spouse was submitted  on  the  9th  November  2009  and
    ultimately rejected by the Secretary of State on  15th  May  2011.  The
    Appellant denies any knowledge of that application.

5.   The Appellant resided with  her  husband  and  his  family  in  the  UK
    between July 2007 and December 2008  when,  following  an  incident  of
    domestic violence, she left  the  property  to  go  to  stay  with  her
    brother. She then moved back with her husband, this time into their own
    rented property, in March 2009. She remained living  in  that  property
    with her husband until October 2010.

6.   The requirements of the Immigration Rules for leave to  remain  as  the
    victim of domestic violence are that the marriage must have permanently
    broken down as a result of domestic violence during the currency of the
    leave, in this case prior to 28th June 2009.

7.   The First-tier Tribunal found that the  marriage  had  not  permanently
    broken down during that period and so she could not succeed  under  the
    Rules.  It was accepted that the cause of the  breakdown  was  domestic
    violence. The Secretary of State did not challenge the  finding  as  to
    the cause of the breakdown.

8.    Mr  Noor  did  not  challenge  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  Article  8
    conclusion.

9.   Mr Noor argued that within  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Jurisdiction
    there is no guidance as to what "permanent breakdown" means. He  argued
    that guidance is necessary and submitted that "permanent breakdown"  is
    analogous to  "irretrievable  breakdown"  in  divorce  proceedings.  He
    relied on various cases within the family jurisdiction and argued  that
    the test is whether an Appellant can reasonably  be  expected  to  live
    with a spouse and if  not  then  the  marriage  can  be  said  to  have
    permanently broken down. For reasons which I will go  into  in  greater
    detail later I do not find that argument persuasive.

10.  Mr Noor then referred to paragraph 10 of the determination where  Judge
    Cox had found as follows:-

         "I found both  the  Appellant  and  her  brother  to  be  generally
         credible witnesses and I would certainly accept  the  marriage  did
         permanently break down as a result of domestic violence in  October
         2010, since which time the parties have not cohabited. I would also
         accept  from  them,  notwithstanding  the  absence  of  independent
         corroborative evidence from any source, that this was  an  arranged
         as opposed to a "love" marriage and that  the  Appellant  generally
         found  herself  once  here  to  be  in  an  unhappy   and   abusive
         relationship.  Of  course,  if  the   application   for   permanent
         settlement  made  in  her  name  on  9th  November  2009  was   the
         Appellant's application, that really does put  paid  to  her  claim
         now. I am satisfied that the signature on the application  form  is
         the Appellant's but I am prepared to accept in her favour that  she
         may have signed under duress and perhaps not even  known  what  she
         was signing. I observe only that  the  application  would  indicate
         that the husband still regarded the marriage as subsisting. But  if
         I leave that matter to one side and also accept that there was  the
         incident in December 2008 leading to a  two-month  separation,  the
         fact  is  that  by  March  2009  the  parties  had  agreed  upon  a
         reconciliation (however unwillingly on the part of  the  Appellant)
         and, importantly as it seems to me, had  in  effect  determined  to
         start their life together afresh away from  what  appears  to  have
         been the baleful influence of the  mother-in-law  and  brother  and
         sisters-in-law. I found it telling that, when asked by her  counsel
         what her opinion of the reconciliation was she replied "I wanted it
         to get better but it didn't ". It indicates to  me  that,  although
         the reconciliation meeting may have been brokered by relatives, the
         Appellant was not at that time adverse to it and did not regard the
         marriage as having permanently broken down at that stage."


11.  Where I am persuaded that the Judge fell into  error  is  that,  if  he
    found that the Appellant was "forced", in  2009  against  her  will  to
    return to her husband that does then indicate a permanent breakdown  of
    the  marriage  when  she  left  him  in   December   2008.   A   forced
    reconciliation  is  not  a  reconciliation.  The  issue  then  was  her
    intention and motive in March 2009. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  has
    made, in my view, contradictory findings  that  she  was  unwilling  to
    reconcile but wanted it to succeed.  Her  willingness  was  a  relevant
    factor. With the agreement of both representatives I indicated  that  I
    would set aside  the  determination  in  that  respect  only  and  hear
    evidence as to the circumstances of the reconciliation in March 2009.

12.  I then heard what can only be described as tortuous evidence  from  the
    Appellant. I accepted that she was nervous and that she  is  uneducated
    but every effort was made to reassure her and the questions put in  the
    simplest language.  She prevaricated and gave contradictory answers and
    sometimes no answer at all.  That cannot be explained by either  nerves
    or illiteracy.  Her brother was not much better  and  he  had  no  such
    excuse. She was asked her intention when she returned to her husband in
    2009 and she said it was because of the "obligation" regarding  family.
    She claimed ignorance of what had taken place at  the  family  meetings
    and said she did not attend.   She  was  only  able  to  say  that  the
    meetings were to settle things. She said her brother told her what took
    place but then could not or would not tell us what he had told her.
13.   The Appellant was asked what was discussed at the family meetings  and
    whether the abuse she had suffered was discussed and  whether  she  was
    assured that things would get better.  She said that she was told  that
    such assurances were given and that things would get  better.  She  was
    asked the reason for moving into a new property with her husband rather
    than back with his family as before and was unable to give  the  reason
    for that.  When pressed she agreed it was for a fresh  start.  She  was
    asked why it was that if things had not got better as  she  had  hoped,
    she stayed so long and she simply said that she had  an  obligation  to
    stay from her family. She then gave varying answers as  to  whether  or
    not she was in contact with her family during that period saying at one
    stage that she was in contact with her brother  and  at  another  stage
    that she was not. She eventually said that she had no contact with  any
    member of her family between moving in with her husband in  March  2009
    and leaving in October 2010.

14.  The Appellant  was asked about the comment in her  brother's  statement
    where he said that in the past two years (2012 & 2013) efforts had been
    made to ensure a reconciliation and that the family are still trying to
    work for that.  She was unable/unwilling to give a coherent answer.

15.  The Appellant was asked when she decided  in  her  own  mind  that  her
    marriage was over.  This was the part of her  evidence  that  was  most
    confused and inconsistent.  She said both 2008 and 2010. She was unable
    to explain why, although she finally separated from  him  in  2010  she
    neither instigated divorce proceedings nor sought leave to  remain  for
    another three years - there are still no divorce proceedings.   As  for
    not applying for leave to remain she said that her husband had told her
    that if she told anyone she  would  be  sent  back  to  Pakistan.   She
    confirmed that conversation took place when she lived with him - before
    October 2010.  With regard to the divorce she  said  that  she  thought
    that he would divorce her.  Neither are satisfactory answers.  She  had
    confided in her family in December 2008.  The family has a  history  of
    migration to the UK for marriage and would have been able to seek legal
    advice.  The same applies to divorce proceedings.

16.  With regard to the date on which she concluded that  her  marriage  was
    finally over her counsel asked her to clarify.  He pointed out that she
    had said both 2008 and 2010 and asked her which it was.  She said 2010.

17.  I then heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant's  brother.  This  is  the
    brother with whom the Appellant lived during the period  of  separation
    from December 2008 to March 2009 and with  whom  she  has  lived  since
    October 2010. I found his evidence to be similarly less than impressive
    concerning the events of 2009. He said that he had  always  known  that
    the Appellant's husband was a bad man and was never in  favour  of  the
    marriage; however, it was his parents' decision and he was told not  to
    interfere. Nevertheless, his  parents  apparently  asked  him  to  hold
    meetings to broker a  reconciliation  at  his  home.  Contrary  to  the
    evidence of his sister, he said that she was present  at  some  of  the
    meetings.  He said that  he  knew  his  sister  was  very  unhappy  and
    unwilling to return to her husband; however he eventually  acknowledged
    that she had never actually said so. By way of explanation for that  he
    suggested that was because he was male and she was his  sister  and  so
    she was shy of talking to him. That however is totally contradicted  by
    her willingness to tell him all about the abuse she had endured.

18.   The  brother  often,  when  having  difficulty  answering   questions,
    resorted to saying that he was doing as he was told by his parents.  In
    particular he blamed them when asked why, if he knew how dreadfully the
    husband had treated his sister, he went along  with  returning  her  to
    him. However, that parental pressure was apparently  not  present  when
    she left in October 2010. He was unable to  offer  an  explanation  for
    that.

19.  With regard to the delay in making the application to the Secretary  of
    State he said that he did not know about such things.  That is somewhat
    belied by the fact that both he and the Appellant's  twin  sister  have
    settled in the UK  through  the  marriage  route.   It  is  simply  not
    credible that this family knew nothing of immigration  law  or  how  to
    seek legal advice.

20.  It is also not credible that having brokered a  reconciliation  between
    his sister and a man he says he knew would  not  change,  he  would  be
    instrumental in returning her to him. It  is  also  not  credible  that
    having brokered this reconciliation he would not have made contact with
    her between March 2009 and October 2010.  He said he  tried  only  once
    when there was no answer and did not try again. He suggested  that  the
    reason for this was that his parents had told  him  not  to  interfere.
    However they asked him to interfere in brokering the meetings.  Also he
    has been happy to go against their wishes in October 2010 - despite, as
    he said in his statement, attempts to  affect  another  reconciliation.
    Further those are not the actions of a person who is now and has  since
    October 2010 been fully supportive of his sister.

21.   Although  the  First-tier  Tribunal   accepted   that   the   marriage
    permanently broke down as a result of domestic violence and I do not go
    behind that finding, the evidence I heard as to when that happened  and
    the circumstances of the separation were very far from credible.

22.  The evidence that I heard had all the flavour of being given by  people
    who knew that it was necessary to show that the marriage had  ended  in
    December 2008 in order for the appeal to succeed. The way in which  the
    evidence  was  given  by  both  witnesses,  their   prevarication   and
    inconsistencies lead me to conclude that they were not being  truthful.
    This was an arranged marriage not a love marriage therefore  there  was
    an element to which the Appellant was acting  in  accordance  with  her
    family's wishes when she married her husband. There has however been no
    suggestion that this was a forced marriage and I have no doubt that  in
    the culture from which the Appellant comes she was content to go  along
    with the wishes of her family because that was always her  expectation.
    For the same reasons she would have been reluctant to acknowledge  that
    her marriage had failed and I have no doubt that the  discussions  that
    took place in 2009 were an attempt by the wider family to  ensure  that
    the marriage had every chance of success and I also find that she was a
    willing participant in that. She clearly would not wish  to  return  to
    the abuse and ill-treatment that she  had  previously  received  and  a
    considerable amount of that was at the hands of the wider family.  That
    therefore makes it entirely understandable that the  couple  should  be
    provided with rented accommodation of their own where they  could  live
    as a couple without interference from his  family.  The  Appellant  has
    herself said on more than one occasion that she thought or hoped things
    might get better. That was no doubt  the  hope  of  all  those  at  the
    meeting and I have no doubt either that the  Appellant  was  told  that
    assurances had been given  that  his  behaviour  would  alter.  I  find
    therefore that the Appellant was a willing party to the  reconciliation
    albeit she may have been a little nervous because  she  had  previously
    suffered ill-treatment.

23.  I do not believe there was no contact between  the  Appellant  and  her
    family while she was living with her husband in their own home.  It  is
    also significant I find that  the  ultimate  breakup  of  the  marriage
    occurred when the husband left the Appellant not the other way round.

24.  Mr Noor argued, following the line of the family cases that  he  cited,
    that a marriage is said to have  permanently  broken  down  if  it  has
    irretrievably broken down, which is the test  for  divorce.  The  cases
    that he relied on in particular are related to unreasonable  behaviour.
    However, Mr Noor is I think confusing the ground  of  divorce  and  the
    facts to establish the ground. The cases that he  referred  to  do  not
    define "irretrievable breakdown" as he suggested, but rather  they  are
    cases which look at whether and in what circumstances it  can  be  said
    that a party to a marriage "cannot be expected to live with  the  other
    party as a result of their behaviour" if they are in  fact  the  living
    under the same roof. It has long been accepted that that  fact  can  be
    established when parties are living under the same roof if  it  is  the
    case that the relationship has in truth ended and the injured party has
    no alternative but to remain.

25.  There is only one ground  of  divorce  and  that  ground  is  that  the
    marriage has irretrievably broken down. A petitioner establishes to the
    satisfaction of the court that the marriage has in  fact  irretrievably
    broken down by  showing  one  of  five  things.  Those  are  desertion,
    separation for five years, separation two years with the consent of the
    other spouse, adultery such that the petitioner finds it intolerable to
    live with the Respondent  and  unreasonable  behaviour  such  that  the
    petitioner cannot reasonably be expected to live with  the  Respondent.
    If this Appellant had  issued  a  divorce  petition  on  the  basis  of
    domestic violence and on the basis that she had nowhere else  to  go  I
    have no doubt that she would have succeeded. Had she  made  application
    immediately arguing, credibly, that she could not  leave  earlier,  her
    case may well have succeeded. She  did  not  do  that  even  after  the
    separation. To decide now after the Appellant waited  a  further  three
    years, on an objective view that she could not be expected to live with
    her husband and thus the marriage had permanently broken down is wholly
    unsustainable.  The test must be a subjective test:- when was  it  that
    this spouse could not reasonably be expected to live with her  husband.
    Her evidence was that she decided the marriage was over in 2010.   That
    was her decision. On my findings  that  the  Appellant  was  a  willing
    participant in an attempted reconciliation and that she was in  contact
    with her family I can only conclude that while she was living with  her
    husband after March 2009 the marriage was subsisting.  Whether  or  not
    the Appellant was a willing party to the settlement application made in
    November 2009, its very existence  indicates  an  ongoing  marriage.  A
    husband who wants nothing to do with a wife would  have  no  reason  to
    wish her to remain in the UK and again I note that  ultimately  it  was
    the husband who left the wife.

26.  I therefore find as a fact  that  this  marriage  did  not  break  down
    permanently until October 2010 when the husband left the Appellant  and
    instructed her to leave the house. That domestic violence was the cause
    of the breakdown I am prepared to accept as did the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge but not in 2009 as claimed.

27.  Therefore having set aside the First-tier Tribunal's  determination  in
    part as indicated above I redecide it and  find  that  the  Appellant's
    marriage did not permanently break down prior  to  the  expiry  of  her
    leave to enter and thus her appeal is dismissed.

28.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Signed                 Dated 17th June 2014



Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


