
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29481/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 1 September 2016                        |On 13 October 2016               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                LAZIZ GADAEV
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Foot, Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's  decisions
    made on 8 July 2014 refusing him a residence card as a confirmation  of
    the right of residence as a family member of  his  wife,  a  Lithuanian
    national, and revoking his existing residence card.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Uzbekistan born on 6 September 1988.   He
    first came to the UK as a student on 18 February 2007.   His  leave  to
    remain expired in February 2010 when he overstayed.  However, following
    his marriage on 20 January 2012 he was granted a  residence  card  from
    June 2013 until June 2018.  The appellant had  returned  to  Uzbekistan
    between 27 August 2013 and 27 January 2014 and  after  he  returned  he
    made the present application.   This was refused for  the  reasons  set
    out in the  respondent's  decision  letter  dated  8  July  2014.   The
    appellant's previous residence card gave an address of [ - ],  N22.  On
    31 October 2013 immigration  officers  had  visited  that  address  but
    neither he nor his wife were found to be living there and the  officers
    were told that he had not lived at the address for  at  least  eighteen
    months. This directly contradicted his  claim  to  have  been  residing
    there at the time of application.  It was the  respondent's  view  that
    insufficient documentary evidence had been produced to show  that  they
    had lived there, that the address  had  been  used  solely  to  aid  an
    application for a residence card and  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience.

3.   An appeal  against  this  decision  was  dismissed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 6 January 2015. The appeal was decided  without  a  hearing
    but on 29 June 2015 that decision was set aside by the  Upper  Tribunal
    on the basis that there had been a number of procedural irregularities.
    At the hearing the  issue  was  raised  about  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  had  been  entitled  to  consider  whether  the  sponsor  was
    exercising treaty rights as the appellant had not been given notice  of
    this and it had not been raised in  the  decision  letter.   The  judge
    indicated that this would now be a live issue. The appeal was  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing.

4.    The  appeal  was  relisted  for  hearing  on  11  December  2015.   An
    application was made before the hearing for an adjournment on the basis
    that the appellant had recently separated  from  the  sponsor  and  was
    seeking a divorce and for the appeal to  wait  until  his  divorce  was
    finalised.  This application was refused on 1  December  2015  with  an
    indication that the Tribunal would decide the appeal on  the  basis  of
    the circumstances at the date of hearing.   However,  at  the  hearing,
    following a discussion of the issues, a renewed  application  was  made
    for an adjournment on the basis that the appellant  could  not  provide
    evidence that the respondent was exercising treaty rights because  they
    were now separated. The judge was asked to direct that  the  respondent
    make enquiries with HMRC about her.  The  Presenting  Officer  did  not
    oppose the application but the judge refused it on the  basis  that  he
    was required to deal with the case in a way which was proportionate  to
    its importance, the complexity of the issues and the resources  of  the
    parties.  He identified at  [5]  as  the  key  issue:  "...whether  the
    appellant would be deprived of his right  to  a  fair  hearing  if  the
    appeal were to go ahead without being given a  further  opportunity  to
    obtain evidence of the sponsor exercising treaty rights (see  generally
    Kelechi Emanuel  Nwaigwe  (Adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418
    (IAC)."

5.   The judge found that the appellant was not in any meaningful way  taken
    by surprise by any new issue arising and had had ample time to  prepare
    his case [6].  He noted that the documentary evidence included a number
    of HMRC documents but none of them could be described  as  recent  [7].
    The judge said that it was clear from the earlier  written  adjournment
    request  that  the  appellant  intended  making  an   application   for
    confirmation of a right of residence in due course on the basis that he
    held a retained right of residence.  The judge said at  that  point  it
    might be appropriate to consider making a direction to  the  respondent
    along the lines requested but the appellant still faced the  hurdle  of
    the marriage of convenience allegation and this was premature.  It  was
    in the interests of justice to have that point determined  as  soon  as
    possible [7]. A further application for an adjournment was made on  the
    basis that the appellant would require a Tajik interpreter but this was
    also rejected as the judge was not satisfied  that  the  appellant  was
    genuinely unable to participate in the hearing without an interpreter.

6.   The judge went on to hear evidence and submissions.   He  set  out  his
    findings in [19] - [42].  In summary, he accepted that the  appellant's
    wife was an EEA national but found that there was no reliable  evidence
    that she was currently in the UK and exercising her treaty rights.   He
    set out his reasons in [21] - [24].  He then went on  to  consider  the
    marriage of convenience issue. He was satisfied that this had not  been
    a marriage of convenience, noting in particular that the  date  of  the
    marriage was 20 January 2012 and  the  appellant  had  been  granted  a
    residence card on 3 June 2013 on the  basis  of  that  marriage.    The
    decision under appeal had not been made until 8 July 2014,  two  and  a
    half years after the marriage.  Whilst the immigration  officers  visit
    had taken place within five months of the residence card being  issued,
    it was pertinent to note that the respondent took no further action for
    a further eight months and then only when prompted  to  do  so  by  the
    further application.

7.   It was the judge's conclusion that this was  not  a  case  where  there
    were circumstances giving reasonable grounds for  suspicion  such  that
    there was an evidential burden on the appellant to discharge on whether
    or not the marriage was one of convenience.  However, the judge went on
    to consider the subsistence of the relationship and the claim that  the
    couple had cohabited until recently.    He  noted  that  there  was  no
    evidence confirming that the sponsor had been in the UK after  the  end
    of January 2015 and scant evidence that she supported  the  appellant's
    appeal.  He accepted there may have been  a  relationship  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor and that the marriage was genuine.  He  could
    not say with any certainty when it broke down but he inferred  that  it
    was long before the appellant's claim that they had separated  in  June
    2015.  He found it more probable than not that the couple had separated
    by the time of the visit to [ - ] on 31 October 2013  and  he  did  not
    accept that either of them had resided there since  then,  if  at  all.
    For these reasons the appeal was dismissed under the EEA Regulations.

The Grounds and Submissions

8.   In the appellant's grounds two  issues  are  raised.   Firstly,  it  is
    alleged that the judge erred in law by failing to grant an adjournment.
     He had been told that the appellant and his wife  were  separated  and
    intended to divorce and that this  was  one  of  the  reasons  why  the
    appellant had been unable to  provide  updated  evidence  of  his  wife
    exercising treaty rights.  The appellant had been prejudiced, so it  is
    argued, as he was unable to demonstrate that his  wife  was  exercising
    such rights and that the failure to adjourn was a material error of law
    as it was the key reason the appeal was dismissed.  The second  ground,
    which was not pursued before me, was that  the  judge's  findings  were
    inconsistent in that having found that the  marriage  was  not  one  of
    convenience it was inconsistent to find that it was genuine and then to
    go on to hold that it had broken down before  the  date  the  appellant
    said they had separated.

9.   Ms Foot submitted that the judge's decision not to adjourn the  hearing
    had caused unfairness to the appellant. He should  have  had  a  proper
    opportunity to investigate and provide evidence about whether his  wife
    was exercising treaty rights.  This would be of considerable importance
    in relation to his claim that he was entitled to a  retained  right  of
    residence.

10.  Mr Whitwell submitted that the  judge  had  given  clear  and  adequate
    reasons for refusing  the  adjournment.  In  particular,  he  had  been
    entitled to note that at the previous appeal in the Upper Tribunal  the
    judge had indicated that the issue of whether the appellant's wife  was
    exercising treaty rights was a live issue  and  there  had  been  ample
    opportunity to obtain such evidence.  The issues  before  the  Tribunal
    did not include whether the appellant would have an  entitlement  to  a
    retained right of  residence  but  whether  there  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience and whether the appellant's wife  had  been  or  was  still
    exercising treaty rights.

11.  In reply Ms Foot argued that the judge had not properly  grappled  with
    the issue of the appellant's inability to obtain evidence  in  relation
    to his wife's circumstances. That evidence could have made a difference
    to the outcome and it had been unfair of the judge not  to  adjourn  in
    these circumstances.

Consideration of whether the First-tier Tribunal Erred In Law

12.  In Nwaigwe, the President restated the approach set out  by  the  Court
    of Appeal in SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State [2011] EWCA Civ 1284
    that, when considering whether an adjournment should  be  granted,  the
    test was not irrationality but the test and sole test  was  whether  it
    was unfair.  The President said at [7]:

         "Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds, it
         is important to recognise that the question for the Upper  Tribunal
         is not whether the FTT acted reasonably  rather,  the  test  to  be
         applied is that of fairness:  was  there  any  deprivation  of  the
         affected parties right to a fair hearing?  Any temptation to review
         the  conduct  and  decision  of  the  FTT  through  the   lens   of
         reasonableness must  be  firmly  resisted,  in  order  to  avoid  a
         misdirection  in  law.  In  a  nutshell  fairness  is  the  supreme
         criterion."

13.  The issue therefore  is  simply  whether  the  judge's  refusal  of  an
    adjournment was unfair.  At the hearing the application was made on the
    basis that the appellant could not provide evidence  that  the  sponsor
    was exercising treaty rights because  they  had  separated.    On  that
    issue the judge was entitled to find that the appellant had not in  any
    meaningful  sense  been  taken  by  surprise  and  had  had  an   ample
    opportunity to prepare his case: see in particular [5]  -  [8]  of  his
    decision.  The decision letter had made no point  about  the  sponsor's
    self-employment but, as the judge pointed out, it had been clear  since
    the Upper Tribunal decision issued on 29 June 2015 that this was a live
    issue and that there  had  been  ample  opportunity  between  June  and
    December  2015  to  obtain  evidence  on  that  matter.   Further,  the
    appellant had been legally represented  and  had  filed  some  evidence
    dealing with this issue [6] and, as the  judge  also  pointed  out,  an
    application for confirmation of a right of residence could be  made  in
    due course on the basis of a retained right of residence [7].

14.  In summary, the judge was clearly aware  of  the  test  to  be  applied
    having referred to Nwaigwe at [5].  He was fully  entitled  to  proceed
    with the hearing for the reasons he gave and more  to  the  point,  the
    grounds and submissions do not satisfy me that the judge acted unfairly
    or that the appellant was deprived of a  fair  hearing  of  the  issues
    raised in the appeal.  When the decision is read as a whole it is clear
    that the judge considered the appeal with both fairness and care.

15.  As I have already indicated, the  second  ground  of  appeal  that  the
    judge made inconsistent findings was not pursued  and  rightly  so,  as
    there is no inconsistency between a finding that the marriage  was  not
    one of convenience and a finding that  the  marriage  had  subsequently
    broken down.

Decision

16.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and its decision stands.


Signed   H J E Latter                            Date:          9  September
    2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter



