
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/29000/2014
                                                               IA/29001/2014
                                                               IA/29002/2014
                                                               IA/29003/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On September 22, 2015                |On October 5, 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                               MR SHAKEEL KHAN
                              MRS MUSARRAT KHAN
                          MISS WAJIHA SHAKEEL KHAN
                           MASTER OMER DANYAL KHAN
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Ahmed, Counsel, instructed by Law Lane Solicitors
Respondent  Mr Parkinson (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The first-named appellant came as a visitor in June 2004 with his  wife
    (second-named  appellant)  and   children   (third   and   fourth-named
    appellants) as dependants. They were incorrectly issued with  a  C-visa
    covering the period June 11, 2004 to  June  11,  2006.  The  error  was
    corrected and their passports were then endorsed with  a  "Visa  Exempt
    Official" on August 3, 2004 and their leave to remain  here  was  valid
    until July 5, 2009.

 2. On July 9, 2013 the appellants applied for further leave to  remain  on
    basis of long residence. The respondent refused their  applications  on
    August 13, 2013 without a right of appeal. Judicial Review  proceedings
    were issued and on April 3, 2014 a consent order was  lodged  with  the
    Court whereby the respondent agreed to reconsider their application  if
    the appellants withdrew their Judicial Review claims.

 3. On July 2, 2014 the respondent refused their applications  and  at  the
    same time issued removal directions. The  respondent  considered  their
    claims under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules
    and under Article 8 ECHR.

 4. The  appellant  appealed  this  refusal  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on July 15, 2014.

 5. The matter was listed before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Robinson
    on March 5, 2015 and in a decision promulgated on March  20,  2015  the
    Tribunal dismissed their appeals under Article 8 ECHR.

 6. The appellant applied for permission to appeal on  April  2,  2015  and
    permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    White on May 20, 2015 finding it arguable:

      a. The Tribunal should have  considered  the  appeal  under  paragraph
         276ADE before considering the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

      b. In assessing the best interests of the children  the  Tribunal  had
         given insufficient weight to the effect on them of relocation given
         their long residence in the United Kingdom.

      c. The Tribunal failed to have sufficient regard to the provisions  of
         section 117B of the 2002 Act.

 7. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Ahmed adopted both the grounds  of  appeal  and  the  permission  to
    appeal. He firstly submitted there was a  material  error  because  the
    Tribunal had failed to make a finding on  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
    Tribunal should  have  considered  the  position  under  the  Rules  as
    paragraph 276ADE(iv) HC 395 applied because the children  had  been  in
    the United Kingdom for more than seven years and  the  Tribunal  should
    have considered whether, in those circumstances, it was reasonable  for
    the appellants to be returned. Secondly, he argued  that  the  Tribunal
    failed to demonstrate any consideration of  Section  117B  factors  and
    that in itself was a material error  as  statute  required  that  those
    factors had to be considered in each case. Thirdly, he  submitted  that
    the Tribunal had not properly considered proportionality.

 9. Mr Parkinson opposed the application and relied on the  refusal  letter
    dated June 5, 2015. Whilst conceding the Tribunal had not  specifically
    addressed paragraph 276ADE HC 395 it was clear from the  findings  that
    the Tribunal considered it reasonable for the  children  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom. The Tribunal had also considered  the  children's  best
    interests including their education,  location  and  language  and  was
    fully aware of the length of time they  had  been  here.  The  Tribunal
    reminded  itself  that  the  children's  interests   were   a   primary
    consideration but also properly took into  account  the  parent's  poor
    immigration history and the fact the first-named appellant purposefully
    delayed submitting the application until seven years had elapsed. There
    was no requirement to set out the requirements of section 117B  of  the
    2002 Act but in any event the  Tribunal  had  considered  the  relevant
    evidence in its assessment of proportionality. There  was  no  material
    error.

    DISCUSSION AND REASONS ON ERROR IN LAW

10. All of the appellants in this  appeal  are  citizens  of  Pakistan  and
    whilst they were all born there  they  had  all  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom since June  2004  having  entered  lawfully.  The  first  named
    appellant came as an employee of the Pakistan High Commission  and  the
    remaining appellants as his dependants.

11. There is no dispute that they resided lawfully in  this  country  until
    July 5, 2009 when the first named appellant ceased employment with  the
    Pakistan High Commission. No applications were  made  to  extend  their
    leave until July 9, 2013 and their applications were eventually refused
    on July 2, 2014.

12. The respondent considered their claims firstly under Appendix FM of the
    Immigration Rules; secondly, under paragraph 276ADE  HC  395  and  then
    thirdly, outside of the Rules albeit  the  respondent  concluded  there
    were no exceptional circumstances sufficiently  compelling  to  justify
    allowing their applications to remain in the United Kingdom.

13. When the matter came before the Tribunal on March 5, 2015 Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Robinson refused their applications under Article 8
    ECHR. Whilst the Judge recorded on page 4 of his determination that the
    respondent had considered the children's private life,  with  reference
    to paragraph 276ADE, he failed to actually deal with  the  claim  under
    the Rules as evidenced by end of his  decision  when  he  concluded  by
    stating, "the appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds (Article 8)."

14. Mr Ahmed's first challenge is that by failing to deal with  the  appeal
    under paragraph 276ADE there was a material error.   Mr  Parkinson,  in
    his oral submissions, accepted the Judge  had  not  specifically  dealt
    with paragraph 276ADE but argued that taking  the  determination  as  a
    whole it was clear he had  considered  the  Rule.  The  thrust  of  his
    submission being that his consideration under Article 8  ECHR  included
    the factors referred to in paragraph 276ADE.

15. Paragraph 276ADE(iv) HC 395 states that where the  applicant  is  under
    the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in  the  United  Kingdom
    for at least seven years and it would not be reasonable to  expect  the
    applicant to leave the United Kingdom then such an  application  should
    be granted.

16. I am satisfied the Judge erred by failing to deal with the appeal under
    paragraph 276ADE.

17. Whilst Mr Parkinson vociferously argued that the Judge  had  considered
    all the relevant factors I am satisfied that if the Judge  had  allowed
    the appeal under Article 8 without firstly considering the claim  under
    the Immigration Rules then the respondent would have submitted  grounds
    of appeal arguing an error in law.

18. Every application post July 2012 must be considered with  reference  to
    the Immigration Rules before any consideration under Article  8  should
    be undertaken. It is clear from the determination that the Judge's only
    consideration was under Article 8 as  he  made  no  finding  under  the
    Rules.

19. The failure to make a finding under the Immigration Rules is  an  error
    and whilst I considered whether the Judge's assessment under Article  8
    could rescue the determination I concluded that it could not.

20. I therefore find this to be a material error because the  Judge  failed
    to consider the appeal under the Rules.

21. I did raise with Mr Ahmed whether this was a case that I could  proceed
    with in the absence of any other evidence but  he  submitted  that  the
    case should be remitted to  the  first  tier  Tribunal.   Mr  Parkinson
    argued that this was not necessary because the evidence that was before
    the Tribunal set out the position as at March 2015.

22. The only change appeared to be that the children had progressed further
    at school with the youngest child now having just  commenced  secondary
    school.

23. I was satisfied that no further evidence was needed  because  in  March
    the tribunal was aware the youngest child would be  starting  secondary
    school. The child had only recently commenced secondary school and I am
    satisfied this change would not alter the factual matrix  presented  on
    behalf of this family.

24. Mr  Ahmad  wanted  to  provide  further  evidence  of  the  first-named
    appellant's integration but I am satisfied that such an opportunity had
    already been given both at the First-tier hearing and as  a  result  of
    the directions that had been issued to the parties since permission  to
    appeal had been granted.

25. Paragraph [2] of those directions makes clear that the  parties  should
    prepare for today's hearing on the basis that if the decision  was  set
    aside any further could  be  considered  at  the  hearing.  No  further
    evidence had been produced prior to the hearing.

26. I am satisfied I consider this appeal based  on  the  evidence  already
    filed.

27. I have therefore considered their appeals under paragraph 276ADE. There
    are two separate claims under this Rule because there  not  only  do  I
    have to consider claims from the  two  children  but  I  also  have  to
    consider the claims from the two adults.

28. At paragraph [42] of the Judge's decision he recorded that  there  were
    close family members in Pakistan and at paragraph [23] he also recorded
    that family members such as grandparents and aunts/uncles  were  living
    in Pakistan and the families were not estranged.

29. Paragraph 276ADE(vi) HC 395 states where an appellant is over  the  age
    of 18  for  there  has  to  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  their
    integration into Pakistan for such an application to succeed.  No  such
    argument has been put forward at any stage and based  on  the  evidence
    before me I am satisfied a claim under paragraph 276ADE  on  behalf  of
    the adult appellants must fail.

30. The other argument advanced is that the child appellants should succeed
    under paragraph 276 ADE because it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
    them to leave due to the time they had spent here.

31. I have had regard to the bundle of documents that was presented at  the
    earlier hearing and included within this bundle were reports  from  the
    children's  schools  which  indicated  appropriate  progress  and  good
    participation with both children giving the appearance  of  being  well
    settled.

32. I also have had regard to the fact that the children have been  brought
    up in the United Kingdom having come here legally with their parents in
    June 2004. However, their lawful leave expired in October 2009 by which
    time the children had spent just over five years in the United Kingdom.



33. I am told that both children speak  good  English  and  although  their
    understanding of Urdu would not be to the  same  standard  as  children
    their own age who live in Pakistan, the  evidence  presented  was  that
    they were able to speak to their mother in Urdu  as  well  as  English.
    There were no health issues relevant to either child although there was
    some medical evidence regarding problems their mothers' problems.

34. In considering their claims under paragraph 276ADE I also have to  have
    regard to the circumstances that exist in Pakistan  and  in  particular
    the fact that they have close family with whom  their  parents  are  in
    contact.

35. The  Judge  previously  rejected  the  first-named  appellant's  claims
    concerning the sale of a property and the findings made  on  that  were
    clearly open to him.

36. Accordingly, in considering their claims under the Immigration Rules  I
    am satisfied that although they had been here for more than seven years
    it was not unreasonable to expect them to leave the United Kingdom with
    their parents and to return to Pakistan-a country  of  which  they  are
    citizens and were born in. I therefore dismiss their appeals under  the
    Immigration Rules.

37. I have also considered Mr Ahmed's submissions concerning  the  approach
    to Article 8 and in particular that the Judge did not  give  sufficient
    weight to section 117B of the 2002 Act and carried  out  an  inadequate
    proportionality assessment under Article 8 ECHR. I  am  satisfied  that
    these submissions are inextricably linked.

38. The Judge at paragraphs [33] and [34]  of  his  decision  set  out  the
    correct test to be followed when approaching  Article  8  ECHR  (Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 00027) and correctly identified  that  the  fifth  question
    posed by Lord Bingham was what this appeal would turn on namely "was it
    proportionate to require the appellants to leave the United Kingdom?"

39. The Judge properly reminded himself that the children's best  interests
    were a primary consideration and it was in their best interests  to  be
    brought up in a safe, loving environment by their parents.

40. He noted that neither child had  any  special  health  nor  educational
    needs, they had grandparents in Pakistan albeit they had not  met  them
    for many years and they both spoke Urdu but not fluently.

41. The judge  recognised  that  relocation  to  Pakistan  would  mean  the
    children would have to adjust to an unfamiliar environment, educational
    system and culture. The Judge also recognised that there were a  number
    of family members in Pakistan who may well be able to help  the  family
    to resettle.

42. Mr Ahmed submitted that the Judge had failed to consider  section  117B
    of the 2002 Act. This  section  was  inserted  by  section  19  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014.

43.  Section  117B(i)  makes  clear  that  the  maintenance  of   effective
    immigration control is in the public interest.

44. I do not accept Mr Ahmed's submission  that  the  Judge  did  not  have
    regard to section 117B because  he  acknowledged  the  ability  of  all
    parties to speak English as well  as  the  fact  that  the  first-named
    appellant had continued to work, albeit illegally.  The Judge also  had
    regard to the fact that the private life created since  2009  had  been
    created at a time  when  they  were  here  unlawfully  and  when  their
    immigration status was precarious.

45. Section 117B(6)(b) states  the  public  interest  does  not  require  a
    person's  removal  where  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  a
    qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom and  whilst  there  is  no
    specific reference in the determination to section  117B  it  is  clear
    that the Judge had these factors in mind.

46. Satisfying all of the positive aspects of Section  117B  did  not  mean
    every application must succeed and similarly a failure to  satisfy  the
    positive factors and to fall foul of the negative factors did not  mean
    every application would fail. However, they were factors that should be
    taken into account when carrying out the aforementioned proportionality
    assessment.

47. I reject Mr Ahmed's submission that he  did  not  have  regard  to  the
    evidence. The Judge had regard to the length of time the  children  had
    been here, the fact that they were settled, spoke English and  had  had
    little contact with their relatives in  Pakistan  having  visited  them
    only once since coming to the United Kingdom in 2004.

48. The children clearly wished to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  and  it
    follows that if their appeals succeed then the adult appeals would also
    succeed as they would  be  required  to  look  after  them.  The  Judge
    correctly identified their best interests and as the Supreme Court made
    clear in Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  1
    WLR 3690 their best  interests  are  not  in  themselves  of  paramount
    consideration.  The  Judge  has  to  have  the  Judge  regard  to   any
    countervailing circumstances and that is exactly what  he  did  in  his
    decision.

49. At the outset he  identified  the  children's  best  interests  were  a
    primary consideration (paragraph [36] of his decision) but he then went
    on to consider all the facts of the case including having regard to the
    2002 Act.

50. His conclusion was that it may well be disruptive for them to return to
    Pakistan but they would be accompanied by their parents and on  arrival
    they would have support from close  family.  The  judge  concluded  his
    assessment in paragraph [45] but that paragraph should not be  read  in
    isolation of his other findings.

51. Mr Ahmed's submissions on this issue amount to nothing more than a mere
    disagreement.

52. Accordingly, I do not find there has been any  material  error  in  the
    Judge's approach to Article 8 and his  dismissal  of  their  Article  8
    claims stands.

    DECISION

53. There was a material error in respect of the Immigration Rules  because
    no decision was made on that aspect of the claim.   I  have  considered
    the  evidence  and  I  dismiss  the  appellants'  appeals   under   the
    Immigration Rules.

54. I uphold the Tribunal's decision in respect of Article 8 ECHR.


Signed:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
