

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29055/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 4 June 2014                               |On: 18 July 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                         RICHARD STEPHEN KALEB LLOYD
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Jacobs, instructed by Joint Council for the
                    Welfare of Immigrants
For the Respondent:    Mr Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of New Zealand and was  born  on  8  January
    1983.

 2. This is his appeal against the decision promulgated on 8 April 2014  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge R J N B Morris which refused the  appellant's
    appeal against the refusal of an EEA family permit by the respondent on
    7 August 2013.

 3. The background to this matter  is  that  the  appellant  is  the  civil
    partner of Mr Jason David Dela Cruz. Mr Dela Cruz is a citizen  of  the
    Philippines. He was issued with a residence card by the  respondent  on
    20 July 2010 as the family member of an EEA national exercising  Treaty
    rights. That EEA national is his step-father, Mr Martin Healy, an Irish
    citizen. It was common ground before me that Mr  Healy  was  exercising
    Treaty rights.

 4. The appellant maintains that he is entitled to a residence card as  the
    family member of Mr Dela Cruz. He maintains that this right arises from
    Article 2 of Council Directive 2004/38/EC (the Citizens' Directive)  as
    incorporated  into  domestic  legislation  by  Regulation  7   of   the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006   (the   EEA
    Regulations).

 5. Judge Morris did not find that he was so entitled and he  appeals  that
    aspect of her decision as well as that declining to assess his  Article
    8 claim.

 6. Article 2 of the Citizens' Directive states:

      "Article 2


      For the purposes of this Directive:


      1) "Union citizen" means any person having the nationality of a Member
      State;


      2) "Family member" means:


        (a) the spouse;


        (b) the partner with  whom  the  Union  citizen  has  contracted  a
        registered partnership...


        (c) the direct descendants who are under  the  age  of  21  or  are
        dependents and those of the spouse or partner as defined  in  point
        (b);


        (d) the dependent direct relatives in the ascending line and  those
        of the spouse or partner as defined in point (b);


      3) "Host Member State" means the Member State to which a Union citizen
      moves in  order  to  exercise  his/her  right  of  free  movement  and
      residence."


 7. Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations states:



      "Family member

      This sectionnoteType=Explanatory Memorandum has no associated
      7.  (1)  Subject  to  paragraph  (2),  for  the  purposes  of  these
      Regulations the following persons  shall  be  treated  as  the  family
      members of another person-

      (a) his spouse or his civil partner;

      (b) direct descendants of his, his spouse or his civil partner who are-



      (i) under 21; or

      (ii) dependants of his, his spouse or his civil partner;

      (c) dependent direct relatives in his ascending line or that of his
      spouse or his civil partner;

      (d) a person who is to be treated as the family member of that other
      person under paragraph (3).

      (2) A person shall not be treated under paragraph (1)(b) or (c) as the
      family member of a student residing in the United  Kingdom  after  the
      period of three months beginning on the date on which the  student  is
      admitted to the United Kingdom unless-

      (a) in the case of paragraph (b), the person is the dependent child of
      the student or of his spouse or civil partner; or

      (b) the student also falls within one of the other categories of
      qualified persons mentioned in regulation 6(1).

      (3) Subject to paragraph (4), a person  who  is  an  extended  family
      member and has been issued with an EEA family permit,  a  registration
      certificate or a residence card shall be treated as the family  member
      of the relevant EEA national for as long as he  continues  to  satisfy
      the conditions in regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or (5) in relation to that
      EEA national and the permit, certificate or card has not ceased to  be
      valid or been revoked... ."


 6. On the face of it, neither Article  2  nor  Regulation  7  affords  the
    appellant  the  right  to  a  residence  card.  That  is  because   his
    relationship is that of a civil partner with Mr  Dela  Cruz  who  is  a
    family member of an EEA  national  but  not  himself  an  EEA  national
    exercising Treaty rights. Only a direct descendant of Mr Dela Cruz,  as
    opposed to a partner, comes within the provisions of the Directive  and
    the EEA Regulations.

 7. As I understood it, at  the  heart  of  the  appellant's  case  is  the
    proposition that the failure of the Directive and  EEA  Regulations  to
    provide for the lawful residence the civil partner of a dependent of an
    EEA national is inconsistent with Article 8 of the ECHR.  I  could  not
    see how that could be so. Article 8 is a qualified right. It  does  not
    provide for any form of relationship to be afforded lawful residence as
    of right, not even parent and minor child. It cannot  be  an  automatic
    breach of Article 8 that EEA  legislation  does  not  provide  for  the
    lawful residence of a civil partner of a dependent of an EEA  national.
    I could not see where the claimed inconsistency with Article 8  of  the
    ECHR arose, therefore.

 8. The arguments for the appellant also touched on the  issue  of  whether
    the respondent's decision impinged on the EEA rights  exercised  by  Mr
    Dela Cruz and his step-father, Mr Healy. Again, it was not clear to  me
    from the evidence why that would be so. The EEA rights engaged in  this
    appeal are those of free movement under the Citizen's Directive and  Mr
    Healy does not assert that he will be forced to leave  the  UK  because
    the appellant does not have a residence card and this may lead  to  his
    step-son and the appellant leaving the UK.

 9. I accept, however, that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  failing  to
    consider the appellant's Article 8 claim. In an appeal dealing with  an
    issue of EEA law an appellant is  entitled  to  rely  on  human  rights
    grounds. Fundamental human rights form part of the  general  principles
    of Community Law, this being confirmed by the  Charter  of  Fundamental
    Rights of the European Union. The same principle is  confirmed  in  the
    various cases relied upon by Mr Jacobs.

10. I found the failure to decide the Article 8 appeal to be an error on  a
    point of law such that this part of the determination must be set aside
    and re-made. I proceed to do so now.

11. Nothing suggested that the first four of  the  questions  set  down  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 fell to be answered other than in the appellant's
    favour. I proceeded to assess the proportionality of  the  decision  to
    refuse a residence card,  essentially  refusing  lawful  residence  and
    expecting the appellant to leave the UK.

12. There is no dispute as to the strength of the appellant's  family  life
    with Mr Dela Cruz or his private  life  with  Mr  Dela  Cruz's  family,
    through his wider social  network  and  work  he  has  undertaken.  The
    evidence of all of the family members is that it will be distressing if
    the appellant has to leave the UK and Mr Dela Cruz  goes  with  him.  I
    accept that will be so and that it may be heightened for Mr  Dela  Cruz
    and his mother where a facet of Filipino culture is that adult children
    remain in the family home with their partners.  I also  have  no  doubt
    that the appellant and Mr Dela Cruz have offered support  to  Mr  Healy
    when he has been unwell but did not find the evidence on this point and
    where support would be available from Mr Healy's wife this could  be  a
    factor determining the Article 8 claim in the appellant's favour.

13. The appellant has been in the UK only since 2010. There was nothing  to
    suggest that he cannot return to New Zealand, where he has  lived  most
    of his life, with his civil partner. I did not have evidence as to  how
    long Mr Dela  Cruz  has  lived  in  the  UK  but  although  there  will
    inevitably be upheaval and initial difficulty in moving to New  Zealand
    with the appellant it did  not  appear  to  me  that  the  difficulties
    involved in moving to a  relatively  similar  culture  using  the  same
    language could be so great as to reach  the  level  disproportionality.
    Both the appellant and Mr Dela Cruz  have  qualifications,  skills  and
    work experience that will assist them in establishing themselves in New
    Zealand.

14. Even  under  a  free-standing  Article  8  proportionality  assessment,
    untrammelled by the provisions of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE  and
    test of exceptionality or compelling circumstances, it was not my  view
    that the decision could be found to be disproportionate or  the  public
    interest in maintaining an  effective  immigration  system  outweighed.
    When the inability to meet the Immigration Rules is taken as a starting
    point  in  the  proportionality  assessment  and  the  requirement  for
    exceptional or compelling circumstances applied, the  Article  8  claim
    here simply cannot succeed; Haleemudeen v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  558
    applied.

Decision

15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error
    on a point of law as regards EEA law and shall stand.

16. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an  error  on  a
    point of law as regards Article 8 of the ECHR. I re-make that  part  of
    the appeal as refused.


Signed   [pic]                               Date 17 July 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
