
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29320/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th October 2015                  |On 8th October 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                              MR Muhammad Bilal
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk of Counsel instructed by Arshed & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, Mr Muhammad Bilal, date of birth 3rd August 1988,  is  a
    citizen  of  Pakistan.   I  have  considered  whether  or  not  it   is
    appropriate or necessary  to  make  an  anonymity  direction  in  these
    proceedings.  Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider
    it necessary to make such a direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Manuel promulgated  on  18th  February  2015.   The
    judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent to refuse the Appellant  further  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom and thereupon to remove the Appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. By a decision made on 21st April 2015 leave  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted.  Thus the matter appears before me  to  determine
    in the first instance whether or not there is an error of  law  in  the
    original determination.

Preliminary Matter

 4. At the outset of the hearing Counsel on behalf of the Appellant  sought
    leave to amend the Grounds of Appeal.  In the application to amend  the
    Grounds of Appeal the representative is seeking to rely  upon  Appendix
    FM and specifically paragraph EX.1(b) of the Immigration Rules.  It was
    being asserted that the judge had not made a conclusion as  to  whether
    or not there were insurmountable obstacles to family life  between  the
    Appellant and his spouse continuing outside the United Kingdom.  It  is
    submitted that nowhere in the Decision does Judge Manuel make a find in
    respect of insurmountable obstacles.   Instead  the  judge  focuses  on
    Article 8 of the ECHR outside the  rules  and  it  is  suggested  dealt
    primarily with whether or not there are exceptional circumstances.

 5. The power to amend a document is set out in  Rule  5  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   By  those  Rules  the  Upper
    Tribunal is empowered to amend any  document,  that  must  include  the
    Grounds of  Appeal.   However  the  power  contained  therein  must  be
    exercised in accordance with the  overriding  objective  to  deal  with
    cases fairly and justly.

 6. I heard submissions from both the  representatives.  Having  considered
    all the circumstances I did not allow an amendment to be  made  to  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  In refusing that I took into account  a  number  of
    matters.

 7. First and foremost within the Reasons for Refusal Letter  consideration
    is given to the whole of the circumstances of the  Appellant  including
    Appendix FM  and  paragraph  EX.1.   The  reasons  for  refusal  letter
    specifically deals with whether or not insurmountable  obstacles  exist
    to the Appellant's British partner relocating  with  the  Appellant  to
    Pakistan.  The reasons for  refusal  letter  specifically  rejects  the
    claim that there could be any insurmountable obstacles.  The issue  had
    therefore specifically been raised  within  the  refusal  letter.   The
    refusal letter is dated 3rd July 2014.

 8. The original  Grounds  of  Appeal  had  stated  that  the  decision  is
    otherwise not in accordance with the law and is not in accordance  with
    the Immigration Rules but had not referred to  any  specific  provision
    within the rules upon which reliance was placed.

 9. However by a letter of 6th May 2014, a letter before  the  decision  by
    the Respondent, the legal  representatives  acting  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant had indicated that the Appellant was  seeking  to  rely  upon
    Article 8 outside the Rules and exceptional  circumstances  in  respect
    thereof.

10. During the course of the hearing consideration had been  given  to  the
    Immigration Rules and specifically to Appendix FM  but  it  appears  to
    have been accepted that the Appellant could not meet  the  requirements
    of the Rules.  That is  evident  from  paragraph  7  of  the  Decision.
    Thereafter the legal representatives in accordance with the  letter  of
    6th May had indicated that they were seeking to  rely  on  family  life
    under Article 8 outside  the  rules  and  that  removal  would  in  the
    circumstances be disproportionate.

11. Accordingly from reading the Decision it is clear  that  prior  to  the
    date of the hearing it was accepted that the Appellant could  not  meet
    the requirements of the Rules and that therefore Article 8 outside  the
    rules was the basis upon which the Appellant was seeking to present his
    claim.  From paragraphs 7 an 8 of the Decision it appears that  at  the
    hearing it had been conceded that the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements  of  Appendix  FM,  including  EX.1,  and  therefore   the
    Appellant was again seeking to rely upon Article 8 outside the Rules.

12. I also took account of the immigration history of the Appellant and the
    findings made in a previous Decision in respect of this Appellant.  The
    immigration history is:

      i) The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 12th October 2009  with
         entry clearance as a student valid until 30th November 2013.

     ii) On 16th  June  2012  the  Appellant  married  one  Angela  Margaret
         Balneaves a person settled in the United Kingdom.

    iii) On 6th July 2012 the Appellant made application for leave to remain
         as the spouse of Angela Margaret Balneaves.

     iv) The application was granted on 1st  March  2013  with  leave  valid
         until 1st March 2015.

      v) In April 2013 the Appellant had entered into  a  relationship  with
         another female named Irem Bilal, the Sponsor herein.

     vi) By 17th May 2013 the Appellant was applying for leave to remain  on
         the basis of his relationship with Irem  Bilal.   That  application
         was refused on 13th  August  2013.   The  Appellant  appealed  that
         decision.

    vii) On 16th August 2013 the Appellant entered into an Islamic  marriage
         with Irem Bilal.

   viii) On 23rd December 2013 the Appellant's appeal against the refusal of
         13th August 2013 was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parker.
          The Tribunal Decision for that appeal is within the papers.  It is
         evident from those papers that the judge considered the  status  of
         the relationship of the Appellant and Miss Bilal at the  time.   He
         accepted that it was a genuine relationship but  found  that  there
         was no credible suggestion  that  Miss  Bilal  could  not  live  in
         Pakistan.  He did at that stage raise the issue of the availability
         of medical facilities in  Pakistan.   Judge  Parker  dismissed  the
         Appellant's appeal in  so  doing  he  did  treat  the  relationship
         between Miss Bilal and the Appellant as a genuine relationship  but
         there were no credible  suggestions  that  the  Appellant's  spouse
         could not live in Pakistan and it was therefore  proportionate  for
         the Appellant and his spouse to return to Pakistan.

     ix) On 18th March 2014  at  Manchester  County  Court  the  Appellant's
         marriage to Mrs Balneaves was dissolved.

      x) On 12th April 2014 the Appellant and Irem  Bilal  registered  their
         marriage in Manchester.

     xi) On 16th April 2014 the  Appellant's  leave  on  the  basis  of  his
         marriage to Mrs Balneaves was curtailed  on  the  basis  that  the
         Appellant's marriage to Mrs Balneaves  had  broken  down  and  the
         Appellant had not disclosed  that  fact  to  the  Respondent  until
         making the application in May 2013.

    xii) The application for leave on the basis  of  his  relationship  with
         Irem Bilal was refused.  That resulted in the present appeal.

13. Although insurmountable obstacles were  not  specifically  referred  to
    within the Decision by Judge Parker, it is clear that he concluded that
    there was no credible suggestion that the Appellant's spouse could  not
    go to Pakistan to live.

14. Whilst further evidence has been presented to support  the  Appellant's
    case it was  a  matter  that  was  clearly  at  the  forefront  of  the
    representatives' mind in making submissions on behalf of the  Appellant
    at the hearing.  However it was conceded that the Appellant  could  not
    meet the Immigration Rules.  The judge has specifically recorded  that.
    In the light of that the judge cannot be criticised  for  concentrating
    on  the  only  issues  that  were  raised  by  the  Appellant  and  the
    Appellant's representatives that is Article 8 outside the rules.

15. In the circumstances the Appellant's new representatives are seeking to
    raise issues which were not specifically raised before  the  judge  and
    were according to the Decision itself specifically conceded.  I  cannot
    see that the judge can be criticised for  accepting  what  professional
    legal representatives concede that is  that  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules could not be met and that the issues in the case related only  to
    Article 8 outside the rules.

16. In light of the matters set out I did  not  give  leave  to  amend  the
    Grounds of Appeal.

17. Turning to the permission granted in granting permission  emphasis  has
    been made of Section 117A to D of the 2002 Act as  amended.   There  is
    reference to the Section in  paragraph  13  of  the  decision.   It  is
    suggested in the leave  that  as  the  Appellant  had  established  his
    relationship with Miss Bilal at a time when  he  was  lawfully  in  the
    United Kingdom the judge in applying Section  117  has  misapplied  the
    provisions of the Act and that the argument that little  weight  should
    be given to such a relationship is an error of law on the part  of  the
    judge.  It is suggested that that is the conclusion to  be  drawn  from
    the fact that the judge has set the provision out in paragraph 13.

18. However if  one  examines  the  judge's  approach  the  judge  has  not
    suggested that the Appellant has acquired  his  family  life  when  his
    status  was  precarious  as  suggested  in  Section  117B.  Rather   in
    paragraphs 42 and 43 the judge has looked at other factors referred  to
    in Section 117B. The judge has found that the Appellant and his  spouse
    do not meet the requirements of the Rules to  be  able  to  financially
    support themselves.  Such is a material fact not only  with  regard  to
    meeting the Rules and Section 117B but also as to  the  proportionality
    of the decision as to whether or not the Appellant should be allowed to
    stay.  The judge does not therein refer to any question of  whether  or
    not family life exists and giving little weight to  such  family  life.
    The judge has clearly accepted that family  life  does  exist  and  due
    weight has  been  given  to  such  family  life.   The  judge  has  not
    approached the issue on the basis that in accordance with Section 117 B
    little weight should be given to such family life.

19. Accordingly I do not find that there is any error as alleged in  Ground
    1.

20. With regard to Grounds 2 and 3 the permission itself  points  out  that
    there is nothing that indicates that the judge had  acted  unfairly  in
    the manner in which the case was dealt with.  It is suggested in Ground
    2 that there are inconsistent findings and failing to reconcile issues.
     I do not find that that has been made out.

21.  Equally  in  Ground  3  it  is  suggested  that  there  is  procedural
    unfairness, again I do not find that that is made out.  The issue  that
    was the subject of such had been raised previously in the  decision  of
    Judge Parker but no evidence had been produced with regard to  it.   It
    was clearly an issue that had been considered in the previous  Decision
    and the judge was entitled to take such into account.

22. With regard to Ground 4 whilst it commences by  suggesting  that  there
    was a failure to apply the case of Dube [2015]  UKUT  00090  (IAC)  the
    provision then relates back again to Section 117A to  D.   It  is  also
    suggested that the judge has not properly structured and dealt with the
    issue of proportionality.  The  judge  has  properly  referred  to  the
    findings by Judge Parker and  has  considered  all  relevant  evidence.
    There is no error in the judge's assessment of proportionality..

23. Consistent with the case of Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 that was  the
    starting point for the judge's assessment of the circumstances  of  the
    Appellant and assessment of the proportionality issue.  The  judge  has
    carefully looked at all the evidence and given valid reasons for coming
    to the conclusion set out.  In the circumstances I find that  there  is
    no error of law in the way that the judge has dealt with the matter.

24. I therefore uphold the decision to dismiss this appeal on all  grounds.




Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
