

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: IA/29556/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24th July 2014                             |On 7th August 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                   HARRIES

                                   Between

                           MR REXFORD SIMON OPPONG
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr R Ahmed, Counsel
For the Respondent: Miss A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant and Proceedings

   1.   The appellant was born on 22nd April  1960  and  is  a  national  of
      Ghana.  He appealed before First-tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale  (the
      Judge) at Hatton Cross on 19th March 2014 against the decision of  the
      respondent to remove him from the United Kingdom following the refusal
      of his application for leave to remain on grounds of long residence or
      Article 8 human rights.  The Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
      Immigration  Rules  and  on  Article  8  human  rights  grounds  in  a
      determination dated 20th March 2014.
   2.    After an initial refusal in the First-tier Tribunal  of  permission
      to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  permission  was  granted  to  the
      appellant on 4th June 2014 by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker.  The  matter
      accordingly came before me for an initial hearing to determine whether
      the Judge's decision involved the making of an error  on  a  point  of
      law.


Issues Under Appeal and Submissions


   3.   The central issue before the Judge was the length of the appellant's
      residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  respondent   refused   the
      application because the appellant failed to provide evidence of lawful
      entry into  the  United  Kingdom  and  Home  Office  records  did  not
      substantiate his claim to have arrived most  recently  in  the  united
      Kingdom in 1998; the appellant had stated in  a  previous  application
      for an EEA residence card that he arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on
      17th January 2008, although he subsequently claimed this was an error.




   4.   The relevant findings of the Judge flow from  the  evidence  of  the
      appellant set out in paragraph 14 of the determination  recording  the
      appellant's evidence that he worked for Morson International and  also
      for North Star Limited.  He relied on  payslips  for  this  employment
      showing tax deducted but he had been told that HMRC had no  record  of
      his registration for tax purposes with these companies and no tax  had
      been received by HMRC.  The appellant stated  that  he  had  contacted
      HMRC himself to obtain tax records from 1998 to date but he  was  told
      that they could only be provided from 2007 to the present date.

   5.   In paragraph 39 of her determination the Judge make a  finding  that
      the appellant had been in the United Kingdom prior  to  January  2008;
      she accepted that he had been in the United Kingdom continuously since
      May 2007. In paragraph 40 of her determination  the  Judge  considered
      the appellant's evidence of employment including  that  with  a  third
      employer, Ocean Contract Cleaning, from 1998.  However, there  was  no
      record with HMRC of PAYE tax being deducted by  this  third  employer.
      The Judge could find  no  explanation  for  three  separate  employers
      failing to register the appellant for tax, or to pay tax  deducted  to
      HMRC.


   6.   The Judge reminded herself that the onus was upon the  appellant  to
      prove his case and to provide the necessary evidence; she  found  that
      he could easily have provided supporting evidence  of  his  employment
      and his failure to make "even the most basic attempt to do so" led her
      to adverse credibility conclusions. The  Judge's  findings  about  the
      appellant's lack of evidence of his history of employment  contributed
      to her dismissal of the appeal but did not represent the  totality  of
      her adverse findings.

   7.   Permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  on  the
      grounds that it was arguable that had the Judge been aware  that  HMRC
      do not keep records beyond 7 years this might have affected the weight
      she gave to other elements of the evidence; this  was,  however,  with
      the proviso that whether such information is in the public domain  may
      be open to question.

   8.   Mr Ahmed's submissions to me for the appellant were that  the  Judge
      had materially erred in law in her assessment of the evidence relating
      to HMRC records. He relied on new evidence, not before the  First-tier
      Tribunal, which he claimed supplemented the HMRC evidence relied  upon
      by the respondent.   The evidence in question appears at page  269  of
      the appellant's additional bundle and consists of a copy  letter  from
      HMRC, dated 14th December 2011, sent in response to a  question  posed
      through Freedom of Information. The  document  was  sourced  from  the
      internet but not from the  HMRC  website.   It  was  addressed  to  an
      unknown person, Mr McGatland, who had asked for  how  long  HMRC  keep
      personal income records before they are destroyed.  The  core  of  the
      correspondence relied upon by Mr Ahmed states as follows:


         "The former Inland Revenue had a standardised retention period  set
         at up to a maximum of nine years plus the current year.   HMRC  has
         reduced this to six years plus  current  for  direct  and  indirect
         taxes information.  HMRC therefore currently retains  records  from
         the 2005-06 tax year onwards. There  are  exceptions  to  this  and
         these are set out in policies for the relevant business streams."


   9.   This correspondence was submitted by Mr Ahmed to show that the  HMRC
      practice in relation to record-keeping is information  in  the  public
      domain which the Judge should have taken into account; she should have
      taken account of HMRC not retaining records for more than 6 years. The
      Judge is further submitted to have placed undue reliance upon evidence
      from the respondent consisting of a statement from Mr Andrew Underhill
      of HMRC about the lack of  records  held  about  the  appellant's  tax
      affairs.  It is submitted for the appellant that this person  was  not
      present and could not be questioned about his evidence;  the  computer
      records could not be examined.


  10. Mr Ahmed further submitted that at paragraph 44 of  the  determination
      the Judge accepted that the appellant had been  seen  by  one  of  his
      witnesses in the United  Kingdom  since  1998  and  this  should  have
      carried greater weight in the Judge's deliberations;  on  balance  she
      should have found him to be continuously present in the United Kingdom
      from that date.


  11.  In response Miss Everett stated that although the new evidence in the
      form of correspondence is from the internet it is questionable whether
      this shows an HMRC policy within the public domain;  she  queried  the
      sufficiency of the letter for this purpose.  She  submitted  that  the
      record-keeping issue had not been live in the  First-tier  before  the
      Judge and her  findings  went  beyond  this  issue,  for  instance  in
      relation to a lack of evidence of National Insurance which might  have
      been relied upon by the appellant.


  12. I announced my finding at the hearing, with brief reasons, that in  my
      judgment the decision of the Judge does not disclose any error of law.
       My full reasoning is set out below.

   My Findings


  13. I am satisfied that the Judge made no  error  of  law  in  making  her
      decision.  I find that she reached  conclusions  which  were  properly
      open to her and that they were supported by valid reasons.  I  am  not
      satisfied that the evidence set out above shows  the  existence  of  a
      policy of HMRC in the public domain which should have been  taken into
      account by the Judge, notwithstanding its  absence  before  her.   The
      information does not come from the HMRC website but in response  to  a
      question asked in another forum. The letter is addressed to  a  person
      with no connection to the appellant  whose  situation  may  have  been
      entirely different.  The letter is dated December  2011  and  contains
      information which may not necessarily  have  been  applicable  at  the
      relevant date for the Judge's deliberations  and  the  information  is
      stated to be subject to exceptions.


  14.  If I found that the Judge erred by failing to take  account  of  such
      evidence, which I do not, I would further find that such error was not
      material in the light of the determination read as a whole.  The Judge
      correctly directed herself that the  burden  of  proof  was  upon  the
      appellant; I am satisfied that the appellant's  failure  to  discharge
      this burden led to the dismissal of  his  appeal  and  not  any  undue
      reliance placed by  the  Judge  on   evidence  from  the  respondent's
      witness.


  15. At paragraph 38 of the determination the Judge made clear that she had
      considered all the evidence in the round. Aside from the issue of HMRC
      records, the Judge found that the maintenance by the  appellant  of  a
      bank account in the United Kingdom from or before 1998  did  not  show
      his presence in the United Kingdom from 1998; she had concerns  as  to
      who exactly might have been operating the account, including purported
      payments into it from employment.


  16. The Judge considered the oral evidence from the appellant's  witnesses
      and expressed  considerable  concern  about  the  lack  of  supporting
      evidence of their immigration status in the United Kingdom; there  was
      no copy of a passport for one witness and the other witness  had  made
      no written statement in advance of the hearing. I  am  satisfied  that
      the Judge's finding that the appellant may have  been  in  the  United
      Kingdom in 1998 discloses no error as  she  clearly  states  that  the
      evidence does not show residence from then to  have  been  continuous.
      She made allowance for the childhood  memories  of  one  witness,  who
      claimed  to  have  seen  the  appellant  from  then   onwards,   being
      potentially deceptive.


  17. The Judge had concerns, set out in paragraph 45 of her  determination,
      about the appellant's evidence relating to his addresses in the United
      Kingdom. She could see no reason, had he been genuinely  married,  for
      him to maintain a different address  from  his  wife,  which  was  his
      evidence. The  Judge  doubted  the  marriage  to  have  been  genuine;
      although it was not now in issue it was relied upon  in  the  previous
      EEA residence card application by the appellant. In  paragraph  40  of
      the determination the Judge took account of the appellant's failure to
      provide evidence he might easily have obtained including evidence from
      any of his three employers, the DWP  or  other  evidence  of  national
      insurance contributions. He did not contact the  Ghanaian  embassy  to
      show that he held a Ghanaian passport at the time he  claims  to  have
      entered the United Kingdom.


  18. The Judge found the totality of the appellant's evidence to fall below
      the required standard and before reaching her  final  conclusions  she
      took account, in paragraph 49 of her determination, of the appellant's
      illegal entry into the United Kingdom previously, his  clear  contacts
      with people able to facilitate such illegal entry and more likely than
      not illegal exit as well.  She took account  of  the  appellant's  own
      disregard for the immigration laws of the United Kingdom.

  19. Taking account of all these matters I am satisfied that the making  of
      the decision did not involve the making of any  material  error  on  a
      point of law. I find that no other grounds of challenge to the Judge's
      decision show that she made any error of law but  amount  to  no  more
      than a continuing disagreement with her findings.


Decision


  20.  I find that the making of the decision in the First-tier Tribunal did
      not involve the making of a material error on a point of  law  and  it
      follows that the Judge's decision stands and this appeal to the  Upper
      Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005.   There
    is no application or information before me to show any change  to  that
    position to be required.

Signed : J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Dated 3rd August 2014


Fee Award

The position remains that there is no fee award.

Signed: J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Dated 3rd August 2014
