
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/29788/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10 March 2016 & 30 June 2016          |On 05 August 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     ATO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer (30 June 2016)
For the Respondent:    Mr J Khalid of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the respondent against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Jessica Pacey) allowing an appeal by the applicant
    against the respondent's decision dated 2  July  2014  to  curtail  his
    discretionary leave to remain.  In this decision I will  refer  to  the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, the  applicant  as
    the appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  24  December  1987.   He
    arrived in the UK, aged 12, as a visitor, and has remained since  then.
    On 5 September 2011 he was granted discretionary leave to remain as the
    spouse of VN and they have a son (I) born on 22  January  2010.   On  2
    June  2014  the  respondent  decided   to   curtail   the   appellant's
    discretionary leave as he had ceased to  meet  the  requirements  of  a
    concession under which leave to remain was granted.  The  circumstances
    justifying the grant of leave to remain outside the  Immigration  Rules
    no longer applied in the light of information that the marriage was  no
    longer subsisting and the parties no longer lived together.

3.   The appellant appealed against this decision and the hearing  initially
    set for 18 November 2014 was adjourned to provide full details  of  the
    Family Court proceedings which were pending in relation to his son.

4.   Those proceedings were concluded by an order made in the  Family  Court
    on 9 and 10 February 2015.  The  live  applications  before  the  court
    concerned the appellant's application for an order for  direct  contact
    with I and his mother's application to change I's surname.   The  Court
    ordered that their son should live with his mother and that  he  should
    not spend any time with the respondent in terms of face-to-face contact
    but his father should write letters and cards and send any  gifts  that
    he wished to send, such contact not being on set days  but  on  average
    once a month.  Arrangements were made for the communications to be sent
    through the paternal grandparents' home.  In recitals to the  order  at
    (c), the Family Court recorded the following:

         "(c) And upon the Court indicating to the Respondent father that in
             the event an application for direct contact is to be  made  by
             him, the Court would hope and  expect  to  see  progress  with
             regards  to:  his  understanding  surrounding  the  impact  of
             domestic violence/abuse upon the victim of the same as well as
             clarification to the father's immigration status  and  ability
             to remain in this country."


The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

5.    At  the  hearing  before  the  judge  the  appellant  said  that   his
    discretionary leave was not given on the basis of his marriage to VN to
    whom he was not legally married but because he had grown up in  the  UK
    for fourteen years.  He also set out in his witness statement that  his
    partner would be violent towards him and he described the deterioration
    in their relationship during 2010 and 2011.  They broke up  two  months
    after the grant of his limited leave to remain.  He had spent time with
    his son but his wife had refused to allow him to take him to Nigeria to
    visit his paternal family at the end of 2011.  He explained how he  had
    not initially been able to obtain legal representation for  the  family
    proceedings.  He had taken a  parenting  course  beginning  in  October
    2013, taking three modules out of  nine,  but  could  not  complete  it
    because he had been made homeless after losing his  job.   He  had  not
    received the curtailment letter and he wanted to be a role model in I's
    life.

6.   In a further witness statement the appellant said that he had  attended
    the DVPP programme and received a good report.  The agreement had  been
    that once he had done  this,  face-to-face  contact  should  start  but
    CAFCASS had refused recommending that he attended a  further  programme
    called the "Caring Dads" programme but this required contact  with  his
    son first as there were activities they had to complete together.

7.   A skeleton argument was produced at the hearing stating  the  appellant
    was now in a genuine and subsisting relationship with a UK citizen.  It
    was further stated that the Family Court proceedings had  been  ongoing
    for some time, one reason being that the Court had been waiting for the
    appellant's immigration  status  to  be  settled.   The  appellant  was
    currently directed to send letters, photographs and cards to  his  son.
    The Family Court had stated that for it to consider direct contact,  it
    had to have clarification of the  appellant's  immigration  status  and
    ability to remain in the UK.  It would  not  be  in  the  child's  best
    interests if direct contact were to begin and then stop suddenly if the
    appellant were required to leave the UK.  The appellant had now found a
    job and a home and was able to offer  a  stable  environment.   It  was
    further argued that the CAFCASS report was biased towards VM  and  that
    the appellant's words had been misinterpreted.

8.   In oral submissions it was argued on behalf of the respondent that  the
    final court order had stated that the appellant should not have face to
    face contact with his son and that contact by means of letters could be
    carried out from outside the UK.  The CAFCASS  Report  had  highlighted
    concerns about assaults the appellant had  admitted  and  about  social
    media images.  It was argued on behalf of the  appellant  that  he  had
    been in the UK since the age of 12.  He had a British, not  a  Nigerian
    accent.  He had done all he could to maintain contact with his son  and
    that the writer of the CAFCASS Report had been very  negative  and  had
    ignored positive reviews of the appellant,  who  had  acknowledged  his
    previous violent behaviour which  he  regretted  and  had  successfully
    completed the DVPP programme.  He had not been legally represented when
    the final court order had been made.  He would  be  able  to  have  the
    order reviewed in the light of fresh evidence and the Family Court  had
    required clarification of his immigration status.

9.   It was accepted that the appellant could not meet the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules as a parent.  He did not have  direct  access  to
    his son (E-LTRPT.2.4(a)(ii) or sole  responsibility  for  him  and  the
    appeal therefore proceeded under article 8 outside the rules.  At  para
    [26] the judge held that the appellant  had  a  minor  son  who  was  a
    British citizen, living with a British citizen mother, and  given  that
    it was generally accepted that, absent any countervailing  factors,  it
    was preferable for children to have contact with  both  parents,  there
    were circumstances of such a nature that she could consider the  appeal
    outside the rules.  She found that the appellant had family  life  with
    his son, that the respondent's decision would have consequences of such
    gravity as to engage the operation of article 8 as contact even by post
    would of necessity be less easy if the appellant were living in Nigeria
    and his son would be aware that his father had moved from living  close
    by  to  living  thousands  of  miles  away.   She  accepted  that   the
    interference was in  accordance  with  the  law  and  was  made  for  a
    legitimate aim.  The issue for her to assess was proportionality.

10.  The judge took into account the fact that the appellant clearly  had  a
    poor immigration history but he was only 12 when he came  and  hence  a
    minor and would have been required to live where the adults in his life
    chose that he should live.  She considered the issues relating  to  his
    son.  She found that the appellant had accepted responsibility for  his
    past behaviour and was trying to re-build his life  with  his  son  and
    wanted to be a role model for him.  He did not want his son growing  up
    thinking that absentee fathers were the norm and acceptable.  She  took
    into account the fact that the Family Court had at present  ruled  that
    there should be no face-to-face contact and it was arguable  that  such
    contact as permitted could be maintained from Nigeria.  She also  noted
    the wording in the final order that the court would hope and expect  to
    see clarification of the appellant's immigration status and ability  to
    remain in this country.  It was her view that  this  wording  indicated
    that the door would be open for  the  order  to  be  revisited  if  the
    appellant's appeal were allowed and that, had the Family Court been  of
    the opinion that under no circumstances should the appellant have face-
    to-face contact with his son, his immigration status  and  geographical
    location would have been immaterial.

11.  The judge set out concerns about the CAFCASS Report,  noting  that  the
    first report had referred to the child as "Nicholas" which was not  his
    correct name and this raised a question mark as to whether  the  writer
    was confusing two children.  Concern had been expressed that there  was
    a risk of emotional and physical harm should his son  spend  time  with
    his father but nowhere was there any indication that the appellant  had
    harmed, or attempted to harm, him.  She  commented  that  there  was  a
    wholly unrealistic proposal from CAFCASS that the appellant attend  the
    "Caring Dads" programme which was a  recommendation  made  without  due
    consideration as it was impossible  for  him  to  undertake  it  as  it
    required the joint involvement of father and son.  She noted  that  I's
    mother was white British and that it  would  be  his  father  who  must
    reasonably give him an understanding of his  Nigerian  heritage  and  a
    sense of his Nigerian identity.  She noted that the appellant's present
    partner said that she would be happy for any future children she had to
    be fathered by the appellant and that this was a significant  statement
    given the apparent concerns that had been raised in the CAFCASS  Report
    over a possibly physical risk to I from the appellant.

12.  The judge noted that there was no suggestion that the appellant  go  to
    Nigeria with his father who was not arguing that  that  should  be  the
    case.  The judge said that in her view it was in the best interests  of
    the child that his father should also be in the UK.  She considered the
    authority of RS (immigration and family court proceedings) India [2012]
    UKUT 218 on whether the outcome of contemplated family proceedings  was
    likely to be material to the immigration  decision  but  this  was  not
    relevant as the Family Court had indicated the matter was the other way
    round, that it was the outcome of the  appellant's  immigration  appeal
    that was likely to be material to  the  Family  Court's  deliberations.
    For these reasons the judge found that there were no compelling  public
    interest reasons to exclude the appellant from the UK and there was  no
    basis for allowing the appeal only to a limited extent.  She found that
    it would not be reasonable to expect the appellant to leave the UK  and
    his appeal was accordingly allowed on article 8 grounds.

Grounds and Submissions

13.  In the grounds of appeal it is argued that the judge erred  in  law  by
    going behind the  findings  of  experts  in  relation  to  the  child's
    welfare.  It was not for an immigration judge in effect to conduct a re-
    hearing of the appellant's case where the issues had  been  decided  in
    the Family Court.  The judge in the Family Court had taken  a  balanced
    view in respect  of  the  family  proceedings  whereas  the  judge  had
    identified and made findings on the perceived failings of  the  CAFCASS
    Report while not considering any of the negative factors identified  in
    that report.  The report had made worrying comments about drug use  and
    domestic violence but none of these factors appeared  anywhere  in  the
    judge's findings.  Further, the  judge  had  failed  to  identify  what
    family life, existing between a parent who only had indirect contact to
    a child, could not be continued out of country.  Whilst the  judge  had
    referred to s.117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,
    she had failed to take into account the public interest in  respect  of
    immigration control.

14.  Ms Isherwood adopted these grounds in her submissions.  She  questioned
    how the judge could find that there was family life  as  the  appellant
    had not seen his son since 2011.  It had not been for her to  criticise
    the CAFCASS Report as she had.  The  fact  was  that  indirect  contact
    could continue from Nigeria.  Whilst it was true that any  order  could
    be  re-visited,  the  Family  Courts'  main  concern   had   not   been
    clarification of the father's immigration status but an expectation  of
    seeing progress with regard to  his  understanding  of  the  impact  of
    domestic violence/abuse upon the victim.

15.  Mr Khalid submitted that the judge had  been  fully  entitled  to  find
    that there was family life between the appellant and his son and, while
    the  respondent  may  be  unhappy  with  the  judge's   proportionality
    assessment, the fact was she had found the appellant to be  a  credible
    witness. She had reached  a  decision  properly  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence.  The judge had been entitled to comment on concerns about the
    CAFCASS Report but had not sought to go behind it.  She had taken  into
    account the appellant's poor immigration history and her  approach  did
    not disclose any material error of law.  She  had  applied  the  Razgar
    principles and must have taken into account the public  interest.   She
    was entitled to  take  the  view  that  direct  contact  may  become  a
    possibility and that  that  option  should  not  be  prevented  by  the
    appellant's removal to Nigeria.




Consideration of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law

16.  The issue for me at this stage of the hearing  is  whether  the  First-
    tier Tribunal erred in law such that its decision should be set  aside.
    I am satisfied that the judge did so err for a number of reasons.   The
    first is that it was accepted that the appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules primarily because he did not have
    direct access with his son [26].  The judge said  that  she  could  and
    should  consider  the  appeal  under  article  8  because  absent   any
    countervailing factors it was preferable for children to  have  contact
    with both parents.  However, true as this is, the fact remains that the
    appellant, following a final order in  the  Family  Court  in  February
    2015, did not have direct contact  but  only  indirect  contact.   This
    meant that he was not able to bring himself within  the  provisions  of
    the rules and it is clear following the amendments to the rules in 2012
    that article 8 is to be considered in the light of  the  rules  and  in
    particular the provisions of the rules are to be taken into account  as
    part of the public interest.  This the judge failed to do.

17.  At the hearing before me it was questioned how  the  judge  could  find
    that there was family life in the present circumstances but  I  do  not
    accept that submission.  The appellant has indirect  contact  with  his
    son and the judge accepted that he maintained an interest  and  concern
    for him.  In these circumstances, whatever his previous faults may have
    been, it does not mean that he did not have family life with his son.

18.  When assessing proportionality the judge was critical of  a  number  of
    aspects of the CAFCASS Report.  When the first CAFCASS Report  is  read
    as a whole it is clear that the reference to the  child  as  "Nicholas"
    was a typing error.  He is correctly identified  in  the  rest  of  the
    report and it is quite clear that there is no question of confusion  in
    the writer's mind as the judge suggests at [41].  The  judge  was  also
    critical of the second report where the writer stated that there was  a
    risk of emotional and physical harm to I should he spend any time  with
    his father and that there had been no indication that the appellant had
    harmed or attempted  to  harm  his  son.  She  commented  on  what  she
    described as the wholly unrealistic proposal that the appellant  attend
    the "Caring Dads" programme.  Whatever the merits or otherwise of these
    concerns, it was for the family judge to decide what weight  to  attach
    to the CAFCASS reports  and  to  decide  what  order  should  be  made.
    Criticisms of the CAFCASS reports made on the  basis  of  only  hearing
    from  one  side  concerned  were  irrelevant  to  the   assessment   of
    proportionality.

19.  At present the appellant has indirect contact to his  son,  not  direct
    contact.  The judge was concerned and, in some ways understandably  so,
    about whether he would be  deprived  of  an  opportunity  of  making  a
    further application for direct  contact  if  removed  to  Nigeria.   An
    application can be made from abroad although that will  bring  its  own
    difficulties.  The judge attached weight to recital (c)  in  the  order
    where the Family Court indicated that in the event  of  an  application
    for  direct  contact  the  court  would  seek  clarification   of   his
    immigration status and ability to remain in this country but  that  was
    not the only part of that recital, which starts  by  the  Court  saying
    that it would hope and expect  to  see  progress  with  regard  to  his
    understanding surrounding the impact of  domestic  violence/abuse  upon
    its victim.  The judge said at [38]  that  it  was  rational  that  the
    Family Court did not wish I to be able to see his  father  face-to-face
    only to have him withdraw from his life because  of  an  obligation  to
    return to Nigeria.  However, there  is  no  indication  of  that  issue
    weighing with the Family Court  and  there  is  nothing  in  the  other
    recitals to indicate that the  appellant's  immigration  status  had  a
    material bearing on the  outcome  of  the  appeal  as  opposed  to  the
    previous level of violence exhibited by the appellant  to  I's  mother.
    There is  also  nothing  in  the  court  order  to  indicate  that  the
    appellant's location seven miles away from his son had any  bearing  on
    the outcome of the issues before the Family Court.

20.  I am, therefore, satisfied that  the  comment  relied  upon  about  the
    Family  Court  hoping  and  expecting  to  see  clarification  of   the
    appellant's immigration status  has  been  taken  out  of  context  and
    without consideration of the other matters the Court said it wished  to
    see addressed.  When carrying out the exercise of balancing the  public
    interest with the impact of removal on the appellant and  other  family
    members, I am not satisfied that the judge gave proper  weight  to  the
    public interest in maintaining proper immigration control.   The  judge
    reminded herself of s.117B(6) but fails to  explain  why  the  indirect
    contact is such that it would not be reasonable to expect the appellant
    to leave the UK.  The public interest factors have  not  been  properly
    taken into account.

21.  For these reasons I am satisfied that the judge erred in law such  that
    the decision should be set aside.  As indicated at the  hearing,  if  I
    found that there was an error of law, I would set the matter down for a
    directions hearing  to  hear  submissions  on  how  the  appeal  should
    proceed. Further directions were given at the hearing on 4 May 2016 and
    the appellant has filed a further witness  statement  and  a  statement
    from his former partner, AS, both statements dated 6 June 2016.

     Further Evidence of the Appellant

22.  The appellant adopted  his  witness  statement  of  6  June  2006.   He
    confirmed that he continues to have indirect contact with  his  son  by
    post.  He sends letters, pictures and gifts to him twice  a  month.  He
    added that his son has made him very proud by  becoming  an  ambassador
    for his year group  at  school.   He  feels  that  I's  mother  is  not
    consistently sending things from their son but is waiting a whole month
    to do so, sending a picture and a very short  letter  and  only  giving
    limited information.  His statement then deals with part of the history
    before the Family Court hearing which has little if any bearing on  the
    current issue.  He explained that he had attended the DVPP course for a
    year. That took place a significant distance from where he lived but he
    did it because he wanted to see his son.  He had looked into doing more
    courses but they were oversubscribed.  He feels it  is  important  that
    his son has him in his life as a  positive  role  model  and  he  fears
    losing the opportunity of being that.  He also fears that if he has  to
    return to Nigeria, I's mother will not let I write to him  or  pass  on
    his letters and pictures.

23.  In his oral evidence he said that  contact  was  going  positively  for
    indirect contact and he produced some  of  the  pictures  that  he  had
    received.  He accepted that I's mother had had concerns about the risks
    of abduction but this arose from a misunderstanding and  he  had  never
    had any intention of taking I away from her.  He had completed the DVPP
    course and said that he  had  learnt  that  his  actions  could  affect
    everyone.  He had been stressed and had  taken  it  out  on  the  wrong
    person.  He had now learnt to walk away and this has  helped  him  with
    his last two relationships.  He explained that his current partner  had
    not been able to attend the hearing.  She had wanted to  come  but  was
    unable to do so because of work commitments.  He explained that he  had
    changed his employment in October 2015 but was still working.  It meant
    a lot to him to be able to see his  son  on  a  regular  basis  and  he
    believed his son was worth every cent.  He accepted that he  needed  to
    be able to show his former partner that he had improved and that he had
    not yet attempted to apply for a new child arrangements order.

24.  Mr Walker referred to in his  submissions  to  Mohammed  (Family  Court
    proceedings - outcome) [2014] UKUT 419 and in particular  to  [23]-[24]
    about the changes to the procedure in family cases designed to  produce
    a final hearing.  There had been a full hearing in the Family Court and
    the judge had ordered that the appellant should not  have  face-to-face
    contact with his son.  He could return to  Nigeria  and  contact  could
    continue in the same way.  It would be open to him to apply  for  entry
    clearance to take court proceedings, if appropriate.

25.  Mr Khalid submitted that it was common ground that family life  existed
    between the appellant and his son.  Proper weight should  be  given  to
    the best interests of I in accordance with the guidelines given by  the
    Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4.  It  would  be  wrong  to
    draw a hard and fast distinction between direct and  indirect  contact.
    The appellant was sending gifts and clothes to his son and adhering  to
    the terms of the court order.  He argued that the Family Court had laid
    a foundation for the appellant to apply for direct  contact  by  saying
    that in the event of such an application it would hope  and  expect  to
    see progress with regard  to  the  appellant  understanding  about  the
    impact  of  domestic  violence/abuse  on  the   victim   as   well   as
    clarification of his immigration status and ability to  remain  in  the
    country.  He argued that there would be a risk of emotional harm if the
    appellant had to return to Nigeria and was unable to send  gifts  on  a
    regular basis because of the inadequate postal service and the risk  of
    items going astray.

Re-making the Decision

26.  I drew the parties' attention to the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in
    Treebhawon & Others (Section 117B(6)) [2015]  UKUT  674  in  which  the
    Tribunal said as follows:

         "20.  In  section  117B(6),   Parliament   has   prescribed   three
             conditions, namely:

         (a)  if the person concerned is not liable to deportation;

         (b)   such  a  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, namely a person  who  is
             under the age of 18 and is a British citizen or has  lived  in
             the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven  years  or
             more; and

         (c)  it would not be reasonable to expect  a  qualifying  child  to
             leave the United Kingdom.

         Within this discrete regime, the  statute  proclaims  unequivocally
         that where these three conditions are satisfied the public interest
         does not require the removal of the parent from the United Kingdom.
          Ambiguity, there is none."

27.  There is no doubt that conditions  (a)  and  (c)  are  fulfilled.   The
    appellant is liable to removal,  not  deportation.   It  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect I to leave the UK in the light of the fact that he
    lives with his mother.  The remaining issue is  whether  the  appellant
    has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship.   I  have  been
    referred to Mohammed and take into account  the  point  that  following
    reforms to the procedures in the Family Court there is an  emphasis  on
    reaching a final decision and avoiding repeated hearings in the hope of
    producing a different result.  I note that any parent who now makes  an
    application for a court order with respect to their child will  not  be
    allowed to proceed with the application unless  they  have  attended  a
    mediation, information and assessment meeting.  However,  it  is  worth
    noting that the facts in Mohammed  were  very  different  in  that  the
    appellant was subject to deportation, the child in question was in care
    and the Tribunal rejected an argument that the Family  Court  had  left
    open the question of taking a different view regarding  direct  contact
    dependent on the outcome of the appellant's immigration appeal.

28.  That said, each case needs to be decided on its own facts  and  in  the
    light of Treebhawon & Others, the core issue is whether  the  appellant
    has a genuine, subsisting parental relationship with his son.  There is
    nothing to indicate that that must, of necessity, involve either living
    with a parent or having direct contact.  The appellant has family  life
    with his son, at least within article 8(1).  Whilst  the  Family  Court
    found that direct contact was not appropriate at the present  time,  it
    is clear that the Court emphasised  the  importance  of  I's  continued
    relationship with his father in recital (e) in  which  the  applicant's
    mother confirmed that she would ensure that I had a "daddy  box",  that
    he was encouraged to look at his memory box on a regular basis and that
    I maintained a positive image of his father  and  that  she  would  not
    speak negatively about him or allow others to do so in his presence  or
    within his earshot and would share appropriate  letters,  cards,  gifts
    and photographs from the  appellant  in  a  positive  way  and  provide
    encouragement to I to respond to  them.   Further,  she  confirmed  she
    would  provide  the  appellant  with  copies  of  I's  school  reports,
    photographs and by annual update of his likes and dislikes and  further
    information to assist the appellant with indirect contact.

29.  There have been submissions on recital (c) about what inferences  could
    be drawn from the judge's comments that, in the event of an application
    for direct contact being made, the court would expect to  see  progress
    with regard to the appellant's understanding of the impact of  domestic
    violence as  well  as  clarification  of  his  immigration  status.   I
    interpret this as essentially a neutral comment by the  court,  neither
    encouraging nor discouraging a further application, which in any  event
    would need to be dealt with on its own merits if, and when, made.

30.  On the evidence before me, I accept  that  the  appellant  has  written
    letters and sent gifts in accordance with the court order.  In his oral
    evidence he expressed his hopes that he might have direct contact  with
    his son and said that he had more understanding of the consequences  of
    domestic violence and how it could be avoided.  Looking at the evidence
    in the round, I accept that the  appellant  does  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his  son  even  though  it  is  maintained
    through  indirect  contact.   In  these  circumstances  he  meets   the
    conditions set out in s117B(6) and it follows that the public  interest
    does not require his removal from the UK.

31.  I agree with the way the judge put it in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    [49] that "the appellant  has  by  his  continued  and  regular  postal
    contact with I, and its nature, as much of  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with him as the Family Court  currently  allows."
    As is now apparent, the decision in Treebhawon that s117B(6) stands  by
    itself and is not simply one of  a  number  of  factors  in  s117B  has
    answered the concerns I had  about  whether  all  the  relevant  public
    interest factors had been properly taken  into  account.   Had  I  been
    reminded of  that  decision  at  the  error  of  law  hearing,  in  all
    likelihood I would have found that any errors made by  the  judge  were
    not material to the outcome of the appeal but, having set the  decision
    aside and considered the merits for myself, I agree with the judge  and
    I am satisfied that the appeal should be allowed.

Decision

32.  I re-make the decision by allowing  the  appeal  by  the  appellant  on
    human rights grounds.  The  anonymity  order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal remains in force until further order.



Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 2 August 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter





