
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29446/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field Hose                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8th May 2017                          |On 5th October 2017               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                             MR MD MONIRUZZAMAN
                       (anonymity NOT direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. M Bhuiyan, Haque & Hausman Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Ms. K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal ("FtT") Judge Andonian promulgated on 14th September  2016.
       The Judge allowed the appellant's appeal against a decision made  by
       the respondent  on  26th  August  2015  to  refuse  the  appellant's
       application for leave to remain in the UK  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
       Student Migrant.


    2. The respondent's grounds for refusing the application were  twofold.
       First, on  4th  April  2012,  the  appellant  had  made  a  previous
       application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)  student.   In
       support  of  that  application,  the  appellant  submitted  a  TOEIC
       certificate  from  Educational  Testing  Service  ("ETS")   to   the
       respondent and his sponsor in order for them to provide him  with  a
       Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies  ("CAS").  According   to
       information provided to the respondent by ETS, there was significant
       evidence to conclude that the  certificate  of  the  test  that  the
       appellant took at London College of Social Studies, was fraudulently
       obtained by the  use  of  a  proxy  test  taker.  ETS  declared  the
       appellant's test to be 'Invalid",  and  the  scores  were  therefore
       cancelled by ETS.  The respondent was satisfied that the appellant's
       certificate was fraudulently obtained.  As false documents had  been
       submitted in relation to the appellant's previous  application,  his
       application was refused under paragraph 322(2), of  the  Immigration
       Rules.


    3. Second, the appellant had claimed 30 points under Appendix A of  the
       Immigration Rules for a valid CAS but no CAS  reference  number  had
       been  submitted  with  the  application.   The  respondent  was  not
       satisfied that the appellant met the requirements to be  awarded  30
       points under Appendix A of the Immigration Rules.


    4. At paragraph [13]  of  his  decision,  the  Judge  referred  to  the
       evidence relied upon by the respondent.  The respondent relied  upon
       statements  made  by  Hilary  Rackstraw,  Rebecca  Collings,   Peter
       Millington and Professor Peter French.  The Judge noted  that  there
       is no direct evidence as regards this  appellant,  and  no  evidence
       that can show that this particular appellant practised deception.


    5. The Judge concluded, at [14], that the burden of  proof  is  on  the
       respondent  to  satisfy  the  Tribunal,  on  the  civil  balance  of
       probabilities that  there  has  been  deception  practiced  by  this
       appellant in obtaining the TOEIC pass test. The Judge stated:


             "...apart from the limited hearsay evidence of  Mr  Millington
             and  Ms  Collings  there  was  no  evidence   from   the   ETS
             organisation. I base my decision on the oral evidence  I  have
             heard. The legal burden of proof is on the respondent to prove
             on the civil balance of probabilities that her accusation that
             the appellant practised deception should stand. I  regret  her
             accusation has not been proven to the requisite  standard.  As
             regards this particular appellant.  Therefore the SSHD has not
             discharged the legal burden of proof incumbent upon her."


    6. Although the Judge of the FtT  allowed  the  appeal,  the  appellant
       appealed the decision, drawing the Tribunal's attention to the  fact
       that the respondent had also refused the application on the  grounds
       that  no  CAS  reference  number  had  been   submitted   with   the
       application, and that the appellant had conceded at the  hearing  of
       the appeal, that no CAS had been submitted, and so  the  substantive
       requirements of the relevant rules could not be met.


    7. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Cruthers on 22nd  March
       2017.  The Judge noted that the FtT Judge should have dealt with  the
       "CAS issue" as well as the "ETS test result issue", and that in light
       of the concession made by the appellant  that  he  was  not  able  to
       provide a CAS, that matter should have been fatal to the  appellant's
       appeal. The matter comes before me to consider whether  the  decision
       of the FtT Judge involved the making of a material error of law,  and
       if the decision is set aside, to re-make the decision.


    8. It was common ground at the hearing before  me,  that  although  the
       Judge allowed the appeal, the decision of the  FtT  Judge  fails  to
       address whether the substantive requirements of the  relevant  rules
       could be met by the appellant, given  the  concession  made  by  the
       appellant, that he was not able  to  provide  a  CAS.   That  in  my
       judgement is itself a material error  of  law  that  is  capable  of
       affecting the outcome of the appeal, such that the decision  of  the
       FtT Judge must be set aside.


    9. The failure to provide a CAS is in my judgement fatal to the  appeal
       under the  immigration  rules.   Ordinarily,  I  would  not  in  the
       circumstances need to  consider  the  remaining  ground.   There  is
       however, the secondary issue as to the approach adopted by  the  FtT
       Judge as to the evidence in respect  of  the  appellant's  ETS  test
       result,  and  the  question  of  whether  the  appellant  has   used
       deception.


   10. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Pal submits that the Judge erred  in
       his assessment of the evidence before  him.   She  relies  upon  the
       decision of the Tribunal in SM and Qadir -v- SSHD  [2016]  UKUT  229
       (IAC).  It was held that the respondent's generic evidence, combined
       with her evidence particular to the two appellants in that case, was
       sufficient to discharge the evidential burden of proving that  their
       TOEIC certificates had been procured by  dishonesty.   The  Tribunal
       stressed that "every case belonging to  the  ETS/TOEIC  stable  will
       invariably be  fact  sensitive"  and  that  "every  appeal  will  be
       determined on the basis of the evidence adduced by the parties".


   11. As is set out at paragraph [13] of the  decision  of  the  FtT,  the
       evidence here included  not  only  the  generic  evidence  of  Peter
       Millington and Rebecca Collings, but  also  the  additional  witness
       statement from Hilary Rackstraw and the report  of  Professor  Peter
       French.  Applying the approach in SM and Qadir,  that  evidence  was
       sufficient to discharge the evidential burden upon  the  respondent.
       Where the respondent has provided prima facie evidence of deception,
       the burden shifts to the individual, to provide a plausible innocent
       explanation, and if the appellant does so, the burden shifts back to
       the respondent.


   12. Ms Pal submits that the Judge of the FtT erred in  his  approach  to
       the evidence.  The Judge proceeds upon the basis that the respondent
       must satisfy the Tribunal on a  balance  of  probability,  that  the
       appellant  has  practiced   deception   in   obtaining   the   TOEIC
       certificate.  She submits that the evidence that was before the  FtT
       was  sufficient  to  discharge  the  evidential  burden   upon   the
       respondent and the Judge should then  have  considered  whether  the
       appellant is able to provide a plausible, innocent explanation.


   13. Mr Bhuiyan submits that if it is  found  that  the  Judge  erred  in
       reaching his decision  because  he  did  not  consider  whether  the
       respondent has discharged the initial evidential  burden  upon  her,
       that  error  is  immaterial  because  the   Judge   considered   the
       explanation that was given by the appellant.  At paragraphs  [8]  to
       [10] of his decision, the FtT Judge refers to the  evidence  of  the
       appellant and the submissions made on his behalf.


   14. In my judgement, it is clear that the FtT Judge failed to apply  the
       three-stage process identified in the case law.  The Judge  did  not
       consider  whether  the  respondent  had   discharged   the   initial
       evidential burden, before considering the  appellant's  explanation.
       The Judge proceeds upon the basis that there was simply no  evidence
       that  this  particular  appellant  practiced   deception.    In   my
       judgement, the Judge did not properly consider the  evidence  relied
       upon by the appellant and the explanation advanced, in a way that is
       required.  The Judge noted at paragraph [10] of  his  decision  that
       the appellant relied upon the fact that he  has  since  completed  a
       Masters  of  Business  Administration  Course.   The  Judge   noted,
       correctly in my judgement, that the TOEIC  certificate  that  is  in
       issue relates to a test taken in 2012, and not  a  certificate  that
       the appellant obtained some years later.  That aside, all  that  was
       relied upon by the appellant was a bare assertion that he  had  paid
       for the TOEIC test, and attended the test centre for two days, taken
       the tests and  passed  them.   Unsurprisingly,  given  the  approach
       adopted by the Judge, the Judge does not set out any or any adequate
       reasons for concluding that the appellant has satisfied  the  burden
       that  had  shifted  to  him,  to  provide   a   plausible   innocent
       explanation.  I therefore reject the submission made by  Mr  Bhuigan
       that any error in the Judge's approach is immaterial. The Judge does
       not give adequate reasons for his conclusion  that  the  appellant's
       explanation was sufficient to discharge the evidential  burden  that
       had shifted to him.


   15. As to the disposal of the appeal, both Mr Bhuigan and Ms  Pal  agree
       that if I find that the Judge of the FtT made a  material  error  of
       law as to his approach to the TOEIC certificate, the correct  course
       to adopt is for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
       for hearing afresh.  I have decided that it is appropriate to  remit
       this appeal back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  having  taken  into
       account paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statement
       of 25th September 2012.  In my view, the nature and  extent  of  any
       judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive.  The parties will
       be advised of the date of the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  in  due
       course.


 Notice of Decision


   16.  The  appeal  is  allowed.   The  decision  of  FtT  Judge  Andonian
       promulgated on 14th September 2016 is set aside.


   17. The appeal is remitted the FtT for a fresh  hearing  of  the  appeal
       with no findings preserved.

Signed                                  Date          3rd July 2017

       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



FEE AWARD


As I have set aside the decision of the FtT, I also set aside the fee  award
made by the FtT Judge.  Whether or not a fee award is  appropriate  will  be
considered by the FtT when the appeal is heard.


Signed                                  Date          3rd July 2017

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




