

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/29159/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 March 2013                              |On 16 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     CK
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Takavada of Matieni & Co Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr K Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who  was  born  in  1973.   She
      first entered the UK as a student on 24 January 2005 and, following  a
      number of extensions to her leave, she was  granted  leave  to  remain
      until 30 April 2012.   On 26 April 2012,  the  appellant  applied  for
      further leave to remain on  the  basis  of  her  relationship  with  a
      Zimbabwe citizen, the sponsor (who was born in 1964) and who had  been
      granted indefinite leave to remain on 5 December 2008 on the basis  of
      family reunion with his wife.  His wife had subsequently  died  on  26
      December 2010.  On 28 November 2012, the Secretary  of  State  refused
      the appellant's application to  extend  her  leave  and  also  made  a
      decision to remove  her  by  way  of  directions  under  s.47  of  the
      Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

   2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      promulgated on 5 April 2013, Judge Archer  dismissed  the  appellant's
      appeal.  He was not satisfied that the appellant met the  requirements
      of para 295D of the Immigration Rules (HC 395  as  amended)  that  the
      appellant was entitled to further leave  to  remain  as  an  unmarried
      partner.  Although it was not contested that the parties' relationship
      was  genuine  and  that  the  appellant  met  the   English   language
      requirements of the  Rules, he was not satisfied that the parties  had
      been living in a relationship akin to marriage for two years  or  more
      as required by para  295D(vi).   The  Judge  also  accepted  that  the
      appellant could not succeed under para 276ADE of the Rules based  upon
      her private life in the UK.  Further,  she  could  not  succeed  under
      Appendix  FM  of  the  Rules  on  the  basis  that   there   were   no
      "insurmountable obstacles" to the appellant and her partner continuing
      family life in Zimbabwe.  In  the  result,  the  Judge  dismissed  the
      appeal under the Immigration Rules.

   3. On 25 April 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Parkes)  granted  the
      appellant permission to  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  Judge  had
      arguably erred in law in failing to  consider  the  appellant's  claim
      under Article 8 of the ECHR.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Submissions

   4. Mr Takavada relied on the grant  of  permission.   He  confirmed  that
      Article 8 had been relied on in the grounds of appeal  to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal and in his submission before the  Judge.   He  submitted
      that the Judge had erred in law in failing to consider Article 8.

   5. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Hibbs accepted that the Judge had made
      an error in not dealing with Article 8.  However, he submitted that it
      was not material since the Judge was  not  required  to  consider  the
      appellant's claim under Article 8 as he had dismissed the appeal under
      the new "Article 8 Rules" which fully dealt with the appellant's claim
      under Article 8.  He relied upon the decision of the  Inner  House  of
      the Court of Session in Scotland in MS v SSHD [2013] CSIH 52  at  [26]
      where the Court of Session, had agreed  with  the  view  expressed  by
      Sales J in R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) at [30].  Mr Hibbs
      submitted, on the facts of this appeal, no  panel  properly  directing
      itself could have reached the  conclusion  that  Article  8  would  be
      breached.

Discussion

   6. It is accepted by both parties that  the  Judge  did  err  in  law  in
      failing to consider Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   His  reason  for  not
      considering Article 8 is set  out  in  paragraph  1  (the  second  and
      repeated numbering "1") that because no removal  directions  had  been
      issued, the appellant's human rights were not engaged.  That reasoning
      is clearly wrong as the Court of Appeal  pointed  out  in  JM  v  SSHD
      (2006) EWCA Civ 1402.  An appellant is entitled to rely upon Article 8
      in an appeal against a refusal to vary (by way of  extension)  his  or
      her existing leave and, when such a ground is raised,  the  First-tier
      Tribunal  is  required  by  virtue  of  s.86(2)  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to determine that "ground of  appeal",
      namely whether, at the date of the hearing, the  appellant's  removal,
      in consequence of that decision would breach Article 8  of  the  ECHR.
      There is no doubt, therefore, that the Judge fell into  error  by  not
      considering the appellant's claim, raised before him, under Article 8.

   7. Was that error material?  Mr Hibbs'  submission  is  that  it  is  not
      because, having determined that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
      requirements of the Rules, there was in effect nothing left to  decide
      under Article 8.  Mr Hibbs  relied  upon  the  Administrative  Court's
      judgement in Nagre and its approval by the Inner House of the Court of
      Session in MS.  At para [26], the Court of Session  set  out  [30]  of
      Nagre and commented as follows:

           "[26]        In  R  (Nagre)  v  Home  Secretary,  supra,  SalesJ
                 indicated his general agreement with that statement of  the
                 law, but added (at paragraph 30)

                 "The only  slight  modification  I  would  make,  for  the
                 purposes of clarity, is to say that is, after  the  process
                 of applying the new rules and finding that  the  claim  for
                 leave to remain under them fails, the relevant official  or
                 tribunal judge considers it clear that consideration  under
                 the Rules has fully addressed any family  life  or  private
                 life issues arising under Article 8, it would be sufficient
                 simply to say that; they  would  not  have  to  go  on,  in
                 addition, to consider the case separately from  the  Rules.
                 If there is no arguable case that there may be good grounds
                 for granting leave to remain outside the Rules by reference
                 to Article 8, there would be no point in  introducing  full
                 separate consideration of  Article  8  again  after  having
                 reached a decision on application of the rules."

           We agree entirely with that qualification.  It seems to us  that
           the new rules are likely  to  deal  adequately  with  the  great
           majority of cases where the article 8 right to private or family
           life is put in issue.  In that event, there is no need to go  on
           to consider article 8 separately, using the type of analysis set
           out in R (Razgar) v Home Secretary, supra.

   8. At para [27], the Court of Session noted that:

           "[27] In some cases, however, the new Rules may  not  adequately
                 cover an applicant's Article 8 right to private  or  family
                 life."

   9. At [28], the Court went on to state:

           "[28] It can be expected that the  new  Rules  will  cover  most
                 cases where an applicant  seeks  to  rely  on  his  or  her
                 Convention  right  to  private  and  family  life.   If  an
                 official or Tribunal or Court is asked  to  consider  leave
                 outside the Rules, an applicant must put forward  a  reason
                 for doing so.   Such  a  reason  will  usually  consist  of
                 circumstances   'in   which   refusal   would   result   in
                 unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the  individual  such
                 that  the  refusal  of  the  application   would   not   be
                 proportionate' (in the words of paragraph 3.2.7(d)  of  the
                 Home Secretary's  Guidance.   We  are  of  the  opinion  in
                 considering   whether   such   circumstances    has    been
                 demonstrated by an applicant, the criterion that should  be
                 used is that of a 'good arguable  case',  as  suggested  by
                 Sales J in the passage quoted above.   The  decision  maker
                 should  examine  the  circumstances  put  forward  by   the
                 application and determine  whether  they  disclose  a  good
                 arguable case that the Rules would  produce  an  unfair  or
                 disproportionate result such that the applicant's Article 8
                 rights would be infringed.  It is  only  if  that  test  is
                 satisfied that there is any need to go on to  consider  the
                 application of Article 8 in detail.  Furthermore, as  Sales
                 J  indicates,  those  writing   decision   letters   should
                 demonstrate that they have indeed addressed this test."

  10. That approach is reflected  in,  the  Upper  Tribunal's  jurisprudence
      culminating in the decision in Green (Article 8 -  New  Rules)  [2013]
      UKUT 00254 (IAC).

  11. In my judgement,  this  appeal  does  not  fall  within  the  "caveat"
      recognised in Nagre and MS to the approach set out in MF (Article 8  -
      New Rules) [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC) and Izuazu (Article 8 - New  Rules)
      [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC) that a Judge should adopt a two  stage  approach:
      first determining whether a claimant meets  the  requirements  of  the
      Rules and, secondly if the claimant does not, move on to consider  the
      claim under Article 8 generally.

  12. I accept that this was not a case like  Green  where  the  Immigration
      Rules did not reflect the established principles for applying  Article
      8.  There, the appellant was subject  to  a  deportation  order  as  a
      result of a crime he had committed as a juvenile.    That  factor  was
      recognised by the Strasbourg Court as a particularly  relevant  factor
      in assessing proportionality (see Maslov v Austria [2008]  ECHR  546).
      That factor was, however, not reflected in  the  relevant  immigration
      rule, namely para 398.  As a consequence, it was necessary to consider
      that appellant's claim under Article 8 despite the fact that he  could
      not succeed under the Immigration Rules.

  13. It may well be that this appeal cannot be said  to  fall  within  that
      category of case.  It does, however, fall  outside  the  "caveat"  and
      require a consideration of Art  8.   The  appellant  relies  upon  her
      family and/or private life with her partner and the  effect  upon  him
      including his relationship with his 25 year old  daughter  who  is  at
      university in the UK if he returned to Zimbabwe.   The  sponsor  is  a
      MDC activist, being the MDC Secretary for the South West  Region.   In
      principle for the purposes of this appeal,  I  am  content  to  accept
      that if the Judge had fully considered the appellant's claim under the
      relevant Immigration Rules, namely para 276ADE and Appendix FM then it
      might well have not been necessary for the Judge to go on and consider
      Article 8 separately.  That, however, ignores the fact  that  in  this
      appeal the Judge only gave  a  relatively  cursory  treatment  to  the
      application of the Rules.  It is not clear  from  the  judgement  what
      precisely was the extent of the witnesses' evidence  given  orally  at
      the hearing.  The appellant and her partner undoubtedly gave  evidence
      despite the Judge's comment at paragraph 3 (the  second  numbered  "3"
      paragraph) that he heard no evidence because  the  appellant  did  not
      attend the hearing.  At  para  12,  he  found  both  witnesses  to  be
      credible.  In applying para 276ADE the crucial issue  was  whether  or
      not the appellant "had no ties (including social, cultural or family)"
      with Zimbabwe.  In relation to para 276ADE, the  Judge  merely  stated
      that he accepted the Presenting Officer's submission that  the  appeal
      could not succeed under that Rule.  The submission which is quoted  in
      paragraph 10 is that, "the  appellant  does  not  qualify  under  para
      276ADE of the Rules".   The substance of any such  submission  is  not
      recorded and no reason is given for accepting it.  If  the  Judge  was
      dismissing the appellant's reliance upon para 276ADE on the basis that
      she did in fact have some ties with Zimbabwe, the Judge  neither  sets
      out the evidence which could led him to that conclusion  and  made  no
      finding on that specific issue.

  14. In my judgment, the "caveat" to the two stage approach set out in  MF,
      Izuazu and Green cannot be applied in practice.  The Judge's findings,
      in fact, only cover para 295D and Appendix FM in particular EX1.   The
      Judge made no relevant finding in concluding that the appellant cannot
      succeed  under  para  276ADE.   The  latter  would,  certainly,  raise
      relevant matters under Article 8.

  15. It was not argued before me that the Judge's decision under the  Rules
      should not stand.  The findings, as a result, remain.  However,  their
      nature  is  such  that  they  are  an  incomplete  assessment  of  the
      appellant's case under Article 8.  In my judgement, the  "caveat"  can
      only properly be applied if the judicial assessment  of  the  relevant
      factors under the Rules is full and complete.  Here, that is  not  the
      case: it cannot be said that the consideration  of  the  rules  "fully
      addressed" the art 8 issues.  Whilst those findings stand, they do not
      determine (beyond argument) that the appellant cannot succeed  on  the
      basis of her Article 8 rights.

  16. For those reasons, I reject Mr  Hibbs'  submission  that  the  Judge's
      error of law in failing to consider Article 8 was  not  material  and,
      alternatively, that her appeal under Article 8 would necessarily fail.



Decision and Disposal

  17. Thus, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of
      an error of law.   The  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  under  the
      Immigration Rules stands.

  18. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  determine  the
      appellant's appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

  19. The Secretary of State's decision to make  a  contemporaneous  removal
      decision under s.47 of the Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act
      2006 was 'not in accordance with the law (see, SSHD  v  Ahmadi  [2013]
      EWCA Civ 512). A decision to that effect is substituted.

  20. Although Mr Takavada invited me, if the appeal was to be remitted, not
      to remit the appeal to Judge Archer, there  is  no  valid  reason  why
      Judge Archer should not continue to hear the appeal and, in the  light
      of this decision, determine the Article 8 issue.  His primary findings
      under the Rules stand and he found both the appellant and  sponsor  to
      be credible.

  21. On the basis of the evidence presented to him at the hearing,  subject
      to the reserved findings under the Rules, the appeal  is  remitted  to
      the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Archer) to  determine  the  appellant's
      Article 8 claim.




                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
