
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/29499/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 4th August 2015                         |On 13th August 2015        |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                      Mrs VIVIENNE ANGELA WILIAMS-BLAKE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr A Sufien (counsel), instructed by the appellant.
For the Respondent: Mr I Jarvis

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the appellant  against  a  decision  of  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge  Thanki  promulgated  on  22  January  2015,  dismissing  the
appellant's appeal against refusal of her application for  leave  to  remain
on all grounds.


Background


3     The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 2  December  1960.  The
appellant entered the UK as a visitor on 7  July  1999  with  a  visit  visa
valid for six months. From 6 December 1999 to  31  May  2005  the  appellant
remained in the UK lawfully because the respondent  made  successive  grants
of temporary leave to remain as a student.


4     The appellant returned to Jamaica in 2002 for a brief visit. With  the
exception of that brief visit, she has remained in the UK since  July  1999,
but since 31 May 2005, the appellant has not had leave to remain in  the  UK
and has overstayed her visa.


5     On 5 January 2010, the appellant married a British citizen and, on  15
November 2010, the appellant submitted an application for  leave  to  remain
as the spouse of a person present and settled in the  UK.  That  application
was refused by the respondent on 4 January 2011. The appellant did not  have
a right of appeal against that decision.


6     On 17 February 2011 and again on 17 March 2014,  the  appellant  asked
the respondent to reconsider the refusal decision of  4  January  2011.  The
respondent adhered to that decision. On 31 March 2014, the appellant's  then
solicitors made further representations for the appellant to be  allowed  to
stay in the UK on the basis of her Article 8 rights. On 24  June  2014,  the
respondent rejected the further  representations  made  by  the  appellant's
then solicitors both in terms of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  outwith  the
Immigration Rules. On  19  February  2014,  the  respondent  served  on  the
appellant  Form  IS151A.  It  is  against  the  decision  contained  in  the
respondent's letter of 24 June 2014  that  the  appellant  appealed  to  the
First Tier Tribunal.


The Judge's Decision


7     In  a  determination  promulgated  on  22  January  2015,  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge  Thanki  ("the  judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
respondent's decision. The judge found that the appellant could  not  fulfil
the  requirements  of  either  Appendix  FM  or  Paragraph  276ADE  of   the
Immigration Rules. The judge considered the  appellant's  Article  8  rights
outwith the Immigration Rules before dismissing the appellant's appeal.


8     The appellant framed her own grounds of appeal and on 17  March  2015,
First Tier Tribunal Judge Levin gave permission to appeal, stating:

        "4  It is arguable that the judge  erred  in  his  consideration  of
      Article 8 outside the Rules as it appears from  paragraph  49  of  his
      decision that  he  applied  the  test  of  "insurmountable  obstacles"
      thereto.


      "5     Furthermore,  given  that   the   judge   has   conflated   his
      consideration of the appellant's appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules
      with that of Article 8 outside the Rules and his  findings  upon  both
      are unclear, it is also arguable that the judge's  whole  approach  to
      the case was materially flawed."








   The Hearing


9     The appellant was represented by  Mr  A  Sufien,  Counsel.  Mr  Sufien
produced a skeleton argument which, in reality,  rehearses  the  appellant's
position at first instance. He then  sought  to  argue  that  the  appellant
fulfils the requirements of Paragraph 276ADE(vi) because the  appellant  has
lost all ties to Jamaica. He then argued that  the  judge  had  ignored  the
five stage test set out in Razgar and carried out  an  inadequate  balancing
exercise.


10    Mr Jarvis for the respondent complained that the appellant was  trying
to introduce new grounds of appeal for which she did not have permission  to
appeal,  and  that  the  argument  in  relation  to  Paragraph  276ADE   was
incompetent because it had not been raised in  the  grounds  of  appeal.  He
referred me to the case of Azeemi Moayad  (paragraph  16).  He  argued  that
there is no material error  of  law  contained  in  the  decision  and  that
although the judge has taken  a  laborious  and  unusual  approach,  he  has
considered Article 8, both within the  Immigration  Rules  and  outwith  the
Immigration Rules and that  although  he  did  not  immediately  answer  the
question posed at [33] to deal with the issue within the Immigration  Rules,
the answer is found at [49]. He relied on SS Congo and Agyarko.


Analysis


11    Mr Jarvis  is  correct  that  the  permission  to  appeal  focuses  on
consideration of Article 8 outside  of  the  Rules,  but  there  is  also  a
suggestion that the judge did not follow the two stage process and  did  not
set out the boundaries of his consideration of Article 8  within  the  Rules
and then outside the Rules.

12    Even if I were able to consider the submissions made by Mr  Sufien  in
relation to the Immigration Rules, I would have to find  that  no  challenge
is made to the finding that the appellant cannot  satisfy  the  requirements
of Appendix FM so that finding stands.

13    At [33] the judge clearly considered both Appendix  FM  and  Paragraph
276ADE of the Immigration Rules. It would have been helpful if  he  had  set
out his conclusion there (that the appellant cannot fulfil the  requirements
of  the  Immigration  Rules)  but  a  fair  reading  of  his   determination
demonstrates that at [49], having considered the  appellant's  circumstances
and relying on the facts as he found them to be, there is  a  clear  finding
there that  the  appellant  cannot  fulfil  the  requirements  of  Paragraph
276ADE(1)(vi).


14    The judge considered the appellant's Article 8 rights outside  of  the
Immigration Rules. He reminds himself of the five  stage  test  set  out  in
Razgar and applies those five stages to his analysis  of  the  facts  as  he
found them to be. He then applies Section 117A  to  D  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  before  reaching  a   conclusion.   The
conclusion reached by the judge was one which was manifestly open to him.

15.      It is not an arguable error of law  for  an  Immigration  Judge  to
give too little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality
is alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
deal  with  every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with   an
Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the  evidence  or
assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does not give  rise  to
an error of law.
16     In submissions, Mr Sufien made  much  of  the  circumstances  of  the
appellant's British citizen husband. He is of Jamaican origin but has  lived
in the UK since he was 11 years old. I n SS(Congo) and  Others  [2015]  EWCA
Civ 387 Richards LJ suggested a  test  of  exceptional  circumstances  might
apply in cases where a relationship has  been  formed  under  conditions  of
known precariousness before a violation of Article 8 will be found to  arise
in relation to a refusal to grant leave to remain outside the Rules.
17.   I remind myself of the case of Agyarko and others v SSHD 2015 WLR  (D)
205. At paragraph 25, it was stated  that  the  mere  fact  that  a  British
citizen had lived all of his life in the UK, had a job here and  might  find
it difficult, and might be reluctant, to relocate to another country,  could
not constitute insurmountable obstacles.  It  is  open  to  the  appellant's
husband to accompany her to Jamaica if he wants to.

18. Although the judge used the phrase "insurmountable  obstacles"  at  [49]
of his determination, a fair reading of the decision  makes  it  clear  that
the correct legal test has been applied. The  appellant  cannot  fulfil  the
requirements of the  immigration  rules.  There  was  no  reliable  evidence
before the judge to indicate that the appellant had lost  all  ties  to  her
country of origin. The evidence indicated that she had  visited  Jamaica  as
recently as 2002. The appellant's husband is of Jamaican origin.  The  judge
considered whether article 8 out-with the rules is engaged  and  found  that
it is not.


   Conclusion


19.   I am therefore satisfied that the judge's determination, when read  as
a whole, sets out findings that are reasoned, sustainable  and  sufficiently
detailed.


20.   I therefore find that no errors of law have been established  and  the
judge's determination shall stand.




Decision


21    The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date 7
August 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

