
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29548/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 23 August 2017                         |On 26 October 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               KELECHI CHUKWU
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Biggs of Counsel instructed by Dylan Conrad
Kreolle


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Blake promulgated on 13 December 2016 in which he allowed the appeal of
    Ms Chukwu against a decision of the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department dated 11 August 2015 refusing a human rights claim.


2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the Appellant and  Ms  Chukwu  is  the  Respondent,  for  the  sake  of
    consistency with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall
    hereafter refer to Ms Chukwu as the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of
    State as the Respondent.

3.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 16  February  1980.   She
    entered the United Kingdom on 7 October 2008 with a visa as  a  student
    valid until 31 December 2010.  On 15  December  2010  she  applied  for
    variation of leave to remain as a Tier 4 migrant; her  application  was
    granted on 19 January 2011 with leave valid until 31 December 2013.


4.   During the currency of her leave the Appellant sought to apply to  join
    the British Army, and it appears that she also made an  application  to
    the Respondent to regularise her  status  accordingly.  There  is  some
    confusion in the materials before  me  as  to  the  exact  sequence  of
    events, and the nature and status of the Appellant's application to the
    British Army. The Judge has noted something  of  this  history  in  the
    Decision: however, it appears that the Judge did not have  the  benefit
    of the Respondent's bundle - see paragraph 47(i). (It is unclear as  to
    why this should have been: a copy of the bundle is  presently  on  file
    and there is a note on file indicated it was 'printed from the  portal'
    on 6 October 2015 - a full month before the hearing before Judge Blake.
    Be that as it may Mr  Biggs  indicated  that  he  understood  that  the
    Appellant had not ever been served with  the  Respondent's  bundle.)  I
    return to this aspect of the appeal below.


5.   Be that  as  it  may,  it  is  apparent  that  the  Appellant  made  an
    application for leave to remain in order to enlist in the  army  on  13
    September 2013, which was refused on 22  January  2014.  The  Appellant
    appealed this decision (ref IA/05270/2015), and succeeded in her appeal
    to the extent that it was determined that the Respondent's decision was
    not in accordance with the law and  that  the  Appellant's  application
    remained open for a fresh decision by the Respondent.


6.   The Appellant's appeal in IA/05270/2015 was decided  'on  the  papers',
    with the decision being promulgated on 9 June 2015. Written submissions
    drafted by Counsel dated 28 March 2015  were  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant. Those submissions may  now  be  found  at  Annex  C  of  the
    Respondent's bundle - although as noted above this  was  not  seemingly
    before the First-tier Tribunal. However, the written  submissions  were
    also incorporated in  the  Appellant's  bundle  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (pages 10-16). For present purposes it  is  relevant  to  note
    three matters in  particular  that  are  referred  to  in  the  written
    submissions. Firstly, it is asserted that because of delay on the  part
    of the Army the Appellant "became too old for admission to the  army...
    and following an interview on 12 June 2013, it  was  suggested  by  the
    army that she instead apply as a reservist, however  this  necessitated
    possession of ILR in the United Kingdom"; it is acknowledged  that  the
    Army withdrew the Appellant's application to  enlist.  Secondly  it  is
    acknowledged that the Appellant did not lodge a  valid  appeal  against
    the Respondent's decision of 22 January 2014  until  16  January  2015,
    when she made an application for extension of time  which  was  in  due
    course successful. The delay in lodging a valid appeal is explained  by
    reference to a rogue adviser: the Appellant had thought  that  a  valid
    application had been made in February 2014, and it was only in December
    2014 that she became aware that no  appeal  had  been  lodged  and  she
    learnt that her adviser had been suspended and disbarred.  Thirdly,  it
    was stated that the Appellant had "raised concerns" about the safety of
    returning to Nigeria with reference to her father having been a  tribal
    leader and a member of  the  Movement  for  the  Actualisation  of  the
    Sovereign State of Biafra ('MASSOB') which had resulted  in  him  being
    killed by the police,  and  her  own  involvement  in  the  "grassroots
    sanitation section of MASSOB". In this context, amongst  other  things,
    it was said that the  Appellant  was  "contemplating  making  a  formal
    asylum application".


7.   The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  IA/05270/2015  did  not
    engage with any of  the  three  matters  I  have  set  out  above.  The
    reasoning is short and essentially limited to  a  conclusion  that  the
    Respondent had not considered the Appellant's Article 8 rights, and the
    decision was therefore not in accordance with the law.


8.   The Appellant's application was again  considered,  and  again  refused
    for reasons set out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 11
    August  2015.   The  application  was  considered  with  reference   to
    paragraph 276ADE(1) and Article 8  of  the  ECHR.  In  respect  of  the
    Appellant's expressed fears, the RFRL informed  the  Appellant  of  the
    procedures for making a claim for protection via  an  Asylum  Screening
    Unit.


9.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC. It is to be noted that the scope  of
    her appeal was governed by section 82(1)(b) and section  84(2)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 - that is to say it was an
    appeal confined to human rights grounds with reference to section 84(2)
    and section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.


10.  I pause to note that  it  is  not  clear  or  obvious  that  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Blake  recognised  the  nature   of   the   Tribunal's
    jurisdiction in this regard: the appeal was purportedly  allowed  under
    the Immigration Rules as well as under Article 8.


11.  Be that as it may, the appeal was indeed allowed  reasons  set  out  in
    the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


12.  The Respondent applied for permission to appeal which  was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley on 22 June 2017.


13.  In my judgement there is a clear and obvious error in the  Decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.


14.  The Judge found that  the  Appellant's  father  had  been  arrested  in
    Nigeria as a result of his activities with MASSOB (paragraph 100),  and
    that  the  Appellant  "had  herself  been  a   spokesperson   for   the
    organisation and that they had received on  occasions  harsh  treatment
    from the government" (paragraph  101).  The  Judge  indicated  that  he
    considered   that   this   history   was   relevant   when   evaluating
    insurmountable obstacles in the context of paragraph 276 ADE (1)(vi):

      "I  consider  that  there  were  insurmountable   obstacles   to   the
    Appellant's return to Nigeria. I was satisfied that she was  associated
    with the organisation mass of. I found that she would  be  returned  to
    Nigeria as a single lone female who had no family left living there who
    could offer her support. I found the basis of such fact that there were
    insurmountable obstacles such as to qualify her under  the  Immigration
    Rules." (paragraph 108).


15.  It is also clear that  the  judge  considered  that  this  history  was
    relevant in evaluating Article 8: see paragraphs 112 and 113.


16.  However, I am completely unable  to  detect  within  the  Decision  any
    reasoning as to why such a history might  occasion  the  Appellant  any
    difficulties upon return such  that  it  should  materially  inform  an
    evaluation of either 'insurmountable obstacles' or proportionality.


17.  It is important to note the context of the  findings  in  this  regard.
    The  Appellant's  father  died  in  July  2010.  The  Appellant's   own
    involvement in MASSOB is not suggested to have continued since she left
    Nigeria for the UK in October 2008.


18.  Moreover the 'background evidence' or 'country information' as  to  the
    situation in Nigeria in respect of  MASSOB  was  limited.  A  Wikipedia
    entry (Appellant's bundle pages 63-65) does not appear to refer to  any
    events after February 2013; a  blog  entry  (pages  66-77)  covers  the
    period 2000-2006; the most recent reports in the bundle (pages  78  and
    80) refer to incidents in early 2015.


19.  Reports loose on  the  file  relate  to  protests  that  culminated  in
    violence in May 2016, and warnings issued by  the  authorities  against
    disruption of the peace in October 2016.


20.  It does not appear to have been asserted  by  the  Appellant  that  she
    wishes to resume political activism or  that  she  has  any  continuing
    interest in the Biafran independence movement. In any event  the  Judge
    has not stated any findings in relation to such matters,  and  has  not
    stated  any  findings  in  relation  to  the  'country'   evidence   to
    demonstrate what it might be about  the  Appellant's  past  association
    with MASSOB that would presently impact on her ability  to  reintegrate
    in Nigeria or otherwise enjoy a private life there.


21.  In short, the decision  in  this  regard  is  devoid  of  any  relevant
    findings or reasons.


22.  However, notwithstanding what  I  consider  to  be  a  very  clear  and
    obvious error on the part of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  Mr  Biggs
    resists the setting aside of the First-tier Tribunal decision  on  this
    basis by arguing that this error is not identified in  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal. He directed my  attention  to  relevant  case  law  as  to  the
    jurisdiction of the Tribunal - see below.


23.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe argues that the error is subsumed  in  the  Grounds
    when read as a whole. (She expressly indicated that she did not seek to
    amend the Grounds in order to make such a basis of challenge clearer.)


24.  Mr Biggs pleaded in aid  the  following  passage  at  paragraph  16  of
    Shaheen v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
    1294:

     "...it is now clearly established that the IAT had no  jurisdiction  to
    allow an appeal on the grounds  of  an  error  of  law  which  was  not
    ventilated in the grounds of appeal (see B v SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ  61;
    Miftari v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 481; R (Iran) v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
    982..."


25.  Further analysis of R (Iran) is set out in Shaheen: this is in  respect
    of allegations of error of law based on mistake of fact.  Perhaps  more
    helpful and of clearer application to  the  submission  pursued  by  Mr
    Biggs are the cases  of  B  and  Miftari.  I  note  in  particular  the
    following from Miftari:

     "So far as principle is  concerned,  three  points  arise.  First,  the
    grounds are  the  basis,  and  the  only  basis,  on  which  permission
    to appeal is granted or refused. The Vice-President who considers that
    application must determine jurisdiction on the basis  of  the  grounds;
    subject, if he does discern a point that the parties have not taken, to
    his being able to invite an amendment of the grounds. But all that must
    take place within the boundary of the grounds  as  finally  formulated.
    Second, as the Master of the Rolls said in paragraph 18 of the judgment
    of the court in B:
         "the grounds form the agenda on which the IAT considers  the  grant
         of permission and,  if  granted,  conducts  the appeal...with  the
         recent limitation of the IAT it is particularly important that  the
         grounds should clearly establish that the appeal does at least in
         form fall within that jurisdiction"
    That means that the IAT can only consider what is legitimately found in
    the actual or  amended  grounds.  It  does  not  have  jurisdiction  to
    consider anything that is not there found. Third, whilst a court will
    not ordinarily be required, in the absence of the point  being  raised,
    to consider whether it has jurisdiction to take a particular case, that
    is not so of the IAT. It has to consider jurisdiction expressly because
    it has to pass on the grounds of appeal. It is very difficult to see
    how a decision as to jurisdiction can be saved  by  demonstrating  that
    although the basis on which it was taken  was  unjustified,  the Vice-
    President could have granted permission on a different basis that  was
    not before the court.
    I conclude, therefore, that the IAT only had jurisdiction  to  consider
    the appeal to them if a point  of  law  could  be  found  within  the
    formulated grounds."

26.  My attention has also been directed to the case  of  Nixon  (permission
    to appeal: grounds) [2014] UKUT 00368 (IAC) which authoritatively  sets
    out and emphasises guidance  as  to  good  practice  both  in  drafting
    Grounds and considering applications for permission to appeal. However,
    beyond such guidance its does not seem to me that it adds anything  for
    present purposes any more useful to the Appellant's arguments than  the
    passage quoted above from Miftari.


27.  It is  against  this  jurisprudential  background  that  I  turn  to  a
    consideration  of  the  Respondent's  challenge   to   the   First-tier
    Tribunal's reasoning pertaining to return  and  past  association  with
    MASSOB.


28.  After the heading 'Making a material misdirection in law on a  material
    matter', paragraphs 6 and 7 of the Respondent's Grounds of  Appeal  are
    in these terms:

     "6.  More  pertinently,  at  [81]  the  FtTJ  records  the  Appellant's
    submissions through Council as follows:


         "Mr Emezie confirmed that he was not  putting  forward  an  asylum
         claim within the appeal. He submitted however the facts might  form
         part of a future asylum claim which might be relevant to Article  8
         ECHR to a limited extent"

     7.  However  by  [108]  the  FtTJ  is  of  the  view  that  there  were
    'insurmountable obstacles' and one strand of the reasoning to  underpin
    such finding included the Appellant's association with  MASSOB.  It  is
    submitted that  the  Appellant  having  expressly  declined  to  run  a
    protection claim, it was subsequently not open to the FtTJ to rely upon
    the absence of such risk factors to  find  an  inability  to  resume  a
    private life in Nigeria."


29.  I accept Mr Biggs' characterisation of such grounds as being  primarily
    a submission that in principal because the Appellant  had  not  made  a
    protection claim she could  not  rely  upon  any  consequences  of  her
    association with MASSOB in the context of an Article  8  case.  I  also
    accept Mr Biggs' submission that such a ground is  misconceived:  there
    is no reason in principal why a  person  who  has  not  claimed  asylum
    cannot rely in arguments in relation to 276ADE  'obstacles'  and/or  in
    respect of the proportionality of a  removal  decision,  on  claims  in
    respect of anticipated circumstances on return that might also inform a
    protection claim.


30.   Nonetheless,  in  my  judgement  it  is  clear  that  what  was  being
    challenged in substance was the Judge's reliance upon  the  Appellant's
    past association with MASSOB in the context of her circumstances in the
    event of return.


31.  Further, it seems to me that paragraphs 6 and 7 of the Grounds must  be
    read holistically, and in particular  with  the  immediately  following
    paragraphs 8 and 9:

     "8. Furthermore it is not reasoned at all why a single loan  female  in
    Nigeria is unable to help private life, see [108] when the  Appellant's
    case was her grandmother remained in Nigeria.

     9. It is further submitted that the same point can be made  in  respect
    of  the  FtTJ's  findings  at  [113]  that   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances to warrant consideration of the claim outwith  the  Rules
    under Article 8 of the ECHR."


32.  It is to be noted that in the paragraphs in  the  Decision  immediately
    leading up to paragraph 113 - i.e. paragraphs 109-112 under the heading
    'Article 8 ECHR' - the Judge's reasoning relates exclusively to private
    life circumstances in the UK and 'delay', save in  one  regard  -  "her
    association with MASSOB" (paragraph 112). Accordingly it  seems  to  me
    that in substance the Grounds include  an  allegation  that  the  Judge
    failed to reason why the Appellant's  association  with  MASSOB  should
    have been viewed favourably in the context of the Article 8 evaluation.


33.  Notwithstanding that it seems to me that  there  is  some  considerable
    weight to Mr Biggs' criticisms of the clarity of the  drafting  of  the
    Grounds of Appeal, the matter was clearly enough understood  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ransley in granting permission to  appeal  when  he
    articulated the substance of this aspect of the Respondent's  challenge
    in this way:

     "Ground (2) - it is arguable that in finding  that  the  Appellant  met
    the 'insurmountable obstacle' tests the Judge wrongly assumed that  she
    would face a risk on return to Nigeria  due  to  her  association  with
    MASSOB, when the Appellant had expressly declined to make a  protection
    claim. The same argument can be made in respect of the Judge's  finding
    that there were exceptional circumstances in the  Appellant's  case  to
    warrant considering her Article 8 claim outside the Rules."

     The reference to the Judge's 'assumption' is telling: an assumption  is
    indicative of an absence of reasoning.


34.  In all  such  circumstances  I  am  persuaded  by  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe
    submission that the clear and obvious error to which  I  have  referred
    above was in substance  identified  in  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  a
    sufficient extent to found a jurisdiction in the Tribunal - even though
    it might be said it was not articulated  in  as  clear  and  obvious  a
    manner as the error itself.


35.  The error is sufficiently material that  the  decision  in  the  appeal
    requires to be set aside.


36.  The Respondent has also raised arguments  in  respect  of  the  Judge's
    approach to the issue  of  'delay'.  There  are  two  aspects  to  this
    challenge: that there was nothing exceptional in the  delay  -  or  the
    opportunistic consolidation of private life in consequence - bearing in
    mind that length  of  residence  is  a  consideration  subsumed  within
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules;  in  any  event  the  delay
    should not be considered to diminish the  weight  to  be  accorded  the
    imperative   of   maintaining   effective   immigration   control    in
    circumstances where the delay appears to have been whilst the Appellant
    was within the appeal regime, and  not  a  delay  occasioned  by  tardy
    decision-making.


37.  The Grounds of Appeal in this regard might again  be  said  to  lack  a
    degree of sharpness of focus. Charitably, this may in part  be  because
    of the lack of clarity in the First-tier Tribunal's decision, and  also
    in part because the Judge - and seemingly in turn the  drafter  of  the
    Grounds - does not  seem  to  have  identified  the  substantial  delay
    occasioned by reason of the conduct of the Appellant's 'rogue' adviser.
    Indeed it seems to me clear that the  Judge  could  not  possibly  have
    given any consideration to the very helpful  narrative  chronology  set
    out in the written submissions in the earlier proceedings (which  as  I
    have noted were reproduced in the Appellant's bundle before the  First-
    tier Tribunal herein), because the Judge concluded that  the  Appellant
    "still had an extant application" to join the British  Army  (paragraph
    114), notwithstanding that in March 2015 her Counsel acknowledged  that
    the British Army had withdrawn her  application  because  of  her  age.
    Moreover, it does seem to me that in referring to delay the  Judge  had
    in mind delay on the part of the British Army rather than any delay  on
    the part of the Respondent.


38.  On balance I am persuaded that the Judge has failed to articulate  with
    any satisfactory clarity the way in which delay  on  the  part  of  the
    British Army informed the proportionality decision. Moreover, there was
    no evidential foundation to conclude that the delay was such  that  the
    Appellant still had an  extant  application.  There  is  not  otherwise
    identified delay in processing any immigration applications or appeals.
    Moreover, the omission of any reference to  the  delay  caused  by  the
    Appellant's own adviser is indicative of a lack of careful scrutiny  of
    the relevant circumstances.


39.  It was common ground between the representatives before me that in  the
    event that I concluded that there was a material error of law requiring
    the decision in the appeal to be set aside, that the appropriate  forum
    for remaking the appeal would be the First-tier Tribunal. I  agree.  No
    findings of fact of First-tier Tribunal may safely be preserved.  As  I
    have already noted the proceedings before the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    seemingly in the absence of a Respondent's bundle; moreover  the  Judge
    does not seem to have appreciated the full chronology overlooking  both
    the  delay  occasioned  by  the  Appellant's  own  adviser,   and   the
    acknowledgement that the Army application had been withdrawn.


40.  For completeness I note that I was not persuaded  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had erred in law as alleged in relying  on  a  Wikipedia
    entry whilst omitting consideration of the source of the entry. It  was
    for the  Judge  to  determine  what  weight  to  accord  to  supporting
    documentary evidence, and it was no part of such an evaluation that the
    Judge should have unilaterally conducted further searches in respect of
    quoted source materials.


41.  It does not follow, however,  that  the  Wikipedia  article  is  to  be
    accepted uncritically at the rehearing. It is a  matter  for  the  next
    Judge what weight should be  accorded  to  the  article.  However,  the
    Appellant is now on notice that the Respondent has raised questions  as
    to the reliability of the Wikipedia article in circumstances where  the
    website quoted as the source appears  to  have  been  deactivated.  The
    Judge may also wish to  give  consideration  to  the  manner  in  which
    Wikipedia articles may be edited by members of the public. Both parties
    may wish to give some consideration to  the  history  of  the  relevant
    Wikipedia page, and adduce evidence as appropriate.  The  Appellant  in
    particular may wish to  give  consideration  to  adducing  further  and
    different evidence in support of her claim to  have  been  an  activist
    within MASSOB.


42.  Be that as it may I do not propose to make any specific  Directions  as
    to the further conduct of the appeal. The Respondent should ensure that
    an appeal bundle has been duly served on the Appellant.  Otherwise,  it
    is for the parties to decide what, if any, further evidence  they  wish
    to file. Standard directions will suffice in this regard.


Notice of Decision

43.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.


44.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake,  with
    all issues at large


45.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.




Signed:                                 Date: 25 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

