


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29305/2012
     IA/29304/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 18 July 2013                             |On : 23 July 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                           patrick frimpong donkor
                          millicent frimpong coker
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Owusu of BWF Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The  appellants,  father  and  daughter,  are  citizens  of  Ghana,  born
   respectively on 9 November 1981 and 28  February  1999.  They  have  been
   given permission  to  appeal  against  the  determination  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge W Grant, dismissing their appeals against the respondent's
   decision  to  refuse  to  issue  them  with  residence  cards  under  the
   Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

2. The first appellant claims to have  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
   October 2003. He was refused a  residence  card  as  an  extended  family
   member of an EEA national on 29 August 2007 and again on 14 July 2009 and
   subsequently made an application, on 16 February 2012,  for  a  residence
   card as the spouse of an EEA  national,  Patricia  Akosua  Sam,  whom  he
   claimed to have married by proxy on 13 December 2010.

3. The appellants' applications were initially refused on 31 July  2012,  on
   the grounds that the first  appellant  had  failed  to  produce  a  valid
   marriage certificate as evidence that he was related as claimed to an EEA
   national, for the purposes of regulation 7(1)(a) of the EEA  regulations.
   The marriage certificate he had submitted was not considered to be valid,
   since his marriage had been registered eleven months after the  marriage,
   on 30 November 2011, whilst the relevant law, the Customary Marriage  and
   Divorce (Registration) Law 1985, stated that customary marriages  had  to
   be registered within 3 months of the marriage. It was also noted that the
   marriage certificate described the appellant's spouse as a spinster,  yet
   she was a divorcee, having divorced her previous spouse on 21 June  2010.
   The second appellant's application was accordingly refused in line.

4.  The  appellants  appealed  the  decisions,  but   the   decisions   were
   subsequently withdrawn by the respondent before the First-tier Tribunal.

5. The applications were then refused again on  3  December  2012.  By  that
   time the first appellant had produced  an  amended  marriage  certificate
   giving his spouse's status as "divorcee". On that  occasion  the  refusal
   was on the basis that a statutory declaration that had been produced with
   the marriage certificate did not contain all the required information and
   that the marriage certificate was thus invalid; and that the  credibility
   of the marriage and the documentation was undermined  by  the  ease  with
   which the appellant had managed to  obtain  a  new  marriage  certificate
   amending the previous reference to spinster. The respondent  went  on  to
   consider regulation 8(5) of the EEA Regulations  but  was  not  satisfied
   that the first appellant was in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
   akin to marriage.

6. The appellants appealed against the  decisions  and  their  appeals  were
   heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 18 March 2013 by First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge W Grant. The judge heard from the  appellant  and  his  spouse.  He
   noted inconsistencies in the appellant's  and  sponsor's  evidence  about
   their relationship  and  found  there  to  be  no  credible  evidence  of
   cohabitation. With regard to the proxy marriage, he  noted  discrepancies
   in the marriage certificate in regard to  the  age  of  the  parties;  he
   rejected the claim that the reference to the first appellant's spouse  in
   the marriage certificate was a clerical error;  and  he  noted  that  the
   statutory declaration did  not  state  the  place  of  residence  of  the
   parties. He noted that the  UKBA  RALON  report  on  customary  marriages
   referred to registration being compulsory  within  three  months  of  the
   marriage, although he accepted that since 1991 registration was optional.
   He found, nevertheless, that even though registration  was  optional,  if
   the parties decided to register the marriage then they had to comply with
   the conditions of registration and he therefore placed little  weight  on
   the  certificate.  He  found  that  the   material   doubts   about   the
   circumstances of the marriage had to be resolved  against  the  appellant
   and he accordingly dismissed the appeals under the  EEA  Regulations.  He
   found that the appellants' removal to Ghana would not breach Article 8 of
   the ECHR, noting the lack of evidence about the second appellant.

7. Permission to appeal was  sought  on  the  grounds  that  the  judge  had
   demonstrated  a  misunderstanding  of  Ghanaian  customary   law,   since
   registration was not a requirement of a customary marriage, as recognised
   in the case of NA (Customary marriage and divorce, evidence) Ghana [2009]
   UKAIT 00009; that he had digressed onto unrelated issues such as why  the
   appellant's spouse had not represented herself in the proxy marriage; and
   that  he  had  erred  by  considering  the  reference  in  the   marriage
   certificate to be a procedural error when  it  was  in  fact  a  clerical
   error.

8. Permission to appeal was  initially  refused,  but  was  granted  upon  a
   renewed application. In the grant of  permission,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
   McGeachy pointed out that if the judge  had  gone  on  to  refer  to  the
   definition of a spouse in the EEA regulations that would most likely have
   been an end to the matter, given his doubts about the genuineness of  the
   relationship, but he had not done that and had instead found the marriage
   not to be valid.

Appeal hearing and submissions

9. At the hearing the appellant was in attendance, although his  spouse  and
   daughter were not (his daughter was said to be at school and  his  spouse
   was said to be ill). We heard submissions on the error of law.

10. Mr Owusu submitted that the judge had identified  that  the  sole  issue
   before him was the validity of the proxy marriage.  In  determining  that
   issue he had failed to apply the principles in CB (validity of  marriage:
   proxy marriage) Brazil [2008] 00080 and to consider the case  law  before
   him, namely McCabe v McCabe [1994] FLR 410 and Yaotey v Quayle [1961] GLR
   573. Had he applied the principles in those cases he would have  come  to
   the conclusion that the marriage was valid, given that he had accepted at
   paragraph 18 that on the face of  it  the  parties  had  gone  through  a
   customary marriage. Had he found that the marriage was not genuine,  that
   would have been a different matter, but that was not what he  found.  The
   respondent had withdrawn the first decision because  it  had  erroneously
   been made on the basis that Ghanaian law required the  marriage  to  have
   been registered within three months. The amended marriage certificate was
   produced in court at the time the decision was withdrawn. The judge erred
   by placing weight on the RALON report which referred to the  three  month
   requirement and erred by relying upon the reference to the sponsor  as  a
   spinster in the original marriage certificate when that  was  a  clerical
   error and had been amended. Mr Owusu submitted further that the judge had
   erred by drawing adverse inferences about the  status  of  the  sponsor's
   grandchild in the United Kingdom without  putting  his  concerns  to  the
   appellant. Had that been put to the appellant he would have been able  to
   provide an explanation. That was a material error since it formed part of
   his overall adverse credibility findings. There were  further  errors  in
   the judge's Article 8 assessment.

11. Mr Tarlow submitted that any error on the part of the  judge  in  regard
   to the registration of the proxy marriage was  not  material,  given  the
   adverse findings he made about the relationship at paragraphs 15, 16  and
   23 of his determination.

12. In response, Mr Owusu submitted that the adverse credibility finding  he
   had made about the age of the appellant and his spouse  was  not  correct
   since the appropriate date was the date of registration and not the  date
   of the marriage. At the date of registration the ages were  correct.  The
   only issue before the judge was the validity of the marriage and in  that
   respect he applied the wrong test. The genuineness of  the  marriage  was
   not raised by the respondent and was not  raised  by  the  judge  at  the
   hearing and the appellant had therefore  been  given  no  opportunity  to
   respond to his concerns.

13. We advised the parties that in our view there was no  error  of  law  in
   the judge's decision. Our reasons for so finding are as follows.

Consideration and findings

14. It  was  Mr  Owusu's  case  that  the  genuineness  of  the  appellant's
   relationship and marriage had never been raised as an  issue,  either  by
   the  respondent  or  by  the  judge  himself  and  that  the  appellant's
   application had been refused solely on the basis of the validity  of  the
   proxy marriage. However that is clearly not the case and it is plain that
   neither considered the marriage to be genuine and that  that  was  indeed
   the basis upon which Judge Grant dismissed the appeals.

15. With respect to the respondent, that is apparent from  the  latter  part
   of the refusal letter which specifically states that the  fact  that  the
   appellant was so easily able to obtain a new marriage  certificate  after
   the previous refusal, when taken together with his  previous  immigration
   history, brought into doubt the  credibility  of  his  marriage  and  the
   documents submitted. With regard to the  judge,  he  did  not  state,  as
   paragraph 5 of the grounds asserts, that the sole issue was the  validity
   of the marriage in law, but at  paragraph  12  of  his  determination  he
   referred to the only issue being whether the parties had shown that  they
   were married. He did not find that  they  were.  It  is  clear  from  his
   findings at paragraphs 14 to 16 and 20 to 23  that  he  did  not  believe
   there to have been  a  genuine  relationship  and  marriage  between  the
   appellant  and  sponsor.  At  paragraphs  14  to  16  he  noted   various
   discrepancies in the accounts of the appellant and the sponsor about  the
   relationship itself. We do not agree with Mr Owusu's submission that  his
   comment at the beginning of paragraph 18 was intended in any  way  as  an
   acceptance of the reliability of the documentation, since he went on,  at
   paragraphs 18 and  20  to  21  to  note  various  discrepancies  in  that
   documentation and to conclude that  it  was  not  reliable  evidence.  At
   paragraph 23 the judge drew together those findings and concluded that he
   was not able to accept that a proxy marriage ceremony had taken place.

16. With regard to the judge's adverse findings about the  relationship,  Mr
   Owusu submitted  that  he  had  made  his  findings  without  giving  the
   appellant an opportunity to address his concerns and that  the  appellant
   had therefore not been put on notice that the genuineness of the marriage
   was in question. However, as we have already stated,  it  is  clear  that
   such concerns had already been raised in the refusal letter. Furthermore,
   the judge was entitled to place weight upon inconsistencies  between  the
   evidence of the appellant and the sponsor and was  not  required  to  put
   each  inconsistency  to  the  appellant  himself.   The   appellant   was
   represented at the hearing and it  was  open  to  the  representative  to
   address those clear and obvious discrepancies in the evidence. Whilst  it
   may be the case that the judge's  findings  about  the  sponsor's  grand-
   daughter were not entirely helpful, it is clear that his adverse findings
   were based upon the many other inconsistencies in the evidence before him
   and that that did not form a material part of his decision.

17. With regard to the judge's findings on the documentation,  it  is  clear
   that  those  were  based  upon  discrepancies  in  their  contents  which
   undermined their reliability rather than upon any failure to comply  with
   the formalities of a proxy marriage and, as such, any arguable failure to
   consider and apply the principles in the cases referred to by Mr Owusu is
   immaterial. In any event, the judge dealt with the issue at paragraph 19,
   clearly recognising from the relevant case law that registration was  not
   a requirement for validation of a customary marriage, but then  going  on
   to consider, in the alternative, at paragraph 20, the reliability of  the
   documentation.

18. The judge noted that  the  marriage  certificate  had  been  amended  to
   reflect the correct status of the sponsor, but, contrary  to  Mr  Owusu's
   assertion, was entitled to reject the  appellant's  explanation  for  the
   initial error and to find that it  was  in  fact  an  indication  of  the
   unreliability of the evidence as a whole rather than  a  simple  clerical
   mistake. He gave reasons at paragraph 20 for  rejecting  the  appellant's
   explanation and for considering the matter to reflect  adversely  on  the
   credibility of the marriage as a whole. At paragraph 21 he  rejected  the
   argument that the omission of required  information  from  the  statutory
   declaration was irrelevant if there was no need for registration  in  the
   first place and found, for reasons properly given, that  if  the  parties
   decided to register the marriage then they would have had to comply  with
   the conditions attached to that registration. He also noted discrepancies
   in the recording of the appellant's age and that of the  sponsor  at  the
   time of the marriage. Mr Owusu's response to that latter point  was  that
   the certificate correctly stated the ages at  the  date  of  registration
   rather than the date of marriage, but we note that even if that were  the
   case,  the  age  of  the  sponsor  remained  incorrect  at  the  date  of
   registration. Again, that was a matter the judge  was  entitled  to  take
   into account.

19. In view of the numerous discrepancies and inconsistencies he had  noted,
   the judge was fully entitled to place the limited weight that he did upon
   the evidence of the relationship between  the  first  appellant  and  the
   sponsor and upon the documentary evidence relating to the marriage. It is
   plain from his findings at paragraph 22, with regard to the  photographic
   evidence and his conclusion at paragraph  23,  that  he  simply  did  not
   accept that any ceremony of marriage had taken place and that there never
   was a proxy marriage. Although he did not expressly refer to the cases of
   Yaotey v Quayle and McCabe v McCabe, it is plain that in terms  of  those
   decisions, and contrary to the assertions made at paragraphs 2 and  3  of
   the grounds  of  appeal,  he  did  not  accept  that  the  essentials  or
   ingredients of a valid marriage under customary law  were  present.  That
   was a conclusion that was entirely open to him  on  the  evidence  before
   him. Accordingly, the grounds of appeal, whilst criticising  the  judge's
   findings on the validity of the marriage, do not in fact properly  engage
   with the actual basis of his findings,  namely  the  genuineness  of  the
   marriage itself.

20. It follows, from the  above,  that  we  find  no  merit  in  Mr  Owusu's
   submissions in relation to family life and Article 8. Having come to  the
   conclusion that he had  about  the  first  appellant's  marriage  to  the
   sponsor, the judge properly  proceeded  to  consider  Article  8  in  the
   context of private, rather than family, life.  His  findings  on  private
   life have not been challenged and neither have the findings he made  with
   regard to the second appellant and we consider  those  findings  to  have
   been properly made and to have been open to him on  the  evidence  before
   him.

21. Taken as a whole, we consider that the  judge's  determination  contains
   carefully reasoned findings of fact following  a  thorough  and  detailed
   assessment of the appellants' circumstances. He was entitled to reach the
   decision that he did.  He did not make any errors of law.

DECISION

22. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   an error on a point of law.  We  do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
   decision to dismiss the appeals stands.








Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:
