


             [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/29062/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 2 November 2017                         |On 17 November 2017              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                               Deepika deepika
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the decision of 11  August  2015
refusing to vary her leave to remain and to remove her from the UK.



Background

2.    The appellant is a citizen of India  born  on  25  October  1984.  She
first entered the UK on 26 February 2009 as a  student  with  a  visa  valid
until 31 January 2011. Her leave  was  extended  to  10  May  2014  and  she
applied for further leave on 9 May  2014.   She  supported  her  application
with a CAS letter from  her  college,  Newcastle  Academy  of  Business  and
Technology, but before her application was  decided  on  30  July  2014  her
college had lost its sponsor licence and therefore the CAS  was  not  valid.
For this reason her application was refused.

3.    The appellant appealed against this decision and following  a  hearing
on 18 December 2014 her appeal was allowed by the First-tier  Tribunal  with
the consent of the respondent's representative to the  limited  extent  that
it was remitted back to the respondent on the basis that  the  decision  was
not in accordance the law. Subsequently, on 1 June 2015 the respondent  sent
the appellant a letter acknowledging that her appeal had  been  allowed  and
that her application was to be reconsidered. The letter said that  before  a
decision was made and in line with  the  respondent's  Rules  and  Guidance,
consideration of the application would be  suspended  for  a  period  of  60
calendar days during which time it was open to  the  appellant  to  withdraw
her application and submit a fresh application in a different  category  or,
if she wished to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 student, it was  open  to  her
to obtain a new CAS for a course  of  study  at  a  fully  licensed  Tier  4
educational sponsor and vary the terms of  her  original  application.   She
was also sent an Information Leaflet to show to  any  potential  sponsor  to
confirm her position.

4.    On 31 July 2015, the appellant wrote to the  respondent  acknowledging
that she had been given 60 days to obtain a new CAS. She said that  she  had
tried to find a new sponsor but almost all private sponsors had  refused  to
issue a CAS and universities had also refused  applications  for  admission.
She had not been able to obtain a valid CAS as she did not have valid  leave
to remain in the UK, there was no proper progression of her studies  due  to
the suspension of her private sponsor's licence and she had now  lost  trust
in private colleges. She requested a  grant  of  discretionary  leave  or  a
further three months to enable her to find a new sponsor.

5.    On 11 August 2015, the respondent refused her application noting  that
the CAS from the previous college was not  valid,  the  appellant  had  been
informed of this and allowed 60 days to obtain a new  sponsor  and  a  valid
CAS but she had not provided one within that period. The appellant  appealed
against this decision and asked for her appeal to be decided on  the  papers
without a hearing.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

6.    In the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, the judge  commented  that
the respondent had failed to provide an appeal bundle and the appellant  had
also not provided a bundle. In setting out her findings the judge said  that
the appellant did not dispute that she had failed to  provide  a  valid  CAS
with her application and the respondent was therefore right  to  refuse  the
application as she did. She commented that, although article  8  was  raised
in the grounds  of  appeal,  no  evidence  to  substantiate  the  claim  was
submitted and she was not persuaded, referring to  SS  (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA
387, that it was appropriate for her  to  consider  article  8  outside  the
Rules. The appeal was dismissed.

7.    Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
granted by the Upper Tribunal on the basis that it  was  arguable  that  the
appellant did not have a fair hearing as the  judge  did  not  consider  her
supporting evidence and  witness  statement  which  had  been  sent  to  the
Tribunal on 15 June 2016 or the respondent's bundle which appeared to be  on
the case file.

Submissions

8.    There has been no appearance by the appellant at  this  hearing.   She
has, however, written to the Tribunal indicating by letter dated 19  October
2017 that will not be attending and wishes the appeal to  be  determined  on
the papers.  She confirms  that  she  relies  on  her  bundle  of  documents
indexed 1-23 and asks for them to be considered in her absence.

9.    Mr Walker accepted that there had been an error of law as there was  a
procedural irregularity in that neither the appellant's or the  respondent's
bundle had come to the attention of the judge.  However, he  submitted  that
even if the judge had seen all the documents, the  appeal  would  inevitably
have been dismissed.

Assessment of the issues

10.   I have already summarised the background to this  appeal.   From  this
it is clear that the appellant, when she applied for  further  leave  had  a
valid CAS from her college but before the first  decision  was  made  on  30
July 2014 her college had lost  its  sponsorship  and  her  application  was
refused.  She was successful in a subsequent appeal  which  found  that  the
respondent had not acted in accordance with the law  as  she  had  not  been
given an opportunity of obtaining a place  at  another  college  before  the
decision was made.  Following this decision, the appellant was  issued  with
a letter giving her 60 calendar days to  obtain  a  new  CAS  letter  or  to
submit an application for leave to remain a different category.

11.   The letter issued to the respondent on 1 June  2015  set  out  clearly
the purpose of the 60-day period and indicates, equally clearly, that  if  a
new, valid CAS is not submitted within that period along with  the  required
supporting documentation, the application will be considered  on  the  basis
of the information available and will fall to be refused.  On 31 July  2015,
the appellant wrote to the respondent to explain why she had not  been  able
to obtain a valid CAS and she asked for a grant of discretionary leave or  a
further 3 months to enable her to find a new sponsor.   She  said  that  she
had not been able to obtain a valid CAS as she did not have leave.  However,
the purpose of the 60-day period was to give the  appellant  an  opportunity
of attempting to obtaining leave  and  she  was  also  sent  on  Information
Leaflet to show to potential sponsors to  explain  her  position  making  it
clear that a CAS could be issued if a college decided to sponsor her.

12.   The respondent's final decision was made on 11 August  2015.  By  that
time the appellant had not submitted a valid  CAS.   She  could  not  comply
with the requirements of the Rules for a grant of further leave as a Tier  4
student  and  the  respondent  was  therefore   entitled   to   refuse   the
application.  In her letter of 31 July 2015, the  appellant  said  that  she
had lost her trust in private colleges.  There is no  evidence  whether  she
made applications but was unsuccessful during the 60-day period  or  whether
she made no applications.  Whatever the position,  the  fact  remains  that,
she did not have a CAS and could not meet the requirements of the Rules.

13.   In this letter,  the  appellant  had  sought  a  period  of  3  months
discretionary leave but  I  am  satisfied  that  the  respondent  was  fully
entitled to follow her policy of giving 60 days  rather  than  3  months  to
give the appellant the opportunity of finding another course at a  different
college. I am not satisfied that the respondent's decision gives rise  to  a
breach of article 8.  The appellant has been in the UK since  February  2009
and studied until  mid-2014.   Whilst  it  may  be  arguable  that  she  has
established private life within article 8 (1), I am not satisfied  from  the
evidence she relies on  that  the  respondent's  decision  was  in  any  way
disproportionate to the legitimate aim of  maintaining  immigration  control
by the implementation of the Immigration Rules or that there  has  been  any
procedural unfairness to engage the principles set  out  in  cases  such  as
Naved (Students - fairness - notice of  points)  [2012]  UKUT  14  and  Kaur
(Patel fairness: respondent's policy) [2013] UKUT 344, referred  to  in  the
appellant's grounds.

14.   After the first appeal was allowed, the respondent followed the  Rules
and Guidance and the appellant then had a reasonable and  ample  opportunity
to find a new place with a  licensed  sponsor  but  she  failed  to  do  so.
Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

Decision

15.   I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law.   As  the
First-tier Tribunal did not have the evidence the  parties  sought  to  rely
on, the proper course is for the decision to be set aside.   I  re-make  the
decision by dismissing appeal  against  the  refusal  of  further  leave  to
remain as a Tier 4 student.



Signed:          H J E Latter                            Dated: 13  November
2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter



