
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29666/2013
                                                               IA/29672/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 June 2014                               |On 30 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                             mr Sisir Chaudhuri
                          mrs Monjushree Choudhury

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Z Malik, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants have been granted permission to appeal the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  A  J  M  Baldwin  dismissing  their  appeals
    against the respondent's decision dated 27 June 2013  to  refuse  their
    applications for leave to remain under Article  8  family  and  private
    life grounds.

2.   The appellants are citizens of India born on 22  January  1943  and  12
    December 1952 respectively.  They arrived in the  UK  separately  on  6
    September 2012 and 10 October 2012 respectively on visit  visas  issued
    on 6 March 2012 and  11  April  2012  respectively.   They  made  their
    present applications on 6 March 2013.

3.   The respondent's notice of immigration decision included a decision  to
    remove the appellants by way or directions under Section  47  (removal:
    person with statutorily extended leave) of the Immigration, Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.  The  first  ground  of  the  appellants'  appeal
    argued that the First-tier Tribunal's failure to allow the appeal under
    Section 47 removal decision amounted  to  an  error  of  law.   Counsel
    conceded that the Upper Tribunal's decision in Castro  (Removals:  s.47
    (as amended)) [2014] UKUT 234 (IAC)  conclusively  decides  the  points
    raised in the first ground.  However,  Counsel  reserved  his  position
    because there is an application pending before the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    appeal Castro to the Court of Appeal.

4.   The  appellants'  second  ground  of  appeal  was  in  respect  of  the
    Secretary of State's policy in relation to paragraph 276ADE and Article
    8 of the ECHR.  Counsel relied on the argument that  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to refuse  the  appellants'  application  was  plainly
    inconsistent with their published policy, "Long residence  and  private
    life - v11.0".  In particular the  grounds  relied  on  instruction  to
    caseworkers  when  assessing  whether  an  applicant  has   "no   ties"
    (including social, cultural or family) with the country to  which  they
    would have to go if required to leave the UK,  the  factors  they  must
    consider, which are:

     .   the length of time the person has spent in the UK;

     .   the length of time the person has spent in  the  country  to  which
         they would have to go if required to leave the UK;

     .   the exposure the person has had  to  the  cultural  norms  of  that
         country;

     .   whether the person speaks the language of that country;

     .   the extent of the  family  and  friends  the  person  has  in  that
         country; and

     .   the quality of the relationships the person has with  those  family
         members and friends.

5.   Counsel submitted that  the  phrase  "the  factors  he  must  consider"
    clearly  means  that  it  is  mandatory  to  give  express  and   clear
    consideration to the listed factors.   Counsel  compared  the  language
    used in the policy to Head Note  8  of  the  case  of  EO  (deportation
    appeals: scope and process) Turkey [2007] UKAIT  00068.   Head  note  8
    states:

     "In determining an appeal against a decision (whether before  or  after
         20 July 2006) to give  directions  under  s.10  (as  distinct  from
         directions for removal of an illegal entrant) the  Tribunal  should
         first consider whether the decision shows, by its  terms  that  the
         decision maker took into account the factors set out  in  paragraph
         395C and exercised a discretion on the basis of them.  If  it  does
         not, the appeal should be allowed on the basis that it was  not  in
         accordance with the law and that  the  appellant  awaits  a  lawful
         decision by the Secretary of State ..."

6.   Counsel relied on paragraph 44 of EO which states:

     "So far as the appellant process is concerned, two  conclusions  follow
         from it.  The first is that, where the  decision  to  give  removal
         directions  under  s.10  does  not  clearly  demonstrate  a  proper
         consideration of the matters set out  in  paragraph  395C  and  the
         exercise of a discretion to make the decision, the decision will be
         one which is  challengeable  on  the  ground  that  it  is  not  in
         accordance with the law ..."

7.   Counsel also relied on paragraph 34 of Lumba  v  SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  12
    where Lord Dyson made clear that:

         "The rule of law calls for a transparent statement by the executive
         of the circumstances in which the broad statutory criteria will be
         exercised ... [35] The individual has a basic public law right to
         have his or her case considered under whatever policy the executive
         sees fit to adopt provided that the adopted policy is a lawful
         exercise of the discretion conferred by the statute: see In re
         Findlay [1985] AC 318, 338E."

8.   Counsel submitted that the respondent's immigration decision failed  to
    engage with the factors in the respondent's published  policy  on  long
    residence and private life  and  therefore  her  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.

9.   Counsel submitted that the Secretary of State's  policy  was  published
    at the same time as the new Immigration Rules which came into force  in
    July 2012.  I went through the factors as listed in paragraph 21 of the
    grounds and asked Counsel which, if any,  of  those  factors  were  not
    taken into account by the  Secretary  of  State.  Whilst  not  able  to
    identify a particular factor, Counsel  argued  that  the  Secretary  of
    State should have listed the factors to show that she  was  considering
    them and then to have made clear decisions in  relation  thereto.   The
    fact that she had not listed the factors did not demonstrate  that  she
    had considered them and therefore her decision was  not  in  accordance
    with the law.

10.  I have no hesitation in rejecting Counsel's argument.  I find that  the
    Secretary of State was not obliged to list each of the factors to  show
    that she had considered each one, so long as the decision  showed  that
    those factors had been taken into  account  in  her  assessment  as  to
    whether an applicant has not ties (including social, cultural or family
    ties) with the country to which they would have to go  if  required  to
    leave the UK. I find that the respondent did just that.  She considered
    those factors in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  Indeed Counsel  could
    not point to any factor which was not considered by  the  Secretary  of
    State.   I  therefore  fail  to  see  any   consistency   between   the
    respondent's decision and her published policy


11.  I find that to compare  the  language  used  in  the  policy  with  the
    language used in EO Turkey is not comparing like with like.  EO  Turkey
    concerned the consideration of 395C factors  before  the  Secretary  of
    State made a decision under Section 10  to  remove  an  applicant.  The
    published policy concerns an assessment of a phrase "no ties" within an
    immigration rule.  The decision in respect of 276ADE is  not  dependent
    solely on the ties an applicant has to their country of origin.  It  is
    part of the consideration of matters linked to Article 8.

12.  Miss Isherwood submitted that Counsel's  argument  in  respect  of  the
    published policy was not raised in the grounds against the Secretary of
    State's decision or at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  She
    relied on Sarkar [2014] EWCA Civ 195 where the Court  of  Appeal  found
    [11] that the appellants had failed to adduce any evidence or  argument
    in support of their Article 8 case before the First-tier Tribunal,  and
    when invited to respond to  the  Upper  Tribunal's  proposals  for  the
    disposal of the appeal, took no steps  to  ensure  that  the  case  was
    considered by the Tribunal either.  It was  difficult  to  see  how  in
    those circumstances the Upper Tribunal could be said  to  have  made  a
    material error of law in failing to deal with it.  Relying  on  Sarkar,
    Miss Isherwood submitted that Counsel was precluded from  raising  this
    issue before me.

13.  In reply Counsel argued  that  Miss  Isherwood  had  misunderstood  the
    decision in Sarkar.   It was said at [6] of Sarkar that no evidence was
    adduced in support of the appellants' Article 8 claim and  no  argument
    was addressed in support of it before the First-tier Tribunal.  In  its
    formal notice decision dated 18 October 2012, the  Upper  Tribunal  had
    said that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who  refused  permission  to
    appeal in the First-tier Tribunal said that no evidence was adduced  in
    support of the appellants' human rights grounds of appeal under Article
    8 of the ECHR.  The appeal proceeded on the basis of oral  submissions.
    The Upper  Tribunal  Judge  therefore  refused  leave  on  the  grounds
    advanced, which would have been the grounds advanced under Article 8 of
    the ECHR. The Court of Appeal said at [17] that the  unqualified  grant
    of permission to appeal must be read in  the  context  of  the  reasons
    which the Upper Tribunal Judge gave for his  decision,  which  made  it
    clear that he intended to limit it to the ground that he had identified
    based on Section 47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act
    2006.  The Court of Appeal accepted that the Upper Tribunal could  have
    granted permission to appeal in respect of  the  question  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal ought to have considered the Article 8 claim  (that
    being the only relevant point of law arising from the decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal),  and  if  it  had  done  so,  would   have   had
    jurisdiction to decide that question.

14.  In light of Mr Counsel's submissions with reference to Sarkar,  I  find
    that as the appellants were granted permission  by  an  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge on 24 April 2014 to argue all the grounds, I had jurisdiction  to
    consider the new point raised by Counsel.

15.  I have already dealt with his new point and  decided  against  it.   To
    conclude I find that the respondent's decision was in  compliance  with
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules.  It was not unlawful  at
    "basic public law" as claimed in  the  grounds  and  was  therefore  in
    accordance with the law.

16.  In respect of Article 8, I accept Counsel's  argument  that  the  judge
    did not refer to the first four questions in Razgar  but  proceeded  to
    consider the fifth question, which is whether the interference  of  the
    family and  private  lives  of  the  appellants  as  a  result  of  the
    respondent's decision was proportionate to the  legitimate  public  end
    sought to be achieved. Counsel  did  not  dispute  the  proportionality
    findings.  His principle argument was that the judge would not have had
    to consider proportionality if he had found that as  a  result  of  the
    respondent's failure to consider the factors in her  published  policy,
    the respondent's decision was unlawful and amounted to an  interference
    which was not in accordance with the law for  the  purpose  of  article
    8(2).   Mr Malik relied on SC (Article 8 - in accordance with the  law)
    Zimbabwe [2012] UKUT 00056 (IAC) in support of his argument.  In  light
    of my conclusions at paragraph 15 above, I find that Counsel's argument
    is not sustainable.

17.  I find that the judge's  decision  discloses  no  error  of  law.   The
    judge's decision dismissing the appeals of the appellants shall  stand.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
