
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29751/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17th February 2015                         |On 26th March 2015             |
|                                              |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                               RASHAD MAHMOOD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, Solicitor of SMK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. On 10th December 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  R  A  Cox  gave
    permission to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal  Raikes  in  which  she  dismissed  the  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent to refuse a  residence  card  as
    the family member of an EEA national applying  the  provisions  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  The respondent was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant met the definition of spouse in Regulation 2  as  it
    was considered that  the  appellant  was  a  party  to  a  marriage  of
    convenience.

 2. In granting permission Judge Cox noted that the grounds of  application
    lacked clarity although it was evident that it was contended  that  the
    First-tier Judge had failed to give adequate and balanced consideration
    to the evidence before her and to give adequate reasons for her finding
    that the marriage was a sham.  It was noted that the judge had not been
    provided with a transcript of  the  lengthy  interviews  to  which  the
    appellant and his wife were subject but only a summary highlighting the
    points supporting the respondent's refusal.  Taking into  consideration
    the findings of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Miah  (Interview's  comments:
    disclosure: fairness) [2014]  UKUT  00515  (IAC)  and  the  requirement
    imposed upon the respondent to file and serve  a  record  of  interview
    with the appellant, the decision of the First-tier Judge  was  arguably
    unsafe.

 3. At the hearing in the Upper Tribunal before me I heard submissions from
    both representatives after which I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    decision showed an error on a point of law such that it should  be  re-
    made.  My reasons for that conclusion follow.

Error on a Point of Law

 4. At the hearing Mr Khan drew my attention to a claimed further error  in
    the decision of the First-tier Judge in paragraph 7  in  which  it  was
    stated that the appellant's leave had been curtailed on  18th  December
    2013.  Mr Khan drew my attention to the  curtailment  letter  from  the
    respondent dated 1st May 2014 which, he submitted,  actually  curtailed
    the appellant's leave from 30th June 2014.  It was also contended  that
    the appellant had not said that he had met his sponsor in December 2013
    as stated in paragraph 8 of the decision. That was because he was  sick
    at that time which was why he had not been attending college because of
    illness.  Mr Khan  also  confirmed  that  he  relied  upon  the  ground
    referred to in the permission on the basis that the appellant  had  not
    been provided with the interview  record.   He  added  that  the  judge
    appeared  to  have  ignored  the  copious  evidence  of  the   parties'
    relationship which was not based on a proxy marriage as the  respondent
    appeared to think, as pointed out in the solicitors' letter at  C43  of
    the appellant's original bundle.

 5. Mr McVeety reminded me of the response dated 19 December 2014. He  then
    submitted that the appellant had failed to complete  his  course  as  a
    student and had learned in January 2014 that he had been withdrawn from
    his studies yet had done  nothing  about  it.   The  judge's  error  in
    relation to the date of curtailment was therefore not material.

 6. As to the availability of the interview  record,  Mr  McVeety  conceded
    that this had not been made available but thought that this,  too,  was
    not a material error  as  the  judge  had  given  adequate  alternative
    reasons for the conclusion the marriage was  one  of  convenience.   He
    also argued that the judge was not wrong in basing her findings on  the
    summary of the interview as paragraph 23 of the decision made clear.

 7. After I had considered the matter for a few moments I announced that  I
    was satisfied that the decision showed an error on a point of law  such
    that it should be re-made.   That  was  because  paragraph  23  of  the
    decision makes it clear that the issue of the absence of  an  interview
    record was  put  before  the  judge  who,  nevertheless,  continued  to
    determine the appeal without it. The refusal letter merely contained  a
    summary of the inconsistencies to which the respondent wished  to  draw
    attention. Bearing in mind the evidence submitted by both appellant and
    sponsor to support the  genuineness  of  their  marriage,  the  judge's
    failure to adjourn the hearing for the production of the record,  which
    may well have led to a different conclusion, amounts to an error.  I do
    not, however, consider that the additional points made by Mr Khan about
    the error over the  date  of  curtailment  of  leave  make  that  error
    material  because  the  judge  was  entitled  to  consider   that   the
    appellant's knowledge of his withdrawal from his studies meant that his
    leave to remain was at risk.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error on a point of  law
such that it should be re-made.  Bearing in mind that the error affects  the
validity of the findings of fact it is appropriate that  the  appeal  should
be heard afresh before the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

Anonymity was not requested before the Upper Tribunal nor did I consider  it
appropriate.

DIRECTIONS

 1. The appeal will be heard afresh by the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at
    Stoke Hearing Centre on 27th May 2015.

 2. The appeal should not be put before Judge Raikes.

 3. Bulgarian and Urdu interpreters will be required for the hearing  which
    is estimated to take two hours.







Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt


