
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/29795/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 August 2015                    |On 20 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                               mr kuljit singh
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, Counsel, instructed by Charles Simmons
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a national of India, born on 4 November 1980. This  is
    an appeal by him against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Paul
    (Judge Paul), promulgated on 20 March 2015, in which he  dismissed  the
    appeal. That appeal was against the Respondent's decision, dated 7 July
    2014,  refusing  to  issue  a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the Regulations).

The decision of Judge Paul

 2. On appeal to Judge Paul the sole issue in dispute had been  whether  or
    not the Appellant's durable partner, Ms  Kiara  Balagova,  a  Hungarian
    national, was exercising her Treaty rights in the United  Kingdom  (see
    paragraph 4 of his decision). The Appellant's case  was  that  she  was
    employed by Sabi  Traders  UK  Limited,  and  documentary  evidence  in
    support of this was provided on  the  day  of  the  hearing,  including
    payslips, bank statements and a contract of employment.

 3. At paragraphs 12 to 15 Judge Paul  expressed  a  "number  of  concerns"
    about the documentary evidence before  him,  and  ultimately  concluded
    that the Appellant had failed to show that the payslips and contract of
    employment were "genuine" (paragraphs 15 and 17). He also drew  adverse
    conclusions based upon Internet research he had undertaken,  apparently
    during the hearing itself (paragraph 16).

The grounds of appeal

 4. The grounds take issue with all of Judge Paul's conclusions. Permission
    to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Levin  on  27  May
    2015.

The hearing before me

 5. Mr Coleman relied on the grounds of appeal.

 6. Mr Duffy, whilst not conceding  the  appeal,  acknowledged  that  Judge
    Paul's decision suffered from some problems.

Decision on error of law

 7. As indicated to the parties at the hearing, I found there to be several
    errors of law in the decision of Judge Paul. All were material.

 8. First, on a proper reading of the decision, he was in effect concluding
    that documents provided by the Appellant were false: he states in terms
    on two occasions that the contract of employment and the  payslips  had
    not been shown by the Appellant to be genuine. This  is  not  simply  a
    matter of lose terminology. Judge Paul expressly  relies  on  his  view
    that the payslips looked as though they were  produced  on  a  computer
    (paragraph 15). In  addition,  the  other  elements  of  his  reasoning
    strongly indicates that he was reaching a conclusion that the documents
    in question were fake. I note that the Respondent had  not  raised  the
    issue of whether the documents were false.

 9. Judge Paul erred in failing to expressly inform the Appellant  and  his
    representative that he was, of his own motion, raising an issue  as  to
    the genuineness of the documents. In addition, he erred in  failing  to
    apply the appropriate law in respect of this issue in any event, namely
    the location of the burden of proof (being on the Respondent).

10. Second, Judge Paul's reliance on the absence of a stated rate of pay in
    the contract of employment was, in my view, speculative and  not  based
    upon any evidence either before him or brought to the attention of  the
    Appellant's representative at the hearing.

11. Third, there was procedural unfairness by Judge Paul in respect of  his
    Internet research at  the  hearing.  Such  activities  are  potentially
    fraught with difficulties, and great care must be given to ensure  that
    a complete picture  of  the  information  obtained  is  considered  and
    available to the parties for comment. Here, whilst I accept that  Judge
    Paul informed the representatives of what he was doing, I  also  accept
    that he then went on and based adverse conclusions on evidence that was
    not available to the parties and does not appear to have been  complete
    in  any  event.  It  might  have  been  better   of   the   Appellant's
    representative had sought an adjournment, but the context of this  case
    the failure to do so does not 'cure' the procedural unfairness.

12. Fourth, Judge Paul failed to give adequate consideration  to  the  bank
    statements provided by Ms Balagova at  the  hearing.  There  is  but  a
    passing  reference  to  them  in  paragraph  14.  Having  examined  the
    statements, I see that the payments going into the account  match  with
    the payslips (the October 2014 payment being split into two during that
    month). This was clearly highly relevant, and indeed supportive, of the
    Appellant's case and the evidence required  careful  consideration  and
    reasoning. This is not apparent on the face of the decision.

13. For the reasons set out above, I set aside the decision of Judge Paul.

Re-make decision

14. Both representatives were agreed that I should go on  and  re-make  the
    decision in this case.

15. I admitted in a bundle from the Appellant consisting of, amongst  other
    items, evidence  of  Ms  Balagova's  continuing  employment  with  Sabi
    Traders UK Limited. Mr Duffy had no objection to this.

16. On the evidence now before me, I find that Ms Balagova has  been  since
    August 2014, and still is, in employment with Sabi Traders UK  Limited,
    as claimed.

17. There has been no assertion from the Respondent at any  time  that  the
    documents are false. I find that they are all genuine. I also find that
    the documentary evidence is reliable. There has been no  suggestion  to
    the contrary by Mr Duffy. I find that the payslips (covering the period
    September 2014 to  August  2015)  show  the  relevant  wages,  tax  and
    National Insurance contributions, and that the figures  stated  therein
    are reflected in the payments into Ms Balagova's bank account.  I  find
    that the absence of a rate of pay in the contract  of  employment  does
    not diminish its reliability. I find that the P60 contained in the  new
    bundle is reliable and fully supportive of the fact  of  employment  in
    the tax year 2014/2015.  Finally,  I  accept  the  reliability  of  the
    employer's letter,  dated  10  August  2015,  in  which  Ms  Balagova's
    engagement is confirmed.

18. In light of the above,  I  find  that  Ms  Balagova  is  a  worker  and
    therefore a qualified person under Regulation 6 of the Regulations.

19. It has been accepted throughout that the  Appellant  is  in  a  durable
    relationship with Ms Balagova. They have cohabited  for  a  significant
    time and have a child together. I find this to be so. The Appellant  is
    therefore the  extended  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  who  is
    exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

20. The basis of the Respondent's decision to refuse to issue the residence
    card was that  the  EEA  national  was  not  a  qualified  person.  The
    discretion under Regulation 17(4) of the Regulations was not exercised.
    I cannot exercise that discretion at first instance,  and  therefore  I
    can only allow the appeal to the extent that the Respondent's  decision
    of 7 July 2014 was not in accordance with the law, and the  Appellant's
    application  for  a  residence  card  remains  outstanding  before  the
    Respondent awaiting a lawful decision.

21. Accordingly, I allow the appeal on this limited basis.

Anonymity

22. No direction has been made previously, and none has  been  sought  from
    me. I make no direction.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by  allowing  the  appeal  to  the  extent  that  the
Respondent's decision of 7 July 2014 was not in  accordance  with  the  law,
and the Appellant's application for a  residence  card  remains  outstanding
before the Respondent awaiting a lawful decision.

Signed      Date: 17 August 2015

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.
The Appellant only provided evidence of  his  partner's  employment  at  the
hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed      Date: 17 August 2015

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
