
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Appeal Number: IA/29375/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 3 February 2017                        |On 6 February 2017               |
|Prepared on 3 February 2017               |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    J. O.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel instructed by Reiss Edwards
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh  who  entered  the  UK  as  a
      student on 4 January 2010. Athough his leave to  remain  was  extended
      from time to time, on 27 August 2014 an extension was  refused  and  a
      decision was made to remove him because the Respondent concluded  that
      an earlier extension had been obtained in 2012 through  deception.  An
      appeal against that decision was  dismissed  by  the  Tribunal  on  10
      November 2014.
   2. On 8 December 2014 the Appellant made a further application,  for  the
      grant  of  leave.  That  too  was  refused  on  13  August  2015.  The
      Appellant's appeal against this was then  heard  and  dismissed  in  a
      decision promulgated on 1 August 2016 by First Tier Tribunal Judge  MR
      Oliver.
   3. The Appellant was granted permission to  appeal  that  decision  on  2
      December 2016 by Designated  Judge  Macdonald  on  the  basis  it  was
      arguable the Judge's approach to the Appellant's relationship with his
      children was flawed.
   4. Thus the matter comes before me.


   Error of Law?
   5. Although the appeal before the Judge was pursued as an appeal  against
      the decision under the Immigration Rules, on the basis it was  not  in
      accordance with the law, and treated as  such  by  the  Judge  in  his
      decision it is accepted before me by both parties  that  this  was  in
      truth only ever an Article 8 appeal.
   6. It is accepted before me that the Appellant's partner is a  qualifying
      partner, and that his two children are qualifying children, as defined
      in section 117D of the 2002 Act. It is also accepted  before  me  that
      the decision makes no reference to this, or to section 117 itself,  or
      indeed to any of the relevant jurisprudence that  offers  guidance  to
      the proper approach to be taken to such an  appeal.  Indeed  the  sole
      reference to the section 55 duty is to be  found  in  the  penultimate
      sentence of the decision.
   7. In the circumstances both  parties  are  agreed  before  me  that  the
      decision fails to  demonstrate  that  the  Judge  undertook  a  proper
      assessment of the best interests of the two children, or, that he then
      went on to undertake an adequate  proportionality  balancing  exercise
      which  took  into  account  the  particular   circumstances   of   the
      Appellant's wife and children; Kaur (children's best interests/ public
      interest interface) [2017] UKUT 14.
   8. I also note the Respondent's cross-complaint that the Judge's approach
      to the decision of the Tribunal in November 2014 failed to comply with
      the guidance to be found in the Court of Appeal's decision in  Shehzad
      and Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615. An earlier decision of the Tribunal
      rejected the Appellant's bald denial of dishonesty,  and  there  is  a
      failure by the Judge to explain adequately why he departed  from  that
      finding, or even to consider whether such a step was properly open  to
      him to take. There is plainly merit in that, and I  am  not  satisfied
      that the Judge's departure from the earlier findings of  the  Tribunal
      to the effect that the Appellant had failed  to  provide  an  innocent
      explanation for the conclusion by ETS that he had not sat the language
      test he had represented himself as having undertaken, was open to him,
      or that it led to a finding that was safe.
   9. I have in these circumstances considered whether or not to  remit  the
      appeal to the First Tier  Tribunal  for  it  to  be  reheard,  as  the
      Respondent accepts is the proper course. In the circumstances  of  the
      appeal I am satisfied that this is  the  correct  approach,  and  that
      there is indeed no alternative to the appeal being reheard de novo, as
      indeed I note the Appellant requests.
  10. In circumstances where it would appear that the relevant evidence  has
      not properly been considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of
      that error of law has been to deprive the Appellant of the opportunity
      for his case to be properly considered by  the  First  Tier  Tribunal;
      paragraph 7.2(a) of the  Practice  Statement  of  25  September  2012.
      Moreover the extent of the judicial fact finding exercise is such that
      having regard to the over-riding objective, it is appropriate that the
      appeal should be remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b)
      of the Practice Statement of 25 September 2012.  Having  reached  that
      conclusion, with the agreement of the parties  I  make  the  following
      directions;
     i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside. The appeal  is  remitted
        to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing. None of the  findings  of
        fact set out in the decision are preserved. The appeal is not to be
        listed before Judge Oliver.
    ii) If a Bengali interpreter is required for the hearing of the  appeal
        then the Appellant must notify the Tribunal immediately.
   iii) Each party must serve upon the other and file with the Tribunal  by
        5pm on 20 February 2017 any further evidence they may seek to  rely
        upon.
    iv) The appeal is to be listed on the first available date at the North
        Shields hearing centre after 28 February 2017.




Decision

  11. The decision promulgated on 1 August 2016 did involve the making of an
      error of law sufficient to require it to be set aside and  the  appeal
      to be reheard. Accordingly the decision upon the appeal is  set  aside
      and the appeal is  remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  with  the
      following directions, made with the agreement of the parties;
      i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside. The appeal  is  remitted
         to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing. None of the  findings  of
         fact set out in the decision are preserved. The appeal is not to be
         listed before Judge Oliver.
    ii) If a Bengali interpreter is required for the hearing of the  appeal
        then the Appellant must notify the Tribunal immediately.
   iii) Each party must serve upon the other and file with the Tribunal  by
        5pm on 20 February 2017 any further evidence they may seek to  rely
        upon.
    iv) The appeal is to be listed on the first available date at the North
        Shields hearing centre after 28 February 2017.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 3 February 2017



