
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/29926 /2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & reasons Promulgated       |
|on 17 March 2015 and 14 May 2015     |On 3 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                              MR MUHAMMAD AQEEL
                        (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY Of STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Mahmud/ Mr A Janjua, Solicitor
For the respondent:    Ms A Brockles-Weller/Ms A Fijiwala, Senior
Presenting Officers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Pakistan born on 10 October 1987, appealed
    against the decision of the respondent to refuse to issue  him  with  a
    residence card as confirmation of his right to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom pursuant to the EEA 2006 Regulations. First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Khan dismissed the appellant's appeal in a determination promulgated on
    8  December  2014.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  VA  Osborne  gave  the
    appellant permission to appeal stating that the Judge arguably erred in
    law by failing to weigh the competing areas of evidence sufficiently to
    reach a sustainable decision.

    The First-Tier Tribunal Judges Findings

 2. The Judge in his determination found the following which  I  summarise.
    The three witnesses who  gave  oral  evidence  were  contradictory  and
    inconsistent. The mother-in-law gave evidence who said that during  her
    visits she sleeps downstairs in the living room. The  appellant's  wife
    said that her mother slept with her in the bedroom while the  appellant
    slept downstairs on the sofa. The appellant said that his mother-in-law
    shared the smaller room with his wife's son. The Judge found  that  had
    the appellant and his EEA national  wife  been  living  together  these
    inconsistencies about the sleeping arrangements would not arise.

 3. There were further  contradictions  in  the  respondent's  reasons  for
    refusal letter, relating to  questions  about  the  appellant's  wife's
    child's uniform, schoolteachers name, the appellant's medical visit  to
    the hospital, religious celebrations, employment  issues  and  previous
    address. The appellant's wife said she did not know why  the  appellant
    has given different answers in his interview with the  respondent.  The
    appellant said that he could not pronounce  the  name  of  the  teacher
    because the child had moved up a year in March /April 2014.  The  judge
    noted that it is a known fact that children only move up a year at  the
    start of the school year which is September of every year.

 4. The appellant's wife said that last Saturday they stayed home all  day,
    the appellant said that all went out shopping  at  Tesco  in  the  High
    Street. The appellant's wife said that stayed at home on Sunday and the
    appellant said that they went to Prime Mark. The appellant's wife  said
    that she was given a  dress  as  a  present  at  Ramadan  Idd  and  the
    appellant said that it was on the sacrifice Idd that he gave  his  wife
    the dress. These contradictions and  inconsistencies  in  the  evidence
    show that the appellant and his wife  are  not  living  together  as  a
    married couple as claimed.

 5. The appellant and his wife both gave contradictory evidence  about  the
    appellant's visit to hospital. They were both vague and  evasive  about
    when the appellant told his wife about his visit to the  hospital.  The
    appellant and his wife's evidence shows that they have entered  into  a
    marriage of convenience so that the appellant can claim benefits  under
    the EEA Regulations.

 6. On the evidence and a balance of probabilities the Judge found that  he
    is not satisfied that the appellant has entered into a genuine marriage
    with an EEA national or that they have lived together in a relationship
    as a  married  couple.  The  appellant  therefore  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of regulation  2  of  the  2006  Regulations  and  is  not
    entitled to a residence card as confirmation of his right  to  live  in
    this country as the spouse of an EEA national.

    Grounds of Appeal

 7.  The  appellants'  grounds  of  appeal  state  the  following  which  I
    summarise. The question for the Judge,  when  an  issue  is  raised  in
    respect of marriage of convenience, is set out at paragraph 39  in  the
    case of Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012]
    UKUT 00038 (IAC) which stated that, "in the light of  the  totality  of
    the information before me, including the assessment of  the  claimant's
    answers and any information provided,  I  satisfied  that  it  is  more
    probable than not that this is a marriage of convenience?".  The  Judge
    erred in failing to adequately consider the totality of the information
    in evidence before him as required.

 8. The Judge's reasoning in reaching his conclusion that the  marriage  is
    one of convenience is limited  to  6  findings  which  insists  of  the
    inconsistencies in the evidence between the witnesses. The veracity  of
    these findings are challenged.  The  appellant's  wife's  inability  to
    explain why her husband incorrectly detail  the  colour  of  her  son's
    uniform does not amount  to  a  contradictory  statement.  The  Judge's
    findings at paragraph 37 that it is a known  fact  that  children  only
    move up a year at the start of the school which is in  September  2014,
    without information as to the circumstances of the move, is speculative
    and unsustainable.

 9. The remaining four adverse findings which were clearly relevant to  the
    assessment are insufficient to warrant the finding that the appellant's
    marriage is one of convenience  when  viewed  in  the  round  with  the
    evidence and information provided as a whole.

10. The appellant provided evidence of cohabitation, the appellant provided
    evidence that the couple had a failed pregnancy in 2012 and  that  that
    the appellant is known at his son's stepson school.  He  also  provided
    evidence of the appellant's wife having converted to Islam.

11. From the 81 questions asked at the interview,  the  appellant  and  his
    wife provided inconsistent answers to only five questions. Importantly,
    the appellant  and  his  wife  were  entirely  consistent  about  their
    respective personal details, about the  circumstances  of  their  first
    meeting, about their wedding and about each other's wider families.

12. Considering the guidance of the EU Commission and the criteria said  to
    indicate possible triggers for investigation of suspected marriages  of
    convenience, the couple were largely consistent at the interview.  They
    speak the language and is understood by both, there was no evidence  of
    a sum of money or gifts handed over in order for  the  marriage  to  be
    contracted. The past history of the spouses contained  no  evidence  of
    previous marriages of convenience or other forms of abuse and fraud  to
    acquire a right of residence and  that  the  evidence  of  cohabitation
    dates back to 2012.

    Respondents Rule 24 response

13. The respondent stated in her Rule 24 response  dated  6  February  2015
    that the Judge considered all the evidence including the evidence which
    emerged as a result of oral evidence given at the  hearing.  There  are
    inconsistencies  arising   from   the   interview   and   the   further
    inconsistencies from the oral evidence of the witnesses.  It  is  trite
    law that it is a matter for the Judge as to how much weight  to  places
    on  the  evidence  presented.  The  Judge  analysed  the  evidence  and
    dismissed the appeal by giving adequate reasons. There is  no  material
    error of law in the determination.

    The hearing

14. At the hearing I heard submissions from both parties in the full record
    of the hearing are in my Record of Proceedings.

    Findings on Error of Law

15. I find that the Judge fell into material  error  as  he  did  not  give
    sufficient reasons for why he found that the appellant and  his  spouse
    have entered  into  a  marriage  of  convenience.  The  Judge  did  not
    specifically consider evidence which was consistent with  the  marriage
    being genuine. The Judge primarily focused on the inconsistent evidence
    at the interviews and what  was  stated  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter. It is trite law that the Judge must give consideration  to  all
    the evidence before reaching his conclusions.

16. The Judge also made a material error of law in his self-instruction  on
    the burden of proof in marriages of convenience. This is that at  first
    instance the burden falls on the respondent  to  prove  that  there  is
    sufficient indicia for the respondent to consider that the  appellant's
    marriage is one of convenience. After  the  respondent  has  discharged
    that burden, the burden shifts back to the appellant to prove that  his
    marriage is not one of convenience.

17. In the case of Papajorgi (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience)  Greece
    [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC), it was made clear that there is now burden  at
    the outset of an  application  on  the  claimant  to  demonstrate  that
    marriage to an EEA national is not one of convenience. In the  case  of
    IS (marriage of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 31,  establishes  only
    that there is an evidential burden on the claimant to address  evidence
    justifying reasonable suspicion that the marriage is entered  into  for
    the predominant purposes of securing residence rights.

18. The Senior Presenting Officer in the submissions argued that the  Judge
    implicitly understood that the burden was proof was on  the  respondent
    which had  been  proved  by  providing  the  interview  record  of  the
    appellant and his spouse in which  there  were  many  discrepancies  as
    listed in the refusal letter. At paragraph 9 however, the Judge  stated
    that the appellant has the burden of proof and it is on  a  balance  of
    probabilities that he meets the requirements of  Regulation  2  of  the
    2006 Regulations. There was no self-direction of the correct burden  of
    proof in  cases  where  marriage  of  convenience  is  alleged  by  the
    respondent.

19. I am of the view that in the absence of proper analysis and  reasoning,
    it cannot be said that the Judge paid  all  due  scrutiny  to  all  the
    evidence as he was required to do or that he applied the correct burden
    of proof.

20. I find that the first-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in  reaching
    conclusions without considering all the evidence in the appeal.

21. I therefore set aside the determination in its  entirety  and  directed
    that it be heard afresh at the Upper Tribunal. If possible,  I  reserve
    it to myself.

    Rehearing on 14 May 2015

22. Mr Janjua represented the appellant. Before  the  hearing,  The  Senior
    Presenting  Officer,  Ms  Fujiwala  provided  the  appellant's   asylum
    interview record dated 19 September 2011. The  appellant  withdrew  his
    asylum claim after he married and EEA national.

23. The asylum interview record provided was adverse for the appellant. The
    basis of the appellant's claim for asylum was that he fears persecution
    in Pakistan because he is a homosexual. He also stated that  he  has  a
    wife and children in Pakistan. He also stated that a female  friend  of
    his,  a  Czechoslovakian  national,  (not  his  current   spouse)   had
    volunteered to enter into a marriage of convenience with him so that he
    could obtain the paperwork  for  his  application  to  remain  in  this
    country as a spouse of an EEA national.

24. The appellant's solicitor, Mr Janjua, asked for a short adjournment  to
    view the papers and seek instructions from his  client.  The  appellant
    solicitor, after the short recess, said that  he  has  called  the  Law
    Society to consider whether he was professionally  embarrassed  and  he
    was of the view that he is no longer able to  represent  the  appellant
    and excused himself.

25. The appellant represented himself and gave oral evidence in English. He
    gave the following evidence which I summarise.

26. He came to the United Kingdom in 2007 on  a  visitor's  visa.  When  he
    came, he did not intend to return to the United  Kingdom.  He  did  not
    want to return  because  he  feared  for  his  life  because  he  is  a
    homosexual. Asked whether  he  is  a  bisexual  or  a  homosexual,  the
    appellant did not understand the question and it was explained  to  him
    the difference between the two. The appellant said  he  is  a  bisexual
    because he has a wife and kids in Pakistan.

27. It was put to the appellant that at his asylum interview he stated that
    he had a Czechoslovakian national friend who had volunteered  to  marry
    him for him  to  secure  documents  to  remain  in  this  country.  The
    appellant stated "she asked me what is wrong  and  I  told  her  and  I
    agreed and made a mistake". It was put to him that he had made a  false
    application to the Home Office for a certificate of approval  to  marry
    this Czechoslovakian national. The appellant said "yes". He  was  asked
    why the court should now believe him when he claims  that  he  has  not
    married his current wife to gain immigration status. The appellant said
    that they have been together now for three years.

28. His wife does not know about his past and he has now "properly changed"
    asked what he means by "properly changed", he said "I am  no  longer  a
    homosexual but a heterosexual and I only like women." He lived with the
    Czechoslovakian woman for 3 to 5 months but he lived in his own room in
    the same accommodation.

29. He has married his wife Islamicly. Asked why  he  withdrew  his  asylum
    claim, he said because "I married her in March and withdrew  my  asylum
    claim in August or July". Asked how was it  that  within  a  matter  of
    months he changed his sexuality, the appellant said "someone  a  friend
    told me that homosexuality is not good for Islamic people".  Asked  how
    was it that a friend in the United Kingdom persuaded him not  to  be  a
    homosexual when his  brother  in  Pakistan  could  not.  The  appellant
    answered "my brother did not try and convince me to leave homosexuality
    because I ran away". He said that his friend "teach him to  like  women
    and told him that to read  the  Koran.  His  friend  said  that  if  he
    continues down this path, he will go to hell. His wife  does  not  know
    about his past homosexuality because it is a shame for  him  and  "what
    will she think of me, so I did not tell her". His wife  does  not  know
    that he was intending to enter  into  a  false  marriage  with  another
    Czechoslovakian national.

30. Mrs Helena Damovosa gave oral evidence and said the following  which  I
    summarise. Her date of birth is 30 June 1983 and she is 32 years of age
    and the appellant is 26 years of age. The appellant came to the  United
    Kingdom "may be in 2008-2009" on a visit visa. Asked why the  appellant
    did not return to Pakistan, she said "he has a wife  and  some  problem
    with his family he told me".  Asked  whether  she  is  aware  that  the
    appellant made an asylum claim which he later  withdrew,  she  said  "I
    don't know what asylum claim is." It was put to her had  the  appellant
    ever told her that he was in fear of  returning  to  Pakistan  for  any
    reason, to which she replied "no".

31. It was put to Mrs Damovosa that the  appellant  made  an  asylum  claim
    based on his homosexuality and she said "he only told me about his wife
    and child" and said "I am in shock to discover  this".  She  was  asked
    whether she trusts the appellant about his motives in marrying her  and
    she said "he has lied to me". It  was  further  put  to  her  that  the
    appellant had made a  false  application  to  marry  a  Czechoslovakian
    national called Ivana, only to regularise his immigration  status.  She
    replied "no I don't know about it". She has lived  with  the  appellant
    for three years and they are a normal couple. The  appellant  likes  my
    son and we live as a family.

32. I heard submissions from both parties the full record of which is in my
    Record of Proceedings.

    Findings of Fact

33. A residence card is a card issued in accordance with Regulation  17  of
    the 2006 Regulations to a person who is not a national of the  European
    Economic Area (EEA) but who is a 'family member' or an 'extended family
    member' of an EEA national, subject to the criteria of that  Regulation
    being satisfied.

34. 'Family member' is defined for  the  purposes  of  the  Regulations  in
    Regulation 7 which states:

         7. - (1) Subject to paragraph (2), for the purposes of these
         Regulations the following persons shall be treated as the family
         members of another person-

         (a) his spouse or his civil partner;

35. Paragraph 2 of the Regulations states that "spouse" does not include  a
    party to a marriage of convenience.

36. In the case of Papajorgi (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience)  Greece
    [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC), it was made clear that there is now burden  at
    the outset of an  application  on  the  claimant  to  demonstrate  that
    marriage to an EEA national is not one of convenience. In the  case  of
    IS (marriage of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 31,  establishes  only
    that there is an evidential burden on the claimant to address  evidence
    justifying reasonable suspicion that the marriage is entered  into  for
    the predominant purposes of securing residence rights.

37. There is no issue between the parties that the appellants sponsor,  Mrs
    Damovosa is a Czechoslovakian national, and therefore an  EEA  national
    for the purposes of the 2006 Regulations, as defined in  Regulation  2.
    There is also no dispute between  the  parties  that  she  is  in  this
    country exercising her EEA treaty rights and  the  respondent  has  not
    taken issue with this.

38. The respondent has alleged that the appellant who purports  to  be  the
    spouse of Mrs is not a 'family member' of Mrs Damovosa for the purposes
    of paragraph 7 of the Regulations, as the appellant's marriage  to  Mrs
    is one of convenience. Paragraph  2  of  the  Regulations  states  that
    'spouse 'does not include a party to a marriage of convenience.

39. The respondent provided an asylum interview record when  the  appellant
    made an asylum claim which he later withdrew. This  and  other  matters
    seriously compromise the appellant's claim that  his  marriage  to  Mrs
    Damovosa is not one of convenience.

40. The appellant came to this country on a visitor's visa and  overstayed.
    At the hearing he said that when he came to the United Kingdom  he  had
    no intention to return. He also accepted that when he said  he  had  an
    intention to return it is application form that was not  true.  I  find
    that the appellant's credibility is damaged by his misrepresentation to
    the respondent that he would return to Pakistan when he clearly had  no
    intention to do so.

41. The appellant did not leave the country after his  visit  visa  expired
    and then made an asylum claim based  on  his  fear  of  persecution  in
    Pakistan because he is a  homosexual.  He  subsequently  withdrew  this
    asylum claim because he claims that he  married  an  EEA  national  and
    therefore no longer needed to pursue it.

42. At the hearing, the appellant said that he was a homosexual but when  a
    friend of his told him that homosexuality is not Islamic,  he  saw  the
    light and became a heterosexual. He said that his friend  told  him  to
    read the Koran and he will discover that it is  not  Islamic  to  be  a
    homosexual. His friend also told him, that he will go  to  hell  if  he
    continues being a homosexual. The appellant said that he changed  after
    his friend taught him how to like women.

43. I do not find it at all credible that the appellant  would  immediately
    become heterosexual because he was told by a friend that  homosexuality
    is not Islamic or that he could be taught to be a heterosexual. I  find
    that the appellant's claim that  he  is  a  homosexual  at  his  asylum
    interview was not genuine and an attempt to continue to  live  in  this
    country  by  making  false  asylum  claim.  This  also  goes   to   his
    credibility.

44. Furthermore, the appellant said at the hearing that he  is  a  bisexual
    after it was explained to him the difference between a homosexual and a
    bisexual. However at is Asylum interview, the appellant said that he is
    a homosexual. At the hearing he said that he is a bisexual  because  he
    has a wife and children in Pakistan. This inconsistency in his evidence
    goes to his credibility into the credibility of this claim.

45. The  appellant  made  a  false  application  to  the  Home  Office  for
    permission to marry a Czechoslovakian national with whom the  appellant
    claims he was living. He accepted at his asylum interview that this was
    a false application and he was attempting to regularise his  status  to
    continue to live in this country. He also confirmed  that  the  hearing
    that this was a  false  application  and  there's  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience in order to regularise his stay in the United Kingdom.

46. This  evidence  demonstrates  to  me  that  the  appellant  resorts  to
    deception to achieve his objectives.

47. I have taken into account the other evidence in this  appeal  including
    the  inconsistencies  in  the  interviews  of  the  appellant  and  Mrs
    Damovosa. I have also taken into account Mrs Damovosa's medical records
    that she has had a  miscarriage.  This  evidence  in  itself  does  not
    demonstrate that the pregnancy was from the appellant.

48. Mrs Damovosa in her evidence at the hearing said that she was not aware
    of the appellant's past or that he had claimed to be a homosexual.  She
    said  she  did  not  know  he  had  made  an  application  to  marry  a
    Czechoslovakian national in order to regularise his immigration status.
    Mrs Damovosa claims that she has lived with  the  appellant  for  three
    years. I do not find it credible she would know  so  little  about  the
    appellant in the time that she has lived with him. Even if she did  not
    know, it does not affect my decision  because  this  also  demonstrates
    that the appellant has  not  been  truthful  with  Mrs  Damovosa  which
    further demonstrates his propensity to deceive.

49. I find that both the appellant  and  Mrs  Damovosa  have  attempted  to
    deceive the Home Office by entering into a marriage of convenience,  in
    order to regularise the appellant's immigration status in this country.

50. I find that the respondent has discharged her burden of proof that  the
    appellant's marriage is one of convenience. The appellant has not given
    a credible reason for why it is not a marriage of convenience.

51. I find that the appellant's application  for  a  residence  card  is  a
    cynical manoeuvre on his part to regularise his immigration status  and
    he has not entered into a genuine marriage but his marriage is  one  of
    convenience.

52. I therefore find that the Appellant is not a  'family  member'  of  Mrs
    Damovosa under the relevant provisions of Regulation  12  of  the  2006
    Regulations.

    Decision

    Appeal dismissed


Signed by,
      Dated this 16th day of May 2015


.............................................
Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

