
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/29782/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 24th October 2017                      |On 15th November 2017             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                nabila kouser
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Sowerby, Counsel instructed by Nasim & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan born on 1st January 1983.
     She last arrived in the UK on 23rd December 2012 when she was  granted
    leave to enter until 26th April 2013 as a visitor.  On 24th April  2013
    the Appellant applied for leave to  remain  on  compassionate  grounds.
    That application was refused for the  reasons  given  in  a  Notice  of
    Decision dated 10th July 2014.  The Appellant appealed, and  eventually
    her appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ross  (the  Judge)
    sitting at Taylor House on 7th December 2016.  He  decided  to  dismiss
    the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds  for  the  reasons  given  in  his
    Decision dated 22nd December  2016.   The  Appellant  sought  leave  to
    appeal that decision  and  on  7th  August  2017  such  permission  was
    granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant applied for leave to remain on the basis that she was the
    sole carer for her aunt who suffers from  several  medical  conditions.
    The Appellant was the sole person responsible for  providing  her  aunt
    with physical and emotional care and their  relationship  was  akin  to
    that of mother and daughter.  The Judge dismissed the appeal because he
    found that there  were  no  particularly  compelling  or  compassionate
    circumstances in the case and although there was a strong bond  between
    the Appellant and her aunt, it did not go beyond normal emotional ties.
     In reaching this conclusion, the Judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant
    provided personal care for her aunt, for example in helping her to  get
    out of bed, and also emotional support when her aunt awoke in the night
    distressed.  The Judge also considered a psychological report by  Susan
    Pagella but attached little weight to it as it was not objective.   The
    Judge decided that he was unable to consider the appeal outside of  the
    Immigration Rules,  and  in  the  alternative  that  there  was  not  a
    sufficient dependency between the Appellant and her aunt  to  establish
    family life.  The Judge also found in the alternative that the decision
    of the Respondent was proportionate.

 4. At the hearing before me, Mr Sowerby argued that the Judge had erred in
    law in coming to  this  conclusion.   There  was  substantial  evidence
    before the Judge of the high degree of dependency between the Appellant
    and her aunt and the Judge therefore should have found that  there  was
    family life between them.  This case  could  be  distinguished  on  the
    facts from those in the decision in Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31.
     The psychological report should have been attached greater weight  and
    clearly showed the degree of dependency between the Appellant  and  her
    aunt.  The Judge had given insufficient reasons for his decision to the
    contrary.

 5. In response, Mr Avery referred to the Rule 24  response  and  submitted
    that there was no such error of law.  The grounds of application relied
    upon by the Appellant amounted to no more than a disagreement with  the
    decision of the Judge.  The Judge had given sufficient reasons for  his
    rejection of the report of Susan Pagella.  The Judge had accepted  that
    there were strong bonds between the Appellant and the Sponsor,  but  on
    the evidence had been entitled to find that there was  no  evidence  of
    emotional ties which went beyond the normal between  an  aunt  and  her
    niece.

 6. I find no material error of law in the decision of the  Judge  which  I
    therefore do not set aside.  I agree with the argument of Mr Avery that
    the submissions made on behalf of the Appellant amount to no more  than
    a disagreement with the decision of the Judge.   He  decided  that  the
    Appellant could not rely upon the provisions of Article 8 ECHR  because
    although there was a strong bond between the Appellant  and  her  aunt,
    they did not amount to family life for the purposes of Article  8.   In
    reaching that conclusion the Judge correctly applied the test given  in
    Kugathas.  That case stated the general principles to be  applied  when
    deciding whether family life existed between adult  relatives  and  was
    not dependent upon its own particular facts.  The Judge dealt with  all
    the relevant evidence before him and  gave  adequate  reasons  for  his
    decision.  In particular, he gave a  cogent  reason  for  declining  to
    attach any weight to the report of Susan Pagella.

 7. For these reasons I find no material error in the decision of the Judge
    which I do not set aside.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date 13th November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton














