
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29218/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 1st June 2017                         |On 14th July 2017                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                               Monica Frimpong
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Okyere-Darko of Stillwaters Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Ghana born on  9th  January  1974.
    The Appellant first arrived in the UK on 6th August 2004 when  she  was
    given leave to enter as a  working  holidaymaker.   She  married  Kwame
    Amensahi-Bonsufo  on  1st  February  2006,  an  EEA  national.   As   a
    consequence the Appellant was issued with a residence card expiring  on
    1st July 2011.  In the meantime the Appellant and her husband divorced.
     The decree absolute is dated 20th April 2010.  The Appellant  returned
    to Ghana between 2011 and 2014, and on 23rd January 2015 the  Appellant
    applied for a further residence card  on  the  basis  that  she  had  a
    retained right of residence.  That application was refused on 22nd  May
    2015 for the reasons given in the Respondent's  letter  of  that  date.
    The Appellant appealed, and her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal J Robertson (the Judge)  sitting  at  Birmingham  on  1st
    April 2016.  He dismissed the appeal  for  the  reasons  given  in  his
    Decision dated 13th April 2016.  The Appellant sought leave  to  appeal
    that decision, and on 6th March 2017 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.  The Judge dismissed the
    appeal applying the provisions of  Regulation  10(5)  and  (6)  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (the Regulations).  The Judge  found
    that the Appellant  failed  to  meet  the  requirements  of  Regulation
    10(5)(b) because the Appellant, as opposed to her former  husband,  was
    not residing in the UK in accordance with the Regulations at  the  date
    of the divorce.  Further, the Judge found that Regulation 10(6)(a)  was
    not satisfied as the Appellant was not a worker etc.  at  the  relevant
    time.  In the alternative, the Judge found that the Appellant had  lost
    any retained right of residence owing to her three  year  absence  from
    the UK between 2011 and 2014 as provided for by Regulation 15(1A).

 3. At the hearing, Ms Okyere-Darko argued that the Judge had erred in  law
    in coming to these conclusions.   He  had  mistakenly  interpreted  the
    provisions of Regulation 10(5)(b) to apply  to  the  Appellant  whereas
    they apply to the EEA national, being her former husband.  Further, the
    Judge had erred in respect  of  Regulation  10(6)(a)  as  the  relevant
    period to be considered was  that  commencing  with  the  date  of  the
    divorce.  There was ample evidence before the Judge  contained  in  the
    Appellant's Bundle amounting to bank statements and wage slips  showing
    that the Appellant was employed by the NHS during the relevant  period.
    Finally, in his  alternative  decision  the  Judge  erred  by  applying
    Regulation 15(1A) as this applied only to rights of permanent residence
    and not to rights of retained residence.

 4. In response, Mrs Aboni argued that there were no such  material  errors
    of law.  She referred to the Rule 24 response and although she accepted
    that the Judge erred as alleged  in  respect  of  Regulation  10(5)(b),
    there was no material  error  because  the  Judge  came  to  a  correct
    conclusion in respect of Regulation 10(6)(a).  This was  because  there
    was no evidence that the Appellant had worked for  the  NHS  throughout
    the period following her divorce.  In  particular,  she  had  not  been
    employed in the UK during her absence in Ghana and therefore Regulation
    15(1A) did apply.

 5. I find an error of law in the decision of the Judge which  therefore  I
    set aside.  It is not now in dispute that the Judge erred  by  applying
    the provisions of Regulation  10(5)(b)  to  the  Appellant  whereas  he
    should have applied them to the EEA national.  The  Judge  should  have
    found that the Appellant met the requirements  of  Regulation  10(5)(b)
    because at paragraph 11 of  the  Decision  the  Judge  found  that  the
    Appellant had been married to  a  qualifying  person.   This  error  is
    material because the Judge  also  erred  in  his  decision  as  regards
    Regulation 10(6)(a).  There was ample evidence before  the  Judge  that
    the Appellant had been gainfully employed in the UK from  the  date  of
    the decree absolute.  I find the argument of  Mrs  Aboni  that  it  was
    necessary for the Appellant to be employed throughout the  period  from
    the date of the divorce to be erroneous.  I find it also to be the case
    that the Judge incorrectly applied the provisions of Regulation  15(1A)
    to the Appellant.  This Regulation applies only to a permanent right of
    residence and not a retained right of residence as established  in  the
    cases of Kuldip Singh case C-218/14 and Amos v  SSHD  [2011]  EWCA  Civ
    552.  For these reasons I set aside the decision of the Judge.

Remade Decision

 6. At the hearing I proceeded to remake the decision in the appeal.  It is
    not now in  dispute  that  the  Appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 10(5) except for  the  provisions  contained  in  Regulation
    10(5)(c) and Regulation 10(6)(a).  I find I  am  satisfied  that  those
    provisions  are  met.   There  is  ample  evidence  contained  in   the
    Appellant's Bundle of her employment with the NHS since the date of her
    divorce.

Notice of Decision

 7. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside that decision.

    I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Anonymity

 8. The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  I  was
    not asked to do so and indeed find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Dated 12th July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In the light of my  decision  to  remake  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
allowing it, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award.   I  have  had
regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance in such matters.  I make  a  whole
fee award in favour of the Appellant as  I  have  allowed  the  appeal  upon
evidence which according to the Respondent's letter of  22nd  May  2015  was
before the Respondent when the original application  for  a  residence  card
was refused.






Signed                              Dated  12th July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

