
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29804/2013
                                                               IA/29805/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 May 2014                                |On 25 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB


                                   Between

                 Jyoti Paresh Borkhataria - first appellant
               paresh prabhudas borkhataria - second appellant
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr O Richards, of the Law Clinic
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants, who are citizens of India, are a married  couple.   The
    first appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant) was  refused
    further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant, with her
    husband, the second appellant, as her dependant.  The applications were
    refused on 27 June 2013, and the appeals were dismissed by Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Britton, in a determination promulgated on 13 March
    2014.

2.   The appellant had initially come to the UK in 2008 as  a  student,  and
    had been granted further leave on the same basis  in  2009,  2010,  and
    2012.   Her  final  period  of  leave  was  until  31  May  2013.   The
    application that was refused on 27 June 2013 was made before her  leave
    expired.

3.   The refusal was on the basis  that  the  appellant  would,  if  granted
    further leave, exceed the maximum period  of  five  years  allowed  for
    studies at degree level or above.   None  of  the  exceptions  to  this
    limit, including study for a PhD, applied.

4.   The appeals were dismissed on  the  basis  that  the  decision  was  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that  it  was  arguable
    that the appellant's ACCA studies from September 2010 to December  2011
    should have been disregarded, in  calculating  the  five  year  period,
    because they were not at degree level.  Reference  was  made  to  Mirza
    (ACCA Fundamental level qualification - not a recognised degree) [2013]
    UKUT 00041 (IAC).

The Hearing

6.   At the hearing before me it was agreed that the key point  was  whether
    the ACCA course was of degree level.  The  relevant  Immigration  Rule,
    that was the basis of the refusal, was paragraph 245ZX(ha),  which  set
    the five year maximum period allowed for degree level courses.

7.   Mr Richards, for the appellants, submitted that the appellant had  only
    spent a total of three years  and  seven  months  studying  courses  at
    degree level when she made the application.  This was the  period  that
    remained when the ACCA studies were disregarded.

Decision and Reasons

8.   I have decided that no material error of law has been  shown,  and  the
    judge's decision therefore remains undisturbed.

9.    The  challenge  to  the  judge's  determination  appears  to  me,   on
    examination, to rest on a failure to appreciate the difference  between
    "degree level study" on the one hand, and a "recognised degree" on  the
    other.  The case of Mirza was concerned with the  question  of  whether
    the ACCA Fundamental Level qualification was a recognised  degree.   It
    was decided, in that case, that the ACCA did not have  degree  awarding
    powers, and  that  the  qualifications  which  it  awards  are  not  UK
    recognised degrees.

10.  This is not the same issue  as  whether  such  studies  may  amount  to
    "degree level study".  The words "degree level study"  are  defined  in
    paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules.  The definition includes a course
    which leads to  a  recognised  UK  degree,  but  it  also  includes  an
    equivalent qualification at Level 6 or above of  the  revised  National
    Qualifications Framework.

11.  The CAS for the ACCA course in question, at page 22 of the  appellants'
    bundle, includes the following observation on the academic level of the
    course: "Equivalent to NQF Level 6".

12.  When this point was discussed at  the  hearing  Mr  Richards,  for  the
    appellants, was unable to argue that the relevant ACCA course  was  not
    degree level study as defined in the Immigration Rules.  He did  return
    to the point that the judge had not considered the case of  Mirza,  and
    argued that this in itself amounted to an error of law.

13.  Although it was on a closely related point it appears to  me  that  the
    decision in Mirza is not, in fact, relevant to the point  at  issue  in
    this case.  It was therefore not an error of law for the judge  not  to
    consider the case, quite apart from the fact that  it  appears  not  to
    have been put before him.

14.  There was no suggestion of any need for  anonymity,  and  an  anonymity
    direction is not made.  The appeals were dismissed at  the  First-tier,
    and those decisions stand.  There can therefore be no question  of  any
    fee awards.

Decision

15.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed. The judge  did  not  err
    in law in his determination.  His decision dismissing  the  appellants'
    appeals stands.







Signed                                  Date 24.06.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb
