
                                    [pic]
IAC-HW-MP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29839/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th November 2016                        |On 29th November 2016         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                               mr kashif raza
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MAde)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed of Immigration Services, Sheffield
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan whose date of birth is  recorded
    as 2nd May 1990.  He first entered the United  Kingdom  on  29th  April
    2011 as a Tier 4 Student with a valid grant of  entry  clearance  until
    12th August 2012.  A subsequent application  to  vary  that  leave  was
    refused. There was no appeal.  On 9th March 2015 he  then  applied  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis  of  a  relationship
    which he claimed to enjoy with one Miss Perwaiz.  On 18th August 2015 a
    decision was made to refuse that application and the Appellant appealed
    on human rights grounds.

 2. On 19th April 2016 his appeal was heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Holmes sitting at North Shields.  Having heard  the  evidence,
    in a decision dated 20th April  2016,  he  dismissed  the  appeal.  Not
    content with that decision, by Notice dated 6th May 2016 the  Appellant
    made application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The grounds run to 23 paragraphs. However,  at  the  beginning  of  the
    hearing before me it was established that this appeal turns on  whether
    the Appellant and the interpreter at  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal understood one another because on behalf of the  Appellant  it
    was accepted that if that were the case then the  other  grounds  would
    fall away because the findings in dispute would at least have been open
    to the judge notwithstanding the fact that they were in issue.

 4. On 25th October 2016 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Keane  granted
    permission.  He noted in doing so that the judge's notes had under  the
    heading "Introduction", "Appellant's  English  poor"  followed  by  the
    words "non-existent" in brackets but then struck out.

 5. The burden of the submission made before me, by Mr Ahmed, who  appeared
    below was that the judge was aggressive in his intervention to such  an
    extent that the Appellant was  prevented  fairly  from  presenting  his
    case.

 6. I observe that it is  not  in  dispute  that  the  judge  informed  the
    Appellant at the commencement of the hearing that he  should  give  his
    evidence in English if able to do  so  but  otherwise  should  use  the
    interpreter who was made available to him.  No objection  generally  is
    taken to that direction.  The  objection  taken  in  the  grounds,  and
    before me, is that having informed the Appellant  that  he  might  give
    evidence in English the judge then  penalised  the  Appellant  for  his
    attempts to do so.

 7. Although Mr Ahmed who appeared below did not provide the Tribunal  with
    a witness statement in support of the grounds, no objection  was  taken
    by Mr Diwncyz to Mr Ahmed explaining to me what his perceptions were of
    the hearing.  Mr Ahmed very fairly and properly accepted that it  would
    have been open to him to raise in his  submissions  to  the  judge  his
    concerns about  the  conduct  of  the  case  and  that  he  might  more
    forcefully have expressed his views to the judge about any concerns  he
    had during the course of the proceedings, yet he did  not  do  so.   He
    took the view that it would have been  discourteous  had  he  expressed
    himself as forcefully as he had wanted.

 8. The difficulty which I have in  resolving  the  matter  before  me,  of
    course, is that I was not present and there is no recording of hearings
    in the First-tier Tribunal.  Certain it is that a hearing in the First-
    tier Tribunal is not a dress  rehearsal  for  an  onward  appeal.   The
    appeal in the First-tier Tribunal is the venue  in  which  all  matters
    ought fairly to be aired.  If therefore an Appellant is represented and
    that representative has concerns about the manner in which the judge is
    conducting him or herself or indeed the manner in which the evidence is
    being received, then the proper venue to voice  those  concerns  is  at
    that hearing.

 9. It is perhaps not surprising that there are no  notes  in  the  judge's
    hand of any complaints being made during the  hearing  for  I  have  no
    doubt that Judge Holmes would not have considered himself to have  been
    acting improperly even if the perception  had  been  given  to  others.
    However, Mr Diwncyz also has no note from the Presenting Officer of any
    points being taken during the course of the proceedings with respect to
    any intervention or interventions by the judge.

10. Where I significantly disagree with the submissions made is that in  my
    judgment the finding of the judge at paragraph 15 of the Decision, that
    the Appellant repeatedly failed to co-operate with the interpreter  and
    had to be warned in the strongest terms that his failure to do  so  was
    not assisting his own appeal, cannot be said to flow necessarily, as Mr
    Ahmed would invite me to find, from the initial instruction as  to  how
    evidence should be given.  Any judge makes his or her findings  on  the
    basis of all of the evidence including, to  some  extent  (albeit  with
    appropriate caution) the demeanour and, the manner in  which  questions
    are answered.  If the judge formed the view that the way in  which  the
    Appellant answered questions was such  that  the  Appellant  was  being
    evasive and failing to co-operate then the judge was  entitled  to  put
    that into the balance in his  consideration  of  the  totality  of  the
    evidence.

11. I observe, though I do not by this invite any  complaint  to  be  made,
    that not only was the point now taken not taken before  the  judge  but
    was not taken either before the written Decision was received from  the
    judge.  If there had been such concerns about  the  way  in  which  the
    judge conducted himself then I would have expected those to  have  been
    brought to the attention of the Tribunal irrespective of  the  decision
    but that was not done.

12. Since the focus in this case is entirely upon whether or not there  was
    an error of law arising from whether the Appellant  was  given  a  fair
    opportunity to express himself through an interpreter, and since  I  do
    not find that that has been established before me because the Appellant
    was provided with an interpreter in a language  which  was  his  mother
    tongue and was  instructed  by  the  judge  that  he  should  use  that
    interpreter as he best  thought,  then  I  find  no  error  of  law  is
    established in this case.

13. In all the circumstances the Appellant has not  satisfied  me  of  that
    which  is  contended  for  and  in  the  circumstances  the  appeal  is
    dismissed.

DECISION

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed and the decision of the  First
Tier Tribunal is therefore affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
