
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29914/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th December 2016                          |On 10 January 2017            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              MR ADIL MOHAMMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance and not represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a national of India, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 18th August 2015  to
    refuse his application for leave to remain  in  the  UK  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant under  the  points-based  system  and  for  a
    biometric residence permit.  A  First-tier  Tribunal  panel  comprising
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Froome and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Maka
    allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  1st  June  2016.   The
    Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge  Kebede  on  10  November  2016  following  the  renewal  of  her
    application for permission to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. At the hearing of this matter before me there was no appearance by  the
    Appellant Mr Adil.  I noted that on 21st November 2016 the  appellant's
    legal representatives wrote to the Tribunal to say that they no  longer
    represented the Appellant as he  had  withdrawn  his  instruction  from
    their firm in February 2016.  In the letter  the  representatives  gave
    the Appellant's  last  known  address.   The  letter  states  that  the
    representatives tried to contact the Appellant about  the  hearing  but
    had failed to get any response from him.  The  notice  of  hearing  was
    sent to the appellant's last known address. I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant had been provided with notice of hearing and that  there  was
    no explanation for his failure to attend the hearing.  I  proceeded  to
    hear the appeal  in  his  absence  and  I  heard  submissions  from  Ms
    Isherwood.

 4. In the reasons for refusal letter the Secretary of State gave a  number
    of reasons for refusing the application.  The application  was  refused
    under paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules on the basis  that  the
    Appellant had, in a previous application made on  15th  November  2012,
    submitted a TOEIC certificate from Educational Testing Services  (ETS).
    It is asserted that that test was invalid because it was sat by a proxy
    tester in place of the Appellant and that, as a false document had been
    submitted  in  relation  to  his  previous  application,  this  current
    application was refused  under  paragraph  322(2)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The  Secretary  of  State  went  on  to  consider  whether  the
    Appellant had demonstrated that he scored the  requisite  points  under
    Appendix  A  for  Attributes  and  Appendix  C  for  Maintenance.   The
    Secretary of State concluded that the Appellant was not entitled to the
    30 points claimed for a Confirmation of Acceptance  for  Studies  (CAS)
    because he had produced no valid CAS.  Accordingly  the  Appellant  was
    also not awarded any of the 10 points claimed for  maintenance  because
    he had not produced a valid CAS.

 5. The Appellant appealed against that decision and he did not  appear  at
    the hearing before the panel. The panel  considered  the  evidence  put
    forward by the Secretary of State in relation to the  ETS  including  a
    report from Professor French of  20th  April  2016  and  the  documents
    relied on in relation to this Appellant.  The panel concluded that  the
    Respondent had failed to discharge the legal burden on her to show that
    this Appellant's  TOEIC  certificate  was  procured  by  dishonesty  or
    fraudulently;  the  panel  found  that  the   evidence   had   multiple
    shortcomings and frailties in that it did not  show  a  valid  case  to
    answer in respect to this Appellant.  Accordingly the panel found  that
    paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules did not apply  in  this  case
    and the panel concluded "we do not accept the grounds  relied  upon  by
    the Respondent to  curtail  the  Appellant's  leave"  [27].  The  panel
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 6. In the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal the Secretary  of  State
    contended that the panel erred in its approach to  the  evidence  about
    the Appellant's  ETS  TOEIC  certificate  and  the  assessment  of  the
    evidence of Professor French. Permission to appeal was refused  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 7. On renewal of the application for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede decided that there  was  arguable
    merit  in  the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  that   there   was   a
    misunderstanding by the panel of the evidence produced by Secretary  of
    State.  Judge Kebede also pointed out that there was  another  arguably
    significant error which had not been raised in the  grounds  but  which
    meets the Robinson obvious test in  that  the  panel  arguably  wrongly
    proceeded on the basis that the decision under appeal was a curtailment
    decision rather than an application for leave to remain  and  that  the
    panel had  arguably  failed  to  explain  how  the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of Appendix A in relation to the  submission  of  a  valid
    CAS.

 8. At the hearing before me Ms Isherwood accepted  in  the  light  of  the
    recent case law that she could add nothing to the grounds  in  relation
    to the panel's decision in relation to paragraph 322(2) of  the  Rules.
    However she submitted that separate from the ETS issue was the issue of
    the valid CAS.  She referred to the CAS at E in the Respondent's bundle
    which indicated that  the  Sponsor's  licence  had  been  revoked.  She
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal panel had failed  to  deal  with
    this issue.

Decision

 9. In light of the recent decision of the Court of Appeal in Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v Shehzad & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 615 I am
    satisfied that there is no material error in the  panel's  decision  in
    relation to paragraph  322(2)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  panel
    considered all of the generic evidence submitted by  the  Secretary  of
    State as well  as  the  evidence  specific  to  this  Appellant  before
    concluding that the Secretary of State  had  failed  to  discharge  the
    legal burden on her to show that this Appellant's TOEIC certificate was
    procured by dishonesty or fraudulently.

10. I agree with Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede that the issue of the  CAS  is
    Robinson obvious and it is therefore appropriate for me to deal with it
    here. In considering the appeal the panel  made  no  reference  to  the
    second basis of refusal as set out in the Reasons for  Refusal  letter.
    This related to the Appellant's failure to submit a valid CAS.

11. I accept that this was a material error because there was  no  evidence
    before the panel to indicate that there was in fact a valid CAS in this
    case.  In these circumstances, whilst I accept that there is  no  error
    in terms of the panel's conclusions in relation to paragraph 322(2)  of
    the Immigration Rules, the panel materially erred in  failing  to  deal
    with all of the issues in the appeal before it.

12. I preserve the findings and decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    relation to paragraph 322(2). However because of the panel's failure to
    deal with the CAS issue I set aside the conclusion of  the  panel  that
    the appeal should be allowed.

13. In remaking the decision I note that there is no evidence that a  valid
    CAS was issued in this case and therefore the Appellant has  failed  to
    discharge the burden upon him to demonstrate that  he  has  scored  the
    requisite points under Appendix A and Appendix  C  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  In these circumstances I dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal amounts to  a  material  error  of
law and I set it aside.

I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 9th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 9th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

