
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29844/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 July 2014                               |On 28th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE LEWIS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                               Mr Eduart Gjura

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Naz, a Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. This is an appeal brought by Mr Eduart Gjura against a decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 26 February 2014.  By that  decision
    the Tribunal dismissed his appeal against the refusal of an application
    by Mr Gjura for a permanent residence card under the provisions of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. The appeal can be dealt with very briefly in light of the very  helpful
    concessions made by the Secretary of State.  In brief, Mr  Gjura  is  a
    national of Albania. He came to the United Kingdom on 2 April 2006.  He
    met his now wife and they went to Albania in 2006 and they  married  in
    Albania.  His wife is an Irish national who is exercising treaty rights
    in the United Kingdom and has been working here from about 2002.

 3. Mr Gjura got a residence card in December  2006  and  returned  to  the
    United Kingdom.  He and his wife carried on their normal married  life.
    They had two young daughters who  also  attended  the  Tribunal  today,
    namely Leila and Sienna.  Unfortunately Mrs Gjura became ill  in  about
    2007 and at the very least is temporarily unable to work. There  is  an
    issue as to whether or not whether or not she will be  able  to  resume
    work in the future.

 4. The provisions of the Regulations are complex but in essence Regulation
    15(1)(b) of the 2006 Regulations provide that a family member of an EEA
    national who is not himself an EEA national but who has resided in  the
    United Kingdom with the EEA national in accordance with the Regulations
    for a continuous period of five years has a right to acquire  permanent
    residence in the UK.

 5. The Tribunal focused on the period from 2002 to 2007 when Mrs Gjura was
    working and because there had been a three month absence while she went
    to Albania to marry her husband the Tribunal found that that broke  her
    residence and that she was not entitled to claim  her  over  five  year
    period.

 6. Mr Duffy for the Secretary of State concedes that that is an  error  of
    law and that  the  Tribunal  should  have  but  did  not  consider  the
    provisions in Regulation 3 governing continuity  of  residence  and  in
    particular paragraph 3(2) which provides that: "Continuity of residence
    is not affected by periods of absence from the United Kingdom which  do
    not exceed six months in total in any year."

 7. So firstly it is conceded, and we accept, that the  Tribunal  erred  in
    law and we therefore set aside  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  That then means that we, the Upper Tribunal, need to  remake
    the decision and to consider the appeal against the refusal of a  right
    of permanent residence.

 8. In our judgment it is clear that Mr Gjura does qualify for a  right  of
    permanent residence under paragraph 15(1)(b) of the  2006  Regulations.
    He is a family member of an EEA national.   The  EEA  national  is  his
    wife, Mrs Gjura.  He himself is the lawfully  married  husband  of  Mrs
    Gjura and he has resided in the United Kingdom for well over five years
    continuously as the husband of Mrs Gjura.

 9. Insofar as Mrs Gjura has been temporarily unable to work  it  is  clear
    from the provisions in Regulation 5 and Regulation 5(7)  in  particular
    that periods of inactivity due to illness shall be treated  as  periods
    of activity as a worker or self-employed person, as the case may be.

10. So the position is, it seems, that  certainly  from  2007  onwards  Mrs
    Gjura has been here as a qualified  person  and  as  a  worker,  albeit
    somebody temporarily prevented to work, and indeed may well  have  been
    here from 2002 as a worker. In any event it is clear that Mr  Gjura  is
    entitled under paragraph 15(1)(b) to permanent residence in the  United
    Kingdom.  So we will therefore allow his appeal against the refusal  by
    the Secretary of State saying that he was  not  entitled  to  permanent
    residence.

11. There is one other  issue.   There  was  also  an  appeal  against  the
    decision that removal would not breach Article  8.   Ms  Naz,  who  has
    appeared for Mr Gjura today, has helpfully indicated that they  do  not
    wish to pursue that aspect of the matter.  Mr Gjura is  concerned  that
    he can stay in this country to support his wife and family  as  he  has
    been doing for many years, and that has already been dealt  with  under
    the EEA Regulations and therefore we are content to accept the position
    of Mr Gjura that he does not wish to continue with the Article 8 in the
    light of the success with the claim under the  European  Economic  Area
    Regulations 2006.






Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Lewis


