
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29836/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 12th November 2015                    |             On 7th December 2015   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                               Shahid Mahmood
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Mohsin, Counsel instructed by Abbott Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated  15th  July
    2014 to refuse to grant him a residence card as confirmation of a right
    to reside in the UK with a retained  right  of  residence  following  a
    divorce from an EEA national in accordance with Regulation  10  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (the EEA Regulations).  Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Ford dismissed the Appellant's appeal in a decision
    dated 15th April 2015.  The Appellant now appeals  with  permission  to
    this Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant  married  an  Irish
    national in 1999.  The couple separated and  the  decree  absolute  was
    issued on 14th January 2014.   On  26th  February  2014  the  Appellant
    applied for a permanent residence card as a family member under the EEA
    Regulations.

 3. With his application the Appellant provided evidence in relation to his
    former wife's self-employment.  However, the Secretary of State  stated
    in the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  that  "Interdepartmental  checks
    conducted by  this  department  have  highlighted  that  there  are  no
    employment records for your Sponsor during the period  between  2009  -
    2013, and no evidence of any tax payments or  national  insurance  have
    been confirmed".  The Secretary of State stated then; "This  department
    is of the opinion that the wage slips  and  documentation  provided  in
    support of your ex-spouse's employment are  fraudulent  and  deceitful"
    and that  she  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant's  former  spouse
    exercised treaty rights for a period of five  years  or  that  she  was
    exercising treaty rights at the time of the divorce.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered Regulations 10 and 15  of  the
    EEA Regulations.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge said  at  paragraph  14
    that the Appellant must show "that the EEA  national  was  a  qualified
    person for a continuous period of five years in order to qualify either
    as her family member or a former family member with a retained right of
    residence".  The judge went on to say:  "I  am  not  satisfied  on  the
    evidence before me that the EEA national was exercising  treaty  rights
    for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years  at  any  time  during  the
    marriage"[14].

Error of Law

 5. I accept the contention in the Grounds of Appeal that the judge applied
    the wrong test in paragraph 14. At paragraph 7 of the determination the
    judge properly identifies that the Appellant's case is that he  has  an
    entitlement  under  Regulation  10  and  Regulation  15  of   the   EEA
    Regulations. At paragraph 14 the judge  said  :"whether  the  Appellant
    claims a right of permanent residence under Regulation 10 or Regulation
    15, he must show that the EEA national was a  qualified  person  for  a
    continuous period of five years in  order  to  qualify  either  as  her
    family member or a former  family  member  with  a  retained  right  of
    residence". However this is an erroneous statement of the  law  and  it
    seems to me that at paragraph 7 and again at  paragraph  14  the  judge
    conflated the requirements under Regulations 10 and 15.  Regulation  10
    provides, inter alia, for  a  retained  right  of  residence  following
    divorce. Regulation 15 provides for entitlement to permanent residence.



 6. Regulation 10 of the EEA Regulations provides as follows:


         "10. -   (1)  In these Regulations, 'family member who has retained
                  the right of residence' means, subject to paragraph (8), a
                  person who satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3),
                  (4) or (5).
             ...
             (5)  A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if -
                  (a)  he ceased to be a family member of a qualified person
                      or of an EEA  national  with  a  permanent  right  of
                      residence on the termination of the marriage or civil
                      partnership of that person;
                  (b)  he was residing in the United Kingdom  in  accordance
                      with  these  Regulations   at   the   date   of   the
                      termination;
                  (c)  he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and
                  (d)  either -
                      (i)  prior to the initiation of the  proceedings  for
                           the termination of  the  marriage  or  the  civil
                           partnership the marriage or civil partnership had
                           lasted for at least three years and  the  parties
                           to the marriage or civil partnership had  resided
                           in the United  Kingdom  for  at  least  one  year
                           during its duration;
             ...
             (6)  The condition in this paragraph is that the person -
                  (a)  is not an EEA national but would, if he were  an  EEA
                      national, be a worker, a self-employed  person  or  a
                      self-sufficient person under Regulation 6; or
                  (b)  is the family member of a  person  who  falls  within
                      paragraph (a)."

 7. In considering Regulation 10 the question for the judge  was  therefore
    whether the Appellant had demonstrated that at the date of  termination
    of the marriage his ex-wife was a qualified person (or had a  right  of
    permanent residence)  and  whether  she  was  residing  in  the  UK  in
    accordance with the Regulations at  that  time.   The  judge  therefore
    erred in requiring that the Appellant demonstrate that his ex-wife  was
    exercising treaty rights for a continuous period of five years  at  any
    time during the marriage.  This is what would have been required if  it
    had to be demonstrated  that  the  Appellant's  ex-wife  had  permanent
    residence.  In fact all that had to  be  demonstrated  in  relation  to
    Regulation 10 is that the Appellant's ex-wife was a qualified person at
    the time of termination of the marriage, in other words  that  she  was
    self-employed at the relevant time.  I  find  that  the  judge  made  a
    material  misdirection  of  law  in  relation  to  the  application  of
    Regulation 10 of the EEA Regulations and I  set  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal aside.

    Remaking the decision

 8. The judge considered the  all  of  the  evidence  and  found  that  the
    documents provided by the Appellant in relation to his ex-wife's  self-
    employment were reliable in themselves [16].  He decided that they  did
    not assert that the Appellant's ex-wife was  paying  tax  and  national
    insurance.  They showed that she was  contracted  to  provide  cleaning
    services to Submission UK, All Seasons Dry Cleaners and White Rose  Dry
    Cleaners.  He  says  that  the  obligation  to  pay  tax  and  national
    insurance was her obligation and the documents supplied confirmed  that
    this is the case.  The judge found:

         "In the absence of further enquiries by  the  Respondent  with  All
         Seasons Dry Cleaners, White Rose Dry Cleaners or Submission  UK,  I
         am not satisfied that this Appellant has submitted false  documents
         or attempted to deceive merely on the basis that the Appellant's ex-
         wife did not pay her tax and national insurance on  self-employment
         earnings."  [16].

 9. The judge therefore found on the evidence before him that the  evidence
    established that the Appellant's ex-wife was self-employed at the  time
    indicated on the letters submitted.  There  is  no  challenge  to  that
    finding.

10. The judge referred to the fact that the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    submitted the evidence referred to in the Reasons  for  Refusal  letter
    which appeared to indicate that the Appellant's ex-wife  had  not  paid
    tax or national insurance  on  her  self-employment  earnings.  At  the
    hearing before me Ms Isherwood submitted that she has now access to the
    HMRC documents referred to in the Reasons for Refusal letter and sought
    permission to admit them in the context of my remaking the decision.

11. Ms Mohsin objected to the submission of the documents  given  that  the
    Home Office had had the opportunity to submit  such  documents  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal and in any event the Home Office could have  sought
    permission to admit the documents in relation to the proceedings in the
    Upper Tribunal.  She submitted in the alternative that, even  if  there
    is evidence that the Appellant's ex-wife failed to make tax or national
    insurance contributions at a particular point in time,  this  does  not
    mean that she was not self-employed as claimed.  It could be  that  she
    made those contributions at a later time.  In any event the judge found
    that the documents showing her employment were not false.

12. Ms Isherwood submitted that the evidence that she had was to the effect
    of the assertion in the Reasons  for  Refusal  letter  that  the  check
    showed that no evidence of tax or national insurance payments had  been
    paid as of 24th June 2014.

13. In the circumstances I refused to admit the further evidence given that
    the Secretary of State had not complied with  the  Procedure  Rules  in
    relation to this matter and had an opportunity to submit these  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  In any event I was satisfied that the findings of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  relation  to  the  validity  of  the
    documents from White Rose Dry Cleaners (dated 14th February  2014)  and
    All Seasons Dry Cleaners (dated 20th February 2014) were sufficient  to
    demonstrate that, at the date of the termination of the marriage  (14th
    January 2014), the Appellant's ex-wife was  self-employed  as  claimed.
    The Appellant has therefore demonstrated that he meets the requirements
    of Regulation 10 (5) (a) and (b).

14. The Appellant's marriage lasted longer than 3 years and I am  satisfied
    on the evidence submitted with the application that the couple  resided
    in  the  UK  for  at  least  one  year.  The  Appellant  has  therefore
    demonstrated that he meets the requirements of Regulation  10  (5)  (d)
    (i).

15. In these circumstances  I  considered  the  application  of  Regulation
    10(6).  This requires that the Appellant demonstrate that, if  he  were
    an EEA national, he would be considered to be a worker, a self-employed
    person or a self-sufficient person under Regulation  6.   The  evidence
    already submitted before the First-tier Tribunal demonstrates that  the
    Appellant himself was employed at all material times.  I  am  satisfied
    on the basis of the payslips and the P60s that  the  Appellant  himself
    was employed at all relevant times.  On the basis of this evidence I am
    satisfied that  the  Appellant  has  demonstrated  that  he  meets  the
    requirements of Regulation 10 (5) (c) and (6).

16. The Appellant has therefore demonstrated that he is a family member who
    has retained the right of residence in accordance with Regulation 10. I
    find that the Appellant has not shown that he  resided  in  the  UK  in
    accordance with the Regulations for a continuous period of  five  years
    and has not therefore shown that he is entitled to permanent  residence
    under Regulation 15.

17. I therefore remake the decision by allowing the appeal under Regulation
    10 of the EEA Regulations.

    Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of  law.
I set aside that decision and  remake  it  by  allowing  it  under  the  EEA
Regulations.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 30th November 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date: 30th November 2015




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

