

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal No:
IA/29853/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



Heard at Field House                             Determination Promulgated
On 1 September 2014                              On 15 September 2014





                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DIGNEY

                                   Between

                                ASIM MUHAMMAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the respondent: Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the appellant: Mr Blundell

                               DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, applied for a residence card  as
      confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom on  the  basis
      of that he was the spouse of  a  Czech  national  who  was  exercising
      treaty rights in this country.  That application was  refused  and  an
      appeal against the decision dismissed.  The  application  was  refused
      because the respondent concluded that the marriage in question  was  a
      marriage of convenience and the judge who heard the appeal reached the
      same conclusion.  The respondent also concluded that  the  spouse  was
      not exercising treaty rights and the judge agreed with her.

   2. The grounds of appeal make two points and I will deal with the  second
      one first as that is the one that Mr Blundell dealt with first and  on
      which he placed the greater reliance. This was a case where the  judge
      concluded that the parties may have been in a casual relationship  and
      may even have been living in the same accommodation. The point is best
      put in Paragraph 11 of the grounds, which states:

   3. The judge erred in defining a marriage of  convenience  as  one  which
      does not reflect a genuine, subsisting,  long-term  relationship.  The
      terminology  used  indicates  that  the  judge  applied  the  approach
      applicable under the Immigration Rules. The  test  in  Community  Law,
      however, is whether the marriage has been  contracted  "for  the  sole
      purpose of enjoying the right of  free  movement  or  residence"....or
      that it "has no substance or purpose other than that for which it  has
      avowedly been used"   or that it is " a  sham  marriage  entered  into
      solely for immigration purposes [Emphasis in the grounds].


   4. The first ground, which Mr Blundell admits is rather unhappily  called
      "Procedural Impropriety" is based on the  fact  that  the  judge  drew
      certain conclusions from the sponsor's wage slips on the basis of  his
      own experience and did not warn the appellant's  representatives  that
      he was going to do so.


   5. Permission to appeal was granted and the only matter referred  to  was
      the reasoning relating to a marriage of convenience.

   6. There is a rule 24 response which argued that the judge dealt properly
      with both points raised.

   7. At the hearing Mr Blundell produced documentation which justified  the
      definition of a marriage of convenience given in the grounds. He  said
      it is not enough if part of the motivation  for  the  marriage  is  to
      obtain an immigration advantage. This was not a case where the parties
      were  nothing  to  each  other  and  there  was  a   relationship   or
      cohabitation.

   8. He accepted that the judge had  properly  applied  the  law  in  other
      respects but was wrong to  conclude  that  what  we  have  here  is  a
      marriage  of  convenience  in  the  light  of  his  findings  about  a
      relationship.

   9. The fallacy in Mr Blundell's argument is that he treats  the  paradigm
      of a marriage of convenience as the case  where  the  parties  do  not
      speak a word of each other's language and meet for the first  time  at
      the registry office. In reality there will be a continuum, going  from
      that stage to cases where the parties may know each other, be friends,
      or even be in a relationship. In all these cases it  is  possible  for
      there to be a marriage of convenience. This  is  very  different  from
      parties choosing to marry where the immigration result may be a factor
      in the decision. Here it was open to the judge to decide that this was
      a marriage of convenience, carried out in one of the ways referred  to
      in the grounds set out in paragraph 2 of this determination. The judge
      was clearly entitled to reach  the  conclusion  that  he  did  on  the
      evidence and there is no evidence that this is a case where there  was
      a genuine  wish  to  marry  and  this  was  encouraged  by  extraneous
      immigration advantages.  The  fact  that  parties  to  a  marriage  of
      convenience are friends does not stop a marriage of convenience  being
      such if that is the case.

  10. It follows that there is no error of law in the judge's conclusion  on
      the marriage of convenience point.

  11. In those circumstances it is not necessary  for  me  to  consider  the
      point of "Procedural Impropriety".

  12. It follows that the original judge made no error of law. The  original
      decision stands.

The appeal is dismissed


Designated Judge Digney
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                              4 September 2014



