
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29981/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th February 2015                         |On 5th May 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                              MR SARSHAR AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Saleem, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Miss K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  18th  March  1977.   On
    28th February 2014 his solicitors applied on his behalf for  indefinite
    leave to remain on the basis of ten years' continuous lawful  residence
    in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant has a very extensive  immigration
    history.  It starts with confirmation on his passport that  he  entered
    the United Kingdom on 24th September 2003 with  entry  clearance  as  a
    student.  The full detail of the Appellant's immigration history is set
    out in the first main section of the Secretary  of  State's  Notice  of
    Refusal which is dated 1st July 2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed against the refusal and the appeal  came  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Stott sitting  at  Birmingham  on  4th
    November 2014.  In a determination promulgated on  12th  November  2014
    the Appellant's appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules.

 3. The Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 20th November 2014.  Those grounds stated that the judge  had  erred
    in finding that Section 3C leave under the Immigration Act 1971 applied
    to removal directions and as the Appellant was  in  the  UK  unlawfully
    when he made his application the application could not succeed.  On 6th
    January  2015  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Murray  granted
    permission to appeal.  In granting permission Judge Murray stated  that
    as a removal decision is not a variation of leave  Section  3C  has  no
    application to the Tribunal's finding that the removal directions  were
    not in accordance with the law.   The  Appellant  therefore  could  not
    satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules as he was in  the  UK
    unlawfully when he made his application and that therefore there was an
    arguable error of law in the judge's determination.

 4. Albeit late on 18th February 2015 the Appellant's solicitors lodged  an
    extensive Rule 24 response extending to some 42 paragraphs.  It  is  on
    the aforementioned basis that the appeal comes before me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  For the  purpose  of  continuity  throughout  the
    proceedings albeit that this is an appeal by the Secretary of State the
    Secretary of State is referred to herein as the Respondent and Mr Ahmed
    as the Appellant.  The Appellant appears by his instructed solicitor Mr
    Saleem.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer Miss Pal.

Submissions/Discussion

 5. Miss Pal submits that the Secretary of State's starting  point  is  the
    Notice of Refusal  of  11th  August  2014  and  takes  me  through  the
    Appellant's immigration history pointing out that it is  the  Secretary
    of State's position that the Appellant's appeal for  further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 General Student having been dismissed and  with  the
    Appellant's appeal rights becoming exhausted on 22nd August  2013  that
    the outstanding application for leave to remain as  a  Tier  4  General
    Student was then voided on 30th September 2013.  She  points  out  that
    the Appellant did not seek to regularise his  position  in  the  United
    Kingdom until his application dated 14th January  2014  and  that  that
    application was also refused with no right of appeal on  12th  February
    2014.  It therefore remains the Secretary of State's position that  the
    Appellant did not have any lawful leave to remain in the United Kingdom
    since  his  application  was  voided  on  30th  September  2013.    She
    thereafter relies on the conclusion reached in the  Notice  of  Refusal
    that whilst at the date of refusal it was accepted that  the  Appellant
    had completed ten years' continuous  lawful  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the Appellant did not have any valid leave to remain in  the
    UK since 30th September 2013 his current application was considered out
    of time and therefore he could not satisfy the requirement of paragraph
    276B(v).

 6. Miss Pal submits that the Appellant did not challenge the variation and
    therefore his 3C leave expired five working days after receipt  of  the
    determination and therefore on 22nd August 2013 the Appellant's  appeal
    rights became exhausted and his rights under Section 3C came to an end.



 7. She takes me at some length to paragraph 5 of  the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    contending that the judge has erred in finding that  Section  3C  leave
    applies to removal directions.   Miss  Pal  takes  me  to  the  Statute
    stating that Section 3C applies if

         "(a) a person who has limited leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom applies to the Secretary of State for variation
             of the leave,

         (b)  the  application  for  variation  is  made  before  the  leave
    expires, and

         (c)  the leave expires without the application for variation having
             been decided."

    She then states that the leave is extended  by  virtue  of  Section  3C
    during any period when -

         "(a)  the  application  for  variation  is  neither   decided   nor
    withdrawn,

         (b)  an appeal under Section 82(1) of the Nationality,  Asylum  and
             Immigration Act 2002 could be brought (while the Appellant  is
             in the United Kingdom) against the decision on the application
             for variation (ignoring any possibility of an  appeal  out  of
             time with permission).

 8. It is therefore the submission of the Secretary of State that a removal
    decision is not a variation of leave and therefore Section  3C  has  no
    application to a Tribunal's finding that the  removal  directions  were
    not in accordance with the law and consequently the Secretary of  State
    maintains that the Appellant cannot satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  She submits in explanation of the above Rules  that
    Section 3C(1) relates to applications of the Secretary of State and (2)
    now relates to when a variation is refused i.e. the appeal stage.   She
    refers specifically to paragraph 3C(2)(b) pointing that  the  dismissal
    for variation by the First Tribunal was not  challenged  and  therefore
    the removal is not an appeal.  She submits therefore on  the  dismissal
    of the appeal that the Appellant's 3C leave came to an end and that  is
    a decision that the Secretary of  State  was  mandatorily  entitled  to
    reach and therefore for the purpose of the Appellant's  current  appeal
    3C leave has no application.  It is  Miss  Pal's  submission  therefore
    that in August 2013 the Appellant had no lawful  leave  and  became  an
    overstayer and therefore the judge erred materially when  finding  that
    the Appellant had  satisfied  the  long-term  residency  provisions  of
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.  Further she points  out  that
    even if the Tribunal was right to find leave continued  to  the  second
    decision the appeal could only be allowed to the extent  that  it  went
    back to the Secretary of State to enable  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    consider the appeal under paragraph 276B(2).  In such circumstances she
    asked me firstly to find a material error of law in the decision of the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  secondly  to  re-make  the   decision
    dismissing the Appellant's appeal.

 9. Mr Saleem states that his starting point are the arguments  pursued  by
    the representative at the appeal on  4th  November  before  Immigration
    Judge Stott that no fresh decision had been made and consequently there
    had been no final determination of the appeal and  that  in  accordance
    with Section 3C(2) of the 1971 Act the Appellant's leave  was  extended
    during any period  when  the  application  for  variation  was  neither
    decided nor withdrawn and therefore the Appellant's leave meant that he
    had completed ten years' lawful residence on 23rd  September  2013  and
    therefore met the provisions of the Immigration Rules.   On  the  basis
    that no fresh Section  47  compliant  decision  was  made  against  the
    Appellant following the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  11th
    August 2013 to allow the appeal to the limited extent that the  Section
    47 decision issued in that case was unlawful and not in accordance with
    the law, he contends there is no material error of law.

10. He takes me  to  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Talbot
    prepared on 11th August 2013 where the judge found that the appeal  was
    allowed as being not in accordance with the law and the application was
    remitted  to  the  Respondent  for  further  consideration  under   the
    Immigration Rules in the light of his findings.  He submits  that  that
    is  what  is  expressed  in  paragraphs  8  and  9  of  Judge   Stott's
    determination and that there is no need to  appeal  that  decision  and
    that there is no appeal extant.

11. He notes that the Secretary of State contends Section 3C does not apply
    but relies on Section 3C(2)(a) (recited above)  namely  that  leave  is
    extended when the application for  variation  is  neither  decided  nor
    withdrawn.  He submits that there was no decision by the  Secretary  of
    State therefore the decision was not decided nor was it withdrawn.   He
    refers me to the Special Appeal  Team's  Minute  of  15th  August  2013
    reciting the authority of Ahmadi [2013] EWCA Civ 512 where the Court of
    Appeal dismissed Home Office appeals on serving  Section  47  decisions
    consideration should be given to making a further  decision  to  remove
    under Section 10 of the Immigration Act 1999 once an Appellant's appeal
    rights are exhausted.  He therefore submits that there  is  an  ongoing
    appeal and refers me to the letter from  the  Home  Office  dated  30th
    September 2013 which acknowledges that the Appellant has an outstanding
    appeal albeit that it is contended by Miss Pal that the author of  that
    letter was not aware that the Appellant's appeal  had  been  determined
    before Judge Talbot.

12. Mr Saleem continues saying that letter is  written  on  13th  September
    2014 and whilst noting that Miss Pal has indicated that  the  Secretary
    of State contends that the Appellant's appeal rights were exhausted  in
    August 2013 the application has to be considered on the due date namely
    30th September 2013 and that the Secretary of State cannot, to use  his
    words, "have it both ways" in that you cannot  refuse  the  Appellant's
    appeal as an overstayer and not accept that there is an ongoing  appeal
    because to do so would be a contradiction in terms.

13. He takes me  to  the  ongoing  correspondence  pointing  out  that  the
    detailed reply was submitted with the Secretary of  State  promptly  on
    4th October 2013 and that this was replied  to  on  28th  October.   He
    takes me in some detail to the content of that letter

         "Your client was refused leave to remain on  25th  March  2013  and
         subsequently appealed the decision.  According to our records,  the
         appeal was not withdrawn by your client as the appeal was concluded
         rather than withdrawn.  The appeal determination  is  enclosed  and
         dated 15th August 2013.  Therefore, when your client submitted  the
         application on 23rd July 2013, he  had  an  outstanding  appeal  as
         stated in my letter of 30th September 2013."

14. He submits therefore that the position as stated namely that there  was
    an outstanding appeal is actually reaffirmed by the Secretary of  State
    in their letter of 28th October 2013.

15. Mr Saleem explains that the history of the matter shows  that  on  14th
    January 2014 the Appellant formally withdrew the  appeal  that  was  at
    that stage outstanding.  This is accepted by the  Secretary  of  State.
    He submits that the logic therefore is that if the Secretary  of  State
    accepts that the appeal was withdrawn then they must  logically  accept
    that between August 2013 and January August 2014 that  the  appeal  was
    ongoing and therefore their current contentions  must  fall  away.   He
    submits that the Secretary of State  cannot  have  it  both  ways.   He
    acknowledges that there is correspondence from the Court  and  Tribunal
    Service confirming that the appeal was allowed in August 2013 and  that
    therefore it cannot be withdrawn.

16. He thereafter  takes  me  to  paragraph  276B  pointing  out  that  the
    requirement of ten years' continuous lawful  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom was accepted by the Home Office Presenting Officer at the first
    hearing by the decision maker on 1st September 2014.   Paragraphs  (ii)
    to (iv) are not in dispute but that it is paragraph 276B(v) that is the
    issue.  He reminds me for the  benefit  of  the  appeal  of  the  exact
    wording of that paragraph.

         "The requirement to be met by an applicant for indefinite leave  to
         remain on the ground of long residence in the  United  Kingdom  are
         that ...

         (v)  the applicant must not be in the UK in breach  of  immigration
             laws except that any period of overstaying for a period of  28
             days or less will be  disregarded,  (as  will  any  period  of
             overstaying between periods of entry clearance, leave to enter
             or leave to remain  of  up  to  28  days  and  any  period  of
             overstaying pending the determination of an  application  made
             within that 28 day period)."

    He submits that this scenario does not apply to where an application is
    made and that if the ten year residence is accepted  it  actually  does
    not matter if the  Appellant  is  an  overstayer  as  that  is  not  an
    exclusion set out within the Rules.  He takes me  to  the  Home  Office
    guidance for  calculating  indefinite  leave  to  remain  published  in
    January 2014 and to page 25 where  reference  is  made  to  exceptional
    cases where there is a break  in  the  continuous  lawful  period.   He
    submits that exceptional circumstances allow the Secretary of State  to
    disregard applications made more than 28 days after the expiry of leave
    and if I am persuaded that that period has arisen then I  should  treat
    the two letters from the Home Office dated respectively 30th  September
    2013 and 28th October 2013 as  constituting  exceptional  circumstances
    due to the fact that they have misled the Appellant and that he  has  a
    clear legitimate expectation that he has an extant application  and  he
    has relied upon these letters to his detriment which  would,  if  found
    against him, amount to a conspicuous unfairness.  For all these reasons
    he submits that there is no material error of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's determination.  Further if I am against  him  on  that
    premise he asks me to take into account the fact that the applicant has
    been misled by his legal representatives.  He submits that there is  no
    error of law and that all these points were canvassed before the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge who considered them when making his decision.

17. In  response  Miss  Pal  takes  me  to  paragraph  7  of  the  original
    determination of Immigration Judge Talbot and the  fact  that  at  that
    stage the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  upheld  as  being  in
    accordance  with  the  Immigration  Rules.   She  submits  that  it  is
    disingenuous to say that the Immigration Judge was allowing the  matter
    to go back to the Secretary of State.  Further she submits the  letters
    of 30th September 2013 and 28th October 2013 do not give the  Appellant
    any future hope or legitimate expectation that his application would be
    successful bearing in mind that the Secretary  of  State  continued  to
    categorically refute the Appellant's application.  She asked me to find
    a material error of law to set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and to re-make the decision allowing  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal.

The Law

18.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

19. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

20. I have gone to great lengths within this determination to set  out  the
    history of this matter and the very extensive submissions of both legal
    representatives.  At the end of the day the issue is  one  of  law.   I
    agree as a starting point that as a matter of law a removal decision is
    not a variation of leave and that Section  3C  would  consequently  not
    apply to a finding by a Tribunal that removal directions  were  not  in
    accordance with the law.  The basis upon which Section 3C operates  has
    been set out previously within this determination.  Much is made by the
    Appellant's representatives that when First-tier Tribunal Judge  Talbot
    allowed and remitted the Respondent's appeal in August 2013  that  this
    disposed  of  the  appeals  process  irrespective  of  the  Appellant's
    position that the Respondent had an extant appeal.  They argue that the
    Respondent was waiting for a fresh lawful Section 47 compliant decision
    from the Appellant  and  that  the  Respondent's  previous  solicitor's
    withdrawal of his appeal was futile because there was nothing to appeal
    as the First-tier Tribunal had disposed of the appeal  and  the  matter
    was back in the hands of the Appellant to make a fresh lawful decision.
     They argue that the decision of 12th February 2014 that was issued  in
    response to the fresh Tier 4  (General)  Student  application  of  14th
    January was a fresh lawful decision  that  settled  the  issue  in  the
    Appellant's favour and therefore the Appellant meets  the  requirements
    of paragraph 276B(ii)(v).

21. I find that this scenario is not sustainable.  I appreciate that  there
    are letters written by the Home Office dated 30th  September  and  28th
    October 2013 and that it is submitted that the authors of those letters
    got it wrong and they were not aware of the  proper  basis  upon  which
    appeals were treated.  That however does not in my  opinion  amount  to
    exceptional circumstances under the Home Office guidance nor  does  the
    failure of the Appellant's first  solicitors  to  carry  out  a  proper
    appeal process negate the Rules.  Consideration of the whole history of
    this matter leads to the inevitable conclusion interpreting Section  3C
    in particular paragraph 3C(2)(b) that the removal decision is  not  the
    variation of leave  and  therefore  the  Appellant's  appeal  had  been
    finally determined.  In such circumstances the Appellant could not meet
    the requirements of paragraph 276B(v)  and  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    scenario correspondence does not meet the threshold to bring  the  case
    within the exceptional circumstances that could disregard  applications
    made more than 28 days after the expiry of leave.   The  guidance  note
    gives examples, which I acknowledge may be capable  of  being  expanded
    beyond those examples, but in this instant case particularly bearing in
    mind the position of the Secretary of State  has  been  well-documented
    and set out both in the Notice of Refusal and referred to at  paragraph
    7 of Judge Talbot's determination I am not satisfied that the Appellant
    can rely on the Home Office guidance to bring him within  an  exception
    to the Rule.

Notice of Decision

22. In all the circumstances there is consequently a material error of  law
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   I  set  aside  the
    decision and I re-make the decision dismissing the Appellant's  appeal.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

