
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29972/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 June 2014                                |On 3 July 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                        Mr olakunle kayode aragbaiye
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr Lawrence Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


 DETERMINATION AND REASONS FOR FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR/NO MATERIAL ERROR OF
                                     LAW

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a Nigerian national and was born on 10  October  1981.
    On 28 February 2012 he applied for leave to remain  in  the  UK  having
    come here in September 2009 on a visa conferring a leave to enter until
    29 February 2012.  The respondent  refused  his  application  and  made
    directions for his removal under Section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.  On 15 July 2013,  fifteen  days  after  that
    decision, the appellant gave notice of appeal . That appeal  was  heard
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Samimi (the Immigration Judge).

Proceedings before the Upper Tribunal

2.   Following the promulgation of the  Immigration  Judge's  decision,  the
    appellant gave notice of appeal to the Upper Tribunal on 17 March 2014.
     Although  his  application  was  out  of  time  Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Zucker decided to  give  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    grounds  that  there  may  have  been  procedural  unfairness  in   the
    Immigration Judge proceeding to determine the appeal in the appellant's
    absence.  The reason for this  is  that  the  appellant  was  "mentally
    incapable" at the date of the hearing and being unrepresented  at  that
    hearing may have suffered an injustice.  He  wished  to  put  his  case
    forward at the Upper Tribunal.  Judge Zucker considered  that  although
    the Immigration Judge could not be criticised for  circumstances  about
    which she was unaware the grounds were nevertheless arguable.

3.   According to the Tribunal file, the appellant  is  now  represented  by
    Danbar Solicitors.  That firm submitted grounds of appeal on  17  March
    2014.  There is attached to the  grounds  a  letter  from  a  cognitive
    behavioural therapist, Natoy Burnett, stating that  the  appellant  had
    been referred to  her  service.   She  assessed  the  appellant  to  be
    suffering from "anxiety and worry".  She would be contacting Dr Abiola,
    I assume the appellant's doctor, for a "more detailed assessment".  The
    appellant and his solicitors were informed that  permission  to  appeal
    had been granted by a notice dated 1 May 2014  and  on  7  May  2014  a
    notice of hearing was sent to both the  appellant  and  his  solicitors
    informing them that the hearing was to be on Monday 9 June 2014 at 2pm.
     The notice stated that the Upper Tribunal would not consider  evidence
    that was not before the First-tier Tribunal unless the  Upper  Tribunal
    has specifically decided to permit that evidence and that if a party or
    his  representative  did  not  attend  the  hearing  the  Tribunal  may
    determine the appeal in the absence of that party.  On 4 June 2014  the
    appellant's solicitors sent a fax to the Tribunal informing it that  it
    was no longer acting for him.

4.   Neither the appellant nor a legal representative attended the  hearing.
     Having regard to the provisions of Rule 38 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. With the approval  of  the  respondent,  I
    decided to proceed with the hearing in the absence of the appellant.  I
    reserved my decision as to whether or not there was a material error of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion

5.   The grounds of appeal dated 20 February 2014 state that  the  appellant
    had been "experiencing health problems" which impacted on  his  "mental
    capacity". However, the only document that I have been supplied with is
    the letter from Ms Burnett and medical notes which do not in themselves
    give a diagnosis or prognosis  of  his  condition.   The  appellant  is
    described  as  being  "unemployed".   He  apparently  does   not   take
    "psychotropic medication".  Page  2  of  that  document  describes  the
    appellant as suffering from depression and "constant migraines".  He is
    also said to suffer from a low mood or anxiety.  Although he  had  come
    to the UK on a student visa to study business studies he never  started
    that course.  The appellant was not said to be at risk of self-harm and
    it seems that his guardian, the Reverend Isaac, that the appellant "did
    not take 'no' for an answer".  The document was dated 5 September 2013.
     It seems further contact with the medical services took  place  on  20
    September 2013.  The therapist then Susan Keal describes the  appellant
    as not having attended on that date.  A further attempt  at  engagement
    on 25 November 2013 was put off due to the need for the appellant to re-
    book the appointment.  This occurred on  26  November  when  again  the
    appellant did not attend.  On 29 November he again  did  not  make  any
    contact.  On  29  November  2013  a  further  attempt  at  contact  was
    unsuccessful.   On  2  December  2013  the  appellant  was  advised  to
    telephone for an appointment.  On 9  January  2014  the  appellant  was
    assessed by Ms Burnett who recorded the appellant's "worries".  Further
    contact on 14 January 2014 was with a Natasha Alexander,  to  whom  the
    appellant described his worries about finance and his  career.   On  22
    January 2014 he was again seen by Ms Burnett but nothing of note  seems
    to have transpired.  A subsequent entry on 7 February 2014 simply fixed
    an appointment for 19 February when the appellant was one hour late and
    could not be seen due to that.  A subsequent appointment was fixed  for
    19 February 2014 when again contact could not be made.  On 26  February
    2014 the appellant appears to have hung up when he was telephoned by  a
    member of  NHS  staff  but  on  3  March  2014  he  was  given  another
    appointment. However, I have not been  supplied  with  the  details  of
    that.

6.   In addition to the appellant's poor record  of  attendance  at  medical
    appointments, the appellant has failed to attend  the  hearing  of  his
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal.   He  has  not
    given any explanation for his non-attendance at those hearings.   There
    is no clear diagnosis of any form of mental illness that would help  to
    explain his behaviour, either before this or the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    In the absence of any explanation for the appellant's failure to attend
    before the First-tier Tribunal for  the  hearing  of  his  appeal,  the
    Immigration Judge was right to proceed with the hearing on  5  February
    in his absence having regard to Rule 19 of the Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. Rule 19(1) (a) requires  the  Tribunal
    to be satisfied that the appellant or his representative had been given
    notice of the date, time and place of the hearing. In  the  absence  of
    any explanation for the appellant's absence, I am  satisfied  that  the
    requirements of the Rules were met.  No reason for finding any error in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been placed before me.

7.   No  addional  or  alternative  basis  has  been  put  forward  for  the
    appellant to remain in the UK.  According to the medical records  above
    the appellant has not  been  studying  in  the  UK  and  therefore  the
    statement in paragraph 2 of the grounds drafted by  his  solicitors  to
    the effect that he is "very keen to complete his studies in the UK"  is
    plainly wrong.  Such a statement should not have been made.

8.   Having been given an opportunity  to  attend  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    explain his case, the appellant has failed to take that opportunity and
    no basis upon which I find any material error in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal has been put  forward.  Additionally  there  is  no
    substance  to  the  complaint  that  the  respondent's   decision   may
    contravene his rights under the 1951 Convention Relating to the  Status
    of Refugees or any other international convention.

Decision

9.   Having carefully reviewed the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    the background leading up to that hearing I  have  concluded  that  the
    appellant has failed to establish any material error  of  law  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  dismiss  his  appeal  therefore
    stands.  The appellant did not apply for any fee and no  fee  order  or
    anonymity orders were made.     Accordingly all  the  findings  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal stand.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
