
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/29979/2015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 10 January 2017                       |On 11 January 2017        |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between

                        MS ADELOLA OLAWUNMI ADESANYA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel
      (instructed by M A Consultants, London)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS









      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  Designated
           First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald on 7 December  2016  against
           the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lucas  who  had
           dismissed the appeal of the  Appellant  and  her  two  dependant
           children seeking settlement outside  the  Immigration  Rules  on
           Article  8  ECHR  grounds.   The  decision   and   reasons   was
           promulgated on 18 August 2016.


      2.    The Appellant  and  her  dependant  children  are  nationals  of
           Nigeria.  The Appellant had overstayed  in  the  United  Kingdom
           since 2006.   Both children had since been born  in  the  United
           Kingdom.  The eldest child was  accepted  by  the  Secretary  of
           State to have been in the United Kingdom continuously  for  more
           than 7 years but it was considered reasonable for both  children
           to leave the United Kingdom  with  their  mother  who  had  sole
           responsibility for them. The children were  both  young.   Their
           mother would help them to adapt,  there  were  no  obstacles  to
           reintegration, their education could continue and there were  no
           exceptional circumstances.  (There was no issue as  to  parental
           competence.)  The judge agreed and dismissed the appeal on  that
           basis.


      3.    Permission to appeal was granted because it was considered  that
           although it was wrongly claimed in the grounds that  the  eldest
           child was British, he was a "qualifying child" and the judge had
           failed to consider the terms of section 117B of the Nationality,
           Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


      4.    Standard directions were made  by  the  tribunal.    A  rule  24
           notice opposing the appeal was filed by the Respondent.




      Submissions


      5.    Mr Karim for the Appellant relied  on  the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal and grant.  In summary he sought to argue that the  judge
           omitted to consider and apply relevant authority, in  particular
           MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  By [46]  of  that  Court  of
           Appeal decision, the judge had been obliged to give "significant
           weight" to the fact that the eldest child was accepted  to  have
           been 7 years old at the date of the application (in terms of the
           Immigration Rules) and also in relation to section  117B.    The
           judge had not set out "powerful reasons" why  the  eldest  child
           had to go to  Nigeria  nor  had  he  dealt  with  the  issue  of
           reasonableness of that return.  The determination should be  set
           aside and remade.


      6.    Mr Avery for the Respondent relied on the  rule  24  notice  and
           submitted that there had been little evidence in the appeal  and
           that had required no discussion as reflected in the  brevity  of
           the determination.  The judge had  discussed  the  case  in  the
           round and  had  been  right  to  conclude  that  there  were  no
           exceptional circumstances and that it  was  reasonable  for  the
           eldest child to go  to  Nigeria  with  his  mother  and  younger
           sibling.  There was no material error of law.


      7.    In reply, Mr Karim submitted that because the judge had made  no
           clear findings of fact, it was not apparent whether  or  not  he
           had considered that the Appellant had  only  limited  ties  with
           Nigeria, for example, that both her parents were dead.   It  was
           not reasonable for the eldest child to go  to  Nigeria  and  the
           appeal should be allowed.




      No material error of law finding


      8.    In the tribunal's view the grant of permission to appeal was far
           too generous, and was not based on a fair reading of a  succinct
           yet accurate decision.  It was not necessary for  the  judge  to
           have cited any of  the  standard  authorities,  although  it  is
           sometimes sensible to  do  so  in  the  hope  of  reducing  over
           optimistic applications to appeal such as the present one, which
           clog  the  tribunal's  lists  and  waste  public   money.    The
           permission to appeal as lodged was misleading by asserting  that
           the elder child was British  (see  [6ii)  of  the  grounds)  and
           relied on a sterile,  technical  reading  of  a  straightforward
           decision and reasons.


      9.    Contrary to Mr Karim's submissions,  the  judge  had  taken  the
           Appellant's claims at [5] of her two page witness statement into
           account.  The Appellant had stated that her parents had died but
           that she had  a  sister  in  Nigeria  with  whom  she  did  "not
           communicate": see [11]  of  the  determination.   There  was  no
           suggestion of any enmity or hostility, so that was a tie,  above
           and beyond the obvious ones of  nationality  and  a  life  spent
           mainly in Nigeria. The judge recorded at [13]  that  the  appeal
           was in effect "submissions only" on the basis of the Appellant's
           evidence.
      10.   Some of that evidence consisted of statements  of  her  personal
           opinion, with which the judge disagreed as he clearly indicated.
            He noted the submissions of  both  representatives  as  to  the
           reasonableness of return of the elder child, which  was  plainly
           the focus of the tribunal's decision.  The  judge  conducted  an
           examination of the children's best interests at [20] onwards  of
           the determination, and found that they were  to  return  to  the
           country of origin of their mother.  The judge did not  refer  at
           that  point  expressly  to  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
           Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, but  he  had  referred  to  the
           section  at  [14]  when  recording   Mr   Karim's   submissions.
           Reasonableness was thus in his mind.   Possibly  it  would  have
           been advantageous to have cited section 117B, as that would have
           reduced the chance of the empty, technical challenge  which  was
           brought  against  the  determination,  but  the  substance   was
           nevertheless addressed.


      11.   As  indicated  above,  "reasonableness",  derived  from  section
           117B(6), part of the  statutory  public  interest  consideration
           applicable to the tribunal's consideration of  Article  8  ECHR.
           The subsection is in the following terms:


            "In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
           public interest does not require the person's removal where -


            (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
           qualifying child (defined in section 117D as a person under  the
           age of 18 and who is (a) a British Citizen or (b) has  lived  in
           the United Kingdom for a continuous period  of  seven  years  or
           more), and


            (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
           United Kingdom.


      12.   Again contrary to Mr Karim's submissions, on a fair  reading  of
           the decision and reasons, the judge examined  reasonableness  as
           required by section 117B in the context of the  children's  best
           interests, including their current and future education and  the
           need to keep the family unit intact under  their  mother.   That
           examination reflected and applied  relevant  authority  such  as
           Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
           appeals) [2013] UKUT  00197  (IAC).    The  judge  plainly  gave
           significant weight to the fact of the elder child's  seven  year
           presence but the powerful  reasons  to  the  contrary  were  his
           mother's immigration history and the public interest in removing
           her: see [74] of MA (above).  There was no suggestion  that  the
           judge  was  wrong  to  find  that  there  were  no   exceptional
           circumstances applicable to the children.  He found  that  their
           removal would not be a punishment as they could adapt.


      13.   This appeal had no real merit and the Appellant was a long  term
           overstayer as she was well aware.  She had chosen to ignore past
           refusal decisions in 2013 and in 2015.  Nothing of substance had
           changed.  The failure of the Home Office to remove her  and  her
           children earlier created no rights for her or for them  and  her
           failure to respect the law is her responsibility.


      14.   The tribunal finds that this appeal has no  substance  and  that
           there was no material error of law in the decision challenged.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.


      Signed                                  Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




