
[pic]
IAC-AH-     -V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29164/2014
                                                               IA/29165/2014
                                                               IA/29166/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 November 2015                   |On 23 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WIKELEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    ATBS
                                    TBTC
                                     NC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Acharya, Acharyas, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

1.   This appeal  is  subject  to  an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13(1)(b) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
    tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014   (SI
    2014/2604). Neither party invited us to rescind the order. We  continue
    it pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

Introduction

2.   In this appeal, the Secretary of State appeals against  a  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Khawar)  allowing  the  appeal  of  the
    appellant ATBS against a decision taken on 27 June  2014  refusing  her
    application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom under  Art  8  of
    the ECHR. At the same time Judge Khawar allowed the parallel appeals by
    ATBS's husband (TBTC) and their two  year  old  daughter  (NC)  against
    decisions by the Secretary of State of the same date and  to  the  same
    effect. For convenience, we refer  to  the  parties  as  they  appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background Facts

3.   The appellant, a citizen of Zimbabwe, first came to the United  Kingdom
    at the age of 15 in 1999  as  a  visitor.  Similarly,  the  appellant's
    husband first came to the United Kingdom at the age of 16 in 2001. They
    were married here in 2010. They both have family in the United Kingdom,
    on whom they claimed to be both emotionally and financially  dependant.
    Their full immigration history is set out in the First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision (at [6]-[13]).

4.   The appellant and her husband each last had legitimate leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom until November 2011 and August 2011  respectively
    (although the Judge recognised that they would not have been  aware  of
    the change in their status until the Secretary of State's  decision  of
    10 September 2012, refusing them both further leave to remain).

5.   On 25 September 2013 the appellant and her husband lodged  applications
    for leave to remain  on  Art  8  grounds.  On  29  October  2013  those
    applications were refused by the Secretary of State with  no  right  of
    appeal. On 10 April 2014 the appellant  was  served  with  a  One  Stop
    Notice under section 120 of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002. Following further representations, the Secretary of State  issued
    the current refusal notice dated 27 June 2014, which was the subject of
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

6.   The appellant and her husband both appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    (and on behalf of their daughter). Following a hearing at Hatton  Cross
    on 15 April 2015, and in a determination promulgated on  21  May  2015,
    Judge Khawar allowed the appeals of all three appellants under Art 8 of
    the ECHR.

7.   There was no dispute that the appellants did not meet the criteria  for
    leave  to  remain  under  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules (at [21]). The First-tier  Tribunal  then  considered
    the child's best interests under section 55 of the Borders  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 (at [22]-[24]), before  turning  to  the  main
    part of its discussion of the issues under the  heading  "Consideration
    of the Appellants' appeals under Article 8 of the ECHR outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules" (at [25]-[39]).

8.   Judge Khawar found that the  family  relationships  in  this  case  "go
    beyond normal emotional ties as between  adult  siblings  and/or  adult
    children and in particular the  Appellant's  mother.  In  addition  the
    latter has a strong bond with her granddaughter, the  third  Appellant"
    (at [28]). He further concluded that removal was not proportionate  and
    so the appellants' appeals succeeded under Art 8 (at [32] and [38]).

The Appeal to the Upper-Tribunal

9.   The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on two grounds. The first ground  went  to  jurisdiction,  the
    Respondent arguing that the husband and child  had  never  been  issued
    with immigration decisions carrying an in country right of appeal.  The
    second  ground  of  appeal   was   that   the   First-tier   Tribunal's
    proportionality assessment was materially flawed. For example,  it  was
    argued that the  Judge  had  failed  to  have  regard  to  the  correct
    threshold as set out in R (on the application of Nagre) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).

10.  Judge Page of the First-tier Tribunal granted the  Secretary  of  State
    permission to appeal on 28 July 2015. He observed that the first ground
    may not have been material, as if the appellant did indeed succeed with
    her appeal then the same result would have followed for  all  practical
    purposes for her two dependants. The second ground was  "stronger",  as
    the decision to allow the appeal on Art 8  grounds  outside  the  Rules
    "appears to be a generous one to the appellants, so it is arguable that
    the proportionality assessment is flawed through inadequate reasoning."
    However, permission to appeal was granted on both grounds.

Summary of the submissions

11.  Mr Tufan, for the Secretary of State,  started  by  wisely  withdrawing
    the first ground of appeal. We need say no more about that.

12.  Mr Tufan accordingly concentrated on the second ground  of  appeal.  As
    he correctly observed, the principle set out  in  Nagre  has  now  been
    confirmed by the Court of Appeal in Singh v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 74. Mr Tufan's submission, however, was
    that there was a structural error in the First-tier Tribunal's decision
    in that it had  failed  to  consider  whether  there  were  "compelling
    circumstances" such as to justify consideration of Art  8  outside  the
    Rules. Rather, the Judge  had  gone  directly  into  a  proportionality
    assessment as set out in R (on the application of Razgar)  v  Secretary
    of State for the  Home  Department   [2004]  UKHL  27,  without  proper
    consideration of the threshold requirement as laid down  by  Nagre  and
    now Singh. Further, even if the Judge had been right to consider Art  8
    outside the Rules, Mr Tufan argued that he had  misapplied  Kugathas  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ  31  in  his
    consideration of the strength of the family ties.

13.  Mr Acharya, for the appellants, whilst acknowledging  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had  not  in  as  many  words  expressly  referenced  the
    "compelling circumstances" test,  argued  that  it  could  be  properly
    inferred that Judge Khawar had applied the correct test.   Moreover  he
    submitted the proportionality assessment had been properly carried  out
    and reasoned through by the Judge. Furthermore, the First-tier Tribunal
    had been entitled to find that the dependency test for family life  was
    satisfied. In particular, the facts of the present case were a long way
    removed from those in Kugathas and the extensive  evidence  adduced  by
    the appellants had not been challenged by the  Respondent's  Presenting
    Officer at the original hearing.

Discussion

14.  The first point to address is  whether,  as  Mr  Tufan  submitted,  the
    First-tier Tribunal had failed to apply the two-stage approach.  It  is
    well established that the Secretary of State's intention  is  that  the
    Immigration Rules  should  in  the  generality  of  cases  satisfy  the
    requirements of Art 8 of the ECHR. It is accepted that may  not  always
    be the case.  In Nagre Sales  J  (as  he  then  was)  held  as  follows
    (emphasis added):
         "29. Nonetheless, the new rules do provide better explicit coverage
         of the factors identified in case-law as relevant  to  analysis  of
         claims under Article 8 than was formerly the position, so  in  many
         cases the main points for consideration in relation  to  Article  8
         will be addressed by decision-makers applying the new rules. It  is
         only if, after doing that, there  remains  an  arguable  case  that
         there may be good grounds for granting leave to remain outside  the
         Rules by reference to Article 8  that  it  will  be  necessary  for
         Article  8  purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are
         compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the  new
         rules to require the grant of such leave."

15.  In doing so, Sales  J  approved  the  approach  adopted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Izuazu (Article 8  -  new  Rules)  [2013]  UKUT  45  (IAC),
    especially at [40]-[43], subject  only  to  the  following  observation
    (Nagre, at [30]):
         "... The only slight modification I would make, for the purposes of
         clarity, is to say that if, after the process of applying  the  new
         rules and finding that the claim for leave  to  remain  under  them
         fails, the relevant official or  tribunal  judge  considers  it  is
         clear that the consideration under the Rules  has  fully  addressed
         any family life or private life issues arising under Article 8,  it
         would be sufficient simply to say that; they would not have  to  go
         on, in addition, to consider the case separately from the Rules. If
         there is no arguable case  that  there  may  be  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside the Rules by reference to  Article
         8,  there  would  be  no  point  in   introducing   full   separate
         consideration of Article 8 again after having reached a decision on
         application of the Rules."

16.  Subsequently Mr Michael Fordham QC, sitting  as  a  Deputy  high  Court
    Judge in R (on the application of Ganesabalan) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin), sought to  summarise  the
    current state of the law as follows:
         "9.  For present purposes and as relevant to the present  case  the
             correct position in law, in my judgment, is as follows.  Where
             a person seeks leave to remain, relying  on  private  life  or
             family life or both, and relying on Article 8, and  where  the
             claim fails at the first stage by reference to the  applicable
             Immigration Rules (Appendix FM and Rule 276ADE):
             (1)  There is always a "second stage" in which  the  Secretary
             of State must consider the exercise of discretion outside  the
             Rules and must be in a position to demonstrate  that  she  has
             done so.
             (2)  The extent of that consideration and the  extent  of  the
             reasoning  called  for  will  depend   on   the   nature   and
             circumstances of the individual case.
             (3)  In a case in which  the  consideration  or  reasoning  is
             legally inadequate, and leaving aside cases in which there  is
             a right of appeal to a tribunal, it is open to  the  Secretary
             of State to resist the grant of judicial review if she is able
             to demonstrate that the decision would  inevitably  have  been
             the same."

17.  In reviewing these authorities in Singh, Underhill LJ, giving the  lead
    judgment, held as follows:
         "66. Point (3) in Mr Fordham's  summary  broadly  reflects  earlier
             authorities, though there is a fuller and  more  authoritative
             exposition in the judgment of Beatson LJ  in  Haleemudeen,  at
             paras. 59-61. I would not disagree with either of  points  (1)
             and (2); but I am conscious of how practitioners in this field
             can sometimes seek to exploit even the faintest ambiguity, and
             I would accordingly wish to make three  comments  about  point
             (1):
             (1)  I should emphasise - though it is in truth entirely clear
             from the full judgment -  that  Mr  Fordham's  statement  that
             "there is always a second stage" does not in any  way  qualify
             what Sales J says at para. 30 of his judgment in Nagre.  Sales
             J's point is that the second  stage  can,  in  an  appropriate
             case, be satisfied by the decision-maker concluding  that  any
             family life or private life issues raised by  the  claim  have
             already been addressed at the first  stage  -  in  which  case
             obviously there is no need to go  through  it  all  again.  Mr
             Fordham's point is that that is a  conclusion  which  must  be
             reached as a matter of conscious decision in  any  given  case
             and cannot simply be assumed. I agree with both points.
             (2)  The statement that  the  decision-maker  "must  be  in  a
             position  to  demonstrate"  that  he  or  she  has  given  the
             necessary consideration is simply a reflection of the ordinary
             obligation to record a material  decision.  If  the  decision-
             maker's view is  straightforwardly  that  all  the  article  8
             issues raised have been addressed  in  determining  the  claim
             under the Rules, all that is necessary is, as Sales J says, to
             say so.
             (3)  It may not be entirely apt to describe a decision  as  to
             whether article 8 requires that an applicant  be  given  leave
             outside the Rules as an "exercise of discretion".
         67.  In short, neither MM (Lebanon) nor Ganesabalan undermines the
             point made by Sales J in para. 30 of his  judgment  in  Nagre,
             which in  my  view,  together  with  his  endorsement  of  the
             approach in Izuazu, remains good law."

18.  Returning to the present appeal, the question for us is  whether  Judge
    Khawar directed himself properly in accordance with these  authorities.
    It is true there is no specific reference to either Nagre or  Singh  in
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision. However, Mr Tufan rightly  did  not
    suggest that was fatal; what matters  is  whether  the  Judge  properly
    applied the relevant legal principles. Mr Tufan's  case,  however,  was
    that the Tribunal's "structural error" was evidenced both by the use of
    the heading before paragraph [25] (see [7]  above)  and  the  immediate
    reference to Razgar.

19.  We are not persuaded by this line of argument. It is important to  read
    the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  as  a  whole  and  in  its  proper
    context. The Secretary of State's refusal letter had set out in  detail
    why the applications did not meet the criteria specified in Appendix FM
    and paragraph 276ADE. It then went on to consider  whether  there  were
    any exceptional circumstances which would warrant a grant of  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom (paragraphs 48-60). Judge Khawar expressly
    acknowledged that approach in the Tribunal's decision (at [2]). In  our
    view the Judge did not fall into the  trap  of  considering  Art  8  as
    simply an alterative route without more ado. Rather, his  findings  and
    reasoning at [25]-[30] demonstrate that he asked himself whether  there
    were  exceptional   or   compelling   circumstances   which   justified
    consideration of Art 8 outside the Rules. The Judge's analysis  of  the
    five-stage Razgar assessment does not  take  place  until  the  passage
    starting at [31]. We accept this is not the most polished of decisions,
    but we are nonetheless satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  did  not
    err in law in the way that the Secretary of State seeks to persuade us.

20.  Mr Tufan further argued that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  misapplied
    Kugathas. Sedley LJ, giving the leading judgment in  that  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal, held as follows:
         "19. ... neither blood ties nor  the  concern  and  affection  that
             ordinarily go with them are, by themselves or together, in  my
             judgment enough to constitute family life.  Most  of  us  have
             close relations of whom we are  extremely  fond  and  whom  we
             visit, or who visit us, from time to  time;  but  none  of  us
             would say on those grounds alone that we share a family  life
             with them in any sense capable of coming  within  the  meaning
             and purpose of Article 8."

21.  Arden LJ held to similar effect:
         "25. Because there is no presumption of family life, in my judgment
             a family life is not established between an adult  child  and
             his surviving parent or other siblings unless  something  more
             exists than normal emotional ties:  see  S  v  United  Kingdom
             (1984) 40 DR 196  and  Abdulaziz,  Cabales  and  Balkandali  v
             United Kingdom [1985] 7 EHRR 471. Such ties might exist if the
             appellant were dependent on his family or vice versa..."

22.  The Judge was well aware of the proper  legal  test  as  laid  down  by
    Kugathas, and directed  himself  correctly  in  accordance  with  those
    principles (see [28]). The actual assessment as to whether family  life
    has been established as between the adults concerned is then ultimately
    an issue of fact. Judge Khawar had the advantage of hearing evidence in
    person from the appellant's mother and from her husband's two  siblings
    (see at [5]). As Mr Acharya noted, the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    at the hearing did not challenge their evidence as to the  strength  of
    the respective relationships (see at [16]-[18] and [30]). The weight to
    be given to that evidence was  then  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine. Judge Khawar has explained briefly, but adequately,  why  he
    concluded that the mutual dependency satisfied the  Kugathas  test  (at
    [26]-[30]). We also agree with Mr Acharya that the circumstances of the
    present case are a long way removed from the factual matrix in Kugathas
    itself.

23.  We have considered the various other points made by Mr Tufan  and  also
    contained in the grounds of appeal, but are not satisfied that  any  of
    them disclose an error of law on the part of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Although the Tribunal did not refer in terms to  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as inserted by section 19
    of the Immigration Act 2014) it is clear from the decision  that  Judge
    Khawar had those considerations in mind. Thus he was entitled  to  have
    regard  to  the  appellants'  fluency  in  English  and  their  earning
    potential (see section 117B(2) and (3)).  Such  consideration  did  not
    involve breach of the  principle  that  an  appellant  can  "obtain  no
    positive right to a grant of leave to remain from either s117B  (2)  or
    (3), whatever the degree of his fluency in English, or the strength  of
    his financial resources" (see AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC)
    at [18]).

24.  Mr Tufan also referred  to  what  he  characterised  as  the  "curious"
    paragraph [37] of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  where  Judge
    Khawar found the "most significant aspect" of the  case  favouring  the
    appellants' argument was that their family life could not be reasonably
    enjoyed through modern means of communication such as  e.g.  Skype.  Mr
    Tufan prayed in aid the decision of  the  Strasbourg  court  in  Joseph
    Grant v United Kingdom 10606/07 [2009] ECHR 26, in which the applicant,
    who had children in the United Kingdom, had been  deported  to  Jamaica
    following a term of imprisonment. The Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal
    had concluded that although there would be a breach of his family  life
    if deported to Jamaica, this was not disproportionate in terms of being
    conducive to the public good. A  subsequent  application  for  judicial
    review was unsuccessful. The European Court of Human Rights ruled  that
    there had been no breach of Art 8. In doing so, the Court observed that
    "Contact by telephone  and  e-mail  could  easily  be  maintained  from
    Jamaica, and there would be nothing to prevent Naomi, or indeed any  of
    the applicant's children or  relatives  in  the  United  Kingdom,  from
    travelling to Jamaica to visit him" (at [38]).  We  do  not  find  this
    assists Mr Tufan. The factual circumstances of the two cases  are  very
    different in terms of the proportionality assessment.  In  the  present
    case the Tribunal found as a fact, given the close nature of the family
    ties, that modern channels of  internet-based  communication  were  not
    sufficient. Moreover Grant does not purport to lay down  any  principle
    of law on this point.

25.  In reaching our decision we have  also  borne  in  mind  the  following
    helpful observations of the Upper Tribunal in AM (S  117B)  Malawi  (at
    [8]):
         "8.  ... It is not necessary for the FtT to set out in full in each
             of its decisions each of  the  statutory  provisions  that  it
             seeks to apply to the evidence placed before it in the  course
             of an appeal. Still less is it necessary to make reference  to
             statutory  provisions  that  have  no  application   to   that
             evidence. What is required of the FtT is no more, and no less,
             than that its decisions should demonstrate that  the  relevant
             statutory provisions have been taken into  account,  and  that
             they have been applied to the facts of the particular  appeal;
             AJ (India) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1191  at  [43].  That  is  a
             requirement of substance, rather than of  form,  and  in  this
             respect we would respectfully reiterate the caution  expressed
             by Dyson LJ in Baker v SSCLG [2008] EWCA Civ 141 at [37];
                  "The question in every case is whether the decision  maker
                  has in substance had due regard to the relevant  statutory
                  need. Just as  the  use  of  a  mantra  referring  to  the
                  statutory provision does not of itself show that the  duty
                  has been performed, so too a failure to refer expressly to
                  the statute does not of itself show that the duty has  not
                  been performed.""

26.  In conclusion, we can understand why Judge Page gave the  Secretary  of
    State permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, as on the face of  it
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision does appear to be somewhat  generous
    to the appellants. However, what may seem to be a  generous  conclusion
    does not of itself amount to an error of law. On closer scrutiny we are
    not satisfied that any material error of law is disclosed.

Conclusion

27.  In our judgement, and notwithstanding the terms in which permission  to
    appeal was granted, there is no merit in the grounds advanced.  It  was
    open to the Judge to reach the conclusion that he did, for the  reasons
    that  he  gave.  Those  reasons  were  adequate,  albeit  not  entirely
    polished, and disclosed that the relevant statutory provisions had been
    properly considered and applied. The grounds reveal no  material  error
    of law that requires the decision promulgated on 21 May 2015 to be  set
    aside and remade. It is accordingly  confirmed  and  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal dismissed.

Decision

28.  The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law and we order that it shall stand

29.  The anonymity order made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  therefore  also
    continues (see paragraph [1] above).


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                   N Wikeley
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                      Date: 16 November 2015

