




IAC-BFD- MD

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29362/2014
                                                               IA/29365/2014
                                                               IA/29366/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th September 2015                |On 9th October 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               sanath madagodage wanigarathna - 1st Appellant
      manel ross jayamale jayawardana kotte arachchige - 2nd Appellant
           tharushi geethma madagodage wanigarathna - 3rd Apellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clark, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Fisher, of Counsel instructed by VMD Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeals of
    Mr Wanigarathna, his dependant wife Mrs Arachchige  and  daughter  Miss
    Wanigarathna.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal allowed their appeals against the  Respondent's
    decision of 22nd July 2014, refusing their applications  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of their private/family  life
    under Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules.

 3. For the purposes of this decision I shall refer  to  the  Secretary  of
    State as "the Respondent" and to Mr Wanigarathna, his wife and daughter
    respectively as "the first, second and third Appellants".

 4. The Appellants are citizens of Sri  Lanka  born  respectively  on  13th
    September 1969, 19th July 1970 and 22nd July 1997. The first  Appellant
    entered the United Kingdom with valid entry clearance as a  student  on
    31st March 2010. His wife and daughter entered  as  his  dependants  on
    13th  May  2010.  Leave  was  subsequently  extended  for   all   three
    Appellants, to expire on  31st  May  2014.  When  the  third  Appellant
    entered the UK she was aged 12 years  and  therefore  was  enrolled  in
    secondary school here.  She  had  previously  been  educated  in  Italy
    attending an English speaking school there.

 5. Before expiry of their extant leave, the Appellants applied for further
    leave to remain on  the  basis  that  the  third  Appellant  wished  to
    complete her secondary education in the UK. It  was  claimed  that  her
    education would conclude with A Level exams  in  June  2016.  It  would
    appear therefore that she embarked on her A Level at a  time  when  any
    leave was precarious.

 6. The Respondent refused all three applications on the grounds that  none
    of the Appellants could meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.
    The  Respondent  also  considered  that  there  were   no   exceptional
    circumstances on which to grant the first Appellant leave  outside  the
    Rules. Likewise the second Appellant could not meet the requirements of
    paragraph EX1;  nor  could  she  meet  the  residence  requirements  of
    paragraph 276 ADE.

 7. The third Appellant's application for leave to remain  in  the  UK  had
    always been on the basis that she was the dependent child of  a  parent
    with limited leave to remain. Since her parents had  not  been  granted
    further leave to remain, she too failed to meet the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules. Further as she was under the age of 18 years at that
    time, and had not lived here  for  over  seven  years,  the  Respondent
    considered it was not unreasonable to expect that  her  best  interests
    lay in leaving the United Kingdom together with her parents as part  of
    the family unit.

 8. The appeals against the Respondent's decision were heard in the FtT  on
    16th March 2015 by Judge S Taylor. The  judge  heard  evidence  of  the
    history of the first Appellant and his  wife;  it  is  correct  to  say
    however that most of the evidence put forward revolved around the third
    Appellant's wish to complete her secondary education in the UK.

 9. The judge recorded that  it  was  accepted  by  the  first  and  second
    Appellants that they could not succeed under the Immigration Rules.  He
    found there was nothing exceptional in their circumstances, such as  to
    engage Article 8. He said at [18],

         "... I am satisfied that the first and second appellants  have  not
         established a private life in the UK which would engage  Article  8
         ECHR. The first and second appellants have  failed  to  demonstrate
         that they have established a family and private life in the  UK  of
         the magnitude which would engage Article 8 ECHR  under  the  Razgar
         tests. Any family life is within the family unit and they would  be
         removed together..."

10. He went on then to say, however at [19],

         "The only arguable case for granting leave  outside  of  the  Rules
         relates to the third appellant, who at the age of seventeen has had
         her entire education in Europe and in English..."

    He then allowed the appeals of all three Appellants under Article 8.

11. The Respondent sought permission  to  appeal  those  decisions  on  the
    grounds that the Judge's approach to  Article  8  was  flawed;  he  had
    failed to adequately recognise the requirements of Appendix FM  to  276
    ADE of the Immigration Rules, had failed to take into account the Court
    of Appeal guidance in EV  (Philippines)[2104]  EWCA  civ  874  and  had
    misapplied the case law in CDS Brazil 2010 UKUT 305

12. The grant of permission neatly sets out the issues before me.

         "The appellants are  citizens  of  Sri  Lanka  whose  appeals  were
         allowed by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor  in  a  decision
         promulgated on 30  March  2015.  The  judge  noted  that  the  only
         arguable case for granting leave outside the Rules related  to  the
         third appellant who at the age of 17 had had her  entire  education
         in Europe and in  English.  In  all  the  circumstances  the  judge
         allowed the appeal in respect of the first and second appellants as
         well as the third appellant.

         The grant of application point (sic) out various issues  which  the
         judge may not have considered.

         The grant of application point (sic) material  differences  in  the
         facts of CDS Brazil and the present case and also  that  the  judge
         failed to acknowledge what was said in Patel by the Supreme  Court.
         Furthermore, the judge did not take into account EV  and  while  he
         did refer to Section 117B of the  2002  Act  did  not  sufficiently
         emphasise the public interest.

         It is fair to say that the points raised in  the  grounds  are  not
         points which the judge  took  into  account  in  carrying  out  the
         necessary balancing exercise under Article 8, and not to do so  was
         an arguable error in law."

Appeal before the UT

13. The appeals  came  before  me  on  9th  September  2015  when  I  heard
    submissions on the error  of  law/remaking  the  decision.  Mr  Clark's
    submissions kept to the lines of the  grounds  seeking  permission.  He
    submitted that there were two distinct errors in the decision.

       . The FtT has misapplied CDS Brazil, because the  appellant  in  that
         case had been admitted to the UK specifically for the  purposes  of
         education. Therefore different rules applied for consideration.  He
         accepted that CDS resolved that anyone who had entered the  UK  and
         embarked upon a course of study, having paid  for  that  course  of
         study, may have built up a private life within Article  8.  In  the
         third appellant's case she  had  entered  as  a  dependant  of  her
         parent. Whilst it was accepted that she had been properly  enrolled
         in secondary education because her parents  had  leave  to  remain,
         what distinguished her case from CDS is the relevant fact that  she
         is not paying for her education. She is being  educated  at  public
         expense at a time when her parents leave was precarious.  Her  case
         therefore had to be looked at in the context of Patel and Others.

       . The Judge had erred in his Article 8 approach, because he  had  not
         justified departing from the  Immigration  Rules.  He  should  have
         looked at, and been guided by, EV (Philippines) and Patel  and  Ors
         [2013]UKSC 72

14. Ms Fisher in reply handed in a skeleton argument containing a  Rule  24
    response. She accepted that none  of  the  Appellants  could  meet  the
    Immigration Rules. The thrust of her argument was that  the  Judge  had
    correctly stepped outside the Immigration Rules and found, in  essence,
    that the disruption to the third Appellant's education, would render it
    unreasonable or unjustifiably harsh for her to have to  return  to  Sri
    Lanka before completing her secondary education. She could  not  remain
    here without her parents as they are a family  unit.  The  grounds  put
    forward by the Respondent amounted to little more than  a  disagreement
    with the Judge's findings.

15. She submitted further that the claim that the Judge had misapplied  CDS
    Brazil misconstrues the point being made. The third Appellant's parents
    are working and whilst it is accepted that the third Appellant did  not
    enter the UK as a student, nevertheless because her parents are working
    they are not a burden on the State.

16. So far as the failure to take into account EV Philippines is concerned,
    she countered this by saying that the Secretary of State  had  made  no
    reference Section 55 Borders Act to JO and Others[2014] UKUT  00517  in
    her consideration. She submitted there was no failure on  the  part  of
    the  FtT to take into account the public interest consideration set out
    in 117B of the 2002 Act, because on the contrary, mention was  made  of
    it at [20].

My Consideration and Findings

17. I am satisfied that the FtT Judge plainly erred in law in his decision.
    What the Judge did, it seems to me, was to apply what he considered  to
    be  a  pragmatic  and  practical  solution  to  the  third  Appellant's
    situation, rather than following a structured  legal  approach  to  the
    evidence.

18. The Judge's starting point in his consideration is found at [18], where
    after carefully outlining the evidence before him he said,

         "I am satisfied that the  first  and  second  appellants  have  not
         established a private life in the UK which would engage  Article  8
         ECHR. The first and second appellants have  failed  to  demonstrate
         that they have established a family and private life in the  UK  of
         the magnitude which would engage Article 8 ECHR, under  the  Razgar
         tests. Any family life is within the family unit and they would  be
         removed together."

19. The Judge then said at [19],

         "The only arguable  case  for  granting  leave  outside  the  Rules
         relates to the third appellant, who at the age of seventeen has had
         her entire education in Europe and in English."

    Nowhere do I see any reference to the guidance contained in the line of
    cases dealing with these points, starting with  Patel  and  Others,  EV
    (Philippines) and Others.  Whilst the Judge cannot  be  criticised  for
    not refering to it (since it was yet to be published) those  principles
    were set out and confirmed in the UT decision  of  AM  (Malawi)  [2015]
    UKUT 260.  The guidance contained in  those  cases  tell  us  that  the
    question to be posed in cases such as these ones,  is  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect a child to follow its parents to their country  of
    origin? In this case it is correct to  say  that  the  third  Appellant
    although a minor at the date of decision was actually on the  brink  of
    adulthood. (Indeed by the time of the hearing before me she had reached
    the age of 18 years).  Of course this means that the best interests  of
    the child will form part of the  equation  in  answering  the  question
    posed but I am satisfied from a reading of  the  Judge's  decision,  he
    failed to apply the appropriate test.   Instead  of  making  a  rounded
    assessment as to the reasonableness of the  third  Appellant  following
    her parents to  Sri  Lanka,  he  has  treated  any  disruption  to  her
    education as a paramount concern which trumps all others.

20. For those reasons I find that the decision of the  FtT  contains  error
    requiring it to be set aside.

Remaking the Decision

21. Whilst Mr Clark submitted that the decision could simply be  remade  on
    the evidence already available, it was Ms Fisher's request that  should
    I find an error of law, then I should remit matters to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a re-hearing. She said this was so further evidence  could
    be called. When I asked her to detail the further evidence however, she
    was unable to indicate, with clarity what there was that was not before
    the First-tier Tribunal. There was no suggestion that the circumstances
    in these appeals had changed in substance, since they were  only  heard
    March 2015. Accordingly I decided there was no reason why I should  not
    proceed to remake the decision myself on the available evidence.

22. I start by considering the evidence concerning  the  first  and  second
    Appellants. The FtT made a clear reasoned  finding  that  for  them  to
    return to Sri Lanka would cause any hardship, such as  those  envisaged
    by Article 8. It noted that  the  first  Appellant  had  entered  as  a
    student; he could not progress as he would wish but  that  he  was  now
    employed as a chef. The FtT found that being a chef is a  transferrable
    skill and noted that nothing was put forward to show why he  would  not
    be able to find employment on return to his  own  country.  I  find  no
    reason to disturb those findings.

23. The second Appellant works in a family business.  The only other family
    connection in the UK is  with  the  second  Appellant's  adult  sister.
    Likewise the FtT noted that nothing was submitted to show that a return
    to Sri Lanka for her would cause hardship. I see no reason  to  disturb
    those findings. They were not challenged in any event.

24. This leave the sole issue of the third  Appellant's  wish  to  continue
    being educated in the UK. The question to be posed  is  whether  it  is
    reasonable to expect her to follow her parents to Sri Lanka, bearing in
    mind that neither of her parents, nor she, could  have  entertained  an
    expectation that any leave in the UK would be other than temporary  and
    therefore precarious.

25. The third Appellant at the date of the FtT hearing was 17 years of age;
    a native of Sri Lanka. It is undoubtedly  correct  to  say  that  as  a
    minor, her best interests must lie in being with both her parents.  She
    has been in this country for a little over five years. She  speaks  the
    Sinhalese language. Her evidence  that  she  was  not  fluent  in  that
    language appears not to have been accepted by the FtT because  at  [19]
    it is noted that she speaks reasonable conversational Sinhalese.

26.  In EV (Philippines)  Lord Justice Lewison said this,

          1. "In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis  that  the
             facts are as they are in the real world. If one parent has  no
             right to remain, but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against  which  the  assessment  is  conducted.  If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
             ultimate question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?

          1. On the facts of  ZH  it  was  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
             children to follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because
             the family would  be  separated  and  the  children  would  be
             deprived of the right to grow up in the country of which  they
             were citizens.

          1. That is a long way from the facts of our  case.  In  our  case
             none of the family is a British citizen. None has the right to
             remain in this country. If the mother is removed,  the  father
             has no  independent  right  to  remain.  If  the  parents  are
             removed, then it is entirely reasonable to expect the children
             to go  with  them.  As  the  immigration  judge  found  it  is
             obviously  in  their  best  interests  to  remain  with  their
             parents. Although it is, of course a question of fact for  the
             tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of being educated
             at public expense in the UK can outweigh the  benefit  to  the
             children of remaining with their parents. Just  as  we  cannot
             provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate
             the world."

27. Whilst I accept that the FtT Judge  considered  the  third  Appellant's
    best interests, so far as I can see, he  has  done  so  without  proper
    consideration and reference to the public interest which  must  play  a
    part in the question of reasonableness. Further he has  considered  the
    third Appellant in isolation as it were from her parents.

28. The Judge says this at [19],

         "...Although the third appellant speaks  reasonable  conversational
         Sinhalese, I accept her evidence that a return to Sri  Lanka  would
         severely disrupt her education, at which she  has  shown  excellent
         attainment , and that the opportunities available  to  her  may  be
         lost as a result of  not  being  able  to  complete  her  secondary
         education in the UK..."

    Even if her best interest were to remain here, those interests,  albeit
    a  primary  consideration,  are  not  determinative  and  have  to   be
    considered in the light of the countervailing factors such as the  fact
    that both hers  and  her  parents  leave  to  remain  has  always  been
    temporary and that there could never  be  any  expectation  entertained
    that she or they would be able to remain in  the  UK  once  any  extant
    leave had expired. It was open to the  third  Appellant  to  apply  for
    leave to enter or remain in  the  UK  as  a  student  (paying  for  her
    education) should she wish to continue it here.  There  was  no  reason
    shown why her parents could  not  find  employment  in  Sri  Lanka  and
    support her from there.

29.  For  those  reasons,  and  in  the  light  of  the  guidance   in   EV
    (Philippines), I do not consider  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  to
    expect the third Appellant to leave the United Kingdom and return  with
    her parents to Sri Lanka. Having so concluded, there is nothing further
    to consider by way of  a  wider  Article  8  assessment  and  in  these
    circumstances I  find  no  evidence  of  any  compelling  circumstances
    justifying a grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules. I  therefore
    allow the appeal of the Secretary of State and dismiss the  appeals  of
    all three Appellants against the Secretary of State's decision of  22nd
    July 2014 refusing them leave to remain.

Decision

30. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an error
    on a point of law which requires it to be set aside. The  Secretary  of
    State's appeal is accordingly allowed and  I  remake  the  decision  by
    dismissing the original appeals of all three Appellants.

No anonymity direction is made


Signature     Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


Fee Award

As I have allowed the Secretary of State's appeal, it  follows  that  I  set
aside the fee award granted to the Appellant.


Signature     Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
