

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: ia/29218/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined at Field House without a hearing   |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 May 2013                                |On 7 June 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                              MANZRUA HUJANOVA
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the determination of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Blair  promulgated  on  25  February  2013
    dismissing her appeal against the decision of the respondent made on  7
    December 2012  to  refuse  to  issue  her  with  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of her right of residence as the spouse of an EEA national
    exercising treaty rights here.

 2. The respondent refused the application on the basis that  she  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant's husband was, as claimed, self  employed.
    The appellant  appealed  against  that  decision,  adducing  additional
    material and after an oral hearing on  15  February  2013,  the  judge,
    although satisfied [9] that since August 2011 the husband had been  and
    continued to be self-employed, dismissed the appeal stating:

           10.  The problem here is that the sponsor EEA national  has  not
           been in this country for a period of  5  years.  That  is  quite
           clear from his witness statement. This  was  no  raised  by  the
           respondent in the RFRL but having noted it, I cannot ignore  it.
           It is a fundamental point going to his rights and the rights  of
           the appellant which derive from  him.  The  appellant  can  only
           succeed as a family member of a qualifying EEA national. I refer
           to regulation & as read with regulation 15 (1) (a), (b)

 3. The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal against  this
    decision on the basis that the judge  had  erred  in  law  by  applying
    regulation 15 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 which relates to permanent  residence  despite  the  appeal  being
    against a refusal to issue an initial  confirmation  of  the  right  of
    residence.

 4. On 14  May  2013,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kebede  made  the  following
    directions

    1. The appellants solicitors have requested that the hearing  dated  of
       30 May 2013 be vacated and the appeal determined on the  papers,  in
       the light of the narrow issue in the case. The hearing  date  of  30
       May 2013 has accordingly been vacated.


    2. In the light of the findings made by the First-0tier Tribunal  judge
       in his determination promulgated on 25 February 20-13,  the  absence
       of any challenge to those findings by the respondent and  the  basis
       of the grant of permission to appeal, the respondent is directed  to
       advise the Tribunal, no later than ten days from the issue of  these
       directions, whether the appeal is opposed, and, if  so,  to  provide
       written reasons.

    3. The Tribunal will then decide whether or not to proceed to determine
       the appeal on the papers, with respect to the error of law  and  the
       merits of the appeal. Any further submissions are to be  filed  with
       the Tribunal and served upon the other party no later than days from
       the issue of these directions.

 5. There has been no response  to  these  directions.  Accordingly,  I  am
    satisfied that neither party objects to  the  matter  being  determined
    without a hearing and has nothing further to say. I am satisfied  that,
    for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the  grounds  of  appeal,   that   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of  an
    error of law as, despite directing himself [1] correctly that this  was
    an appeal against refusal to issue a residence card as confirmation  of
    the right of residence, he then applied  the  law  [10]  applicable  to
    applications for permanent residence. There is no indication  that  the
    judge raised with the appellant what he believed to be a  problem.  The
    error is clearly material as it was determinative of  the  outcome  and
    the determination must therefore be remade.

 6. The determination requires to be remade.  I am satisfied  that  on  the
    basis of the judge's findings of fact, the appellant's  husband  is  an
    EEA national and as he is  self-employed,  he  is  a  qualified  person
    within the meaning of the EEA Regulations 2006.  I  am  satisfied  also
    that as the spouse of such a person she is entitled to a residence card
    as confirmation of that. I therefore allow the appeal  on  that  basis.
    It is therefore unnecessary to consider the article 8 aspects  of  this
    appeal.

Summary of conclusions

     1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making
        of an error of law and I set it aside.


     2. I remake  the  determination  by  allowing  the  appeal  under  the
        Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.


Signed                       Date:  30 May 2013


[pic]
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
