
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/29100/2014
                                                               ia/29113/2014
                                                               ia/29120/2014
                                                               ia/29122/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd October 2015                  |On 12th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               Chakravarthy Balla Srinivasa (first appellant)
                       Maima Ilmas (second appellant)
                       Malaika balla (third appellant)
                       Misha balla (fourth appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr T Aitken of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Seelhoff (the judge) promulgated on 19th March 2015.

 2. The first Appellant is an Indian citizen born 16th  October  1974,  and
    the second Appellant is a Pakistani citizen born 7th July 1977  and  is
    the first Appellant's wife.  The third and fourth Appellants were  born
    in the UK on 16th April 2009 and 10th January 2013 respectively and are
    the daughters of the first two Appellants.   The  third  Appellant  has
    been registered as an Indian national, but the fourth Appellant has not
    yet been registered, although the Respondent maintains that  she  is  a
    national of India.

 3. The first Appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  22nd  September
    2003 as a student and  overstayed  his  leave.   The  second  Appellant
    arrived on 23rd September 2006 as a student  and  also  overstayed  her
    leave.   The first and second Appellants married in the United  Kingdom
    on 9th October 2008.

 4. In April 2012 the first, second and third Appellants applied for  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom relying upon  Article  8  of  the  1950
    European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  (the  1950  Convention).   The
    applications were refused on 23rd May 2013 without a right  of  appeal.
    Following judicial review proceedings the Respondent  reconsidered  the
    applications, and issued removal decisions  in  relation  to  all  four
    Appellants.   It  was  indicated  that  the  first,  third  and  fourth
    Appellants would be removed to  India,  and  the  second  Appellant  to
    Pakistan.  The Respondent issued a letter dated 1st  July  2014  giving
    reasons for these decisions.

 5. The appeals were heard together by the judge on 5th March 2015.  It was
    accepted that the Appellants could not succeed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules,  and  the  appeals  were  based  upon  Article  8  of  the  1950
    Convention.

 6. The judge heard evidence from  the  first  and  second  Appellants  and
    dismissed the appeals finding that removal of the Appellants  from  the
    UK would be proportionate.

 7. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    They relied upon five grounds which are summarised below:

      i) The judge erred in law by failing to grant the Appellants'  request
         for an adjournment in order to respond to evidence that was adduced
         by the Respondent at the hearing.

     ii) The judge failed to direct himself as  to  the  correct  burden  of
         proof applicable when considering Article 8.

    iii) The judge  materially  erred  in  law  by  finding  that  all  four
         Appellants can be removed to India.

     iv) The judge's conclusion that the second  Appellant  would  not  face
         significant problems or significant delays in applying for  a  visa
         from Pakistan to travel to India is contrary to  the  evidence  and
         the judge therefore  failed  to  take  all  material  matters  into
         account.

      v) The judge erred in law in his assessment of the best  interests  of
         the third and fourth Appellants.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Cruthers on 15th June 2015.

 9. The Respondent thereafter lodged a response pursuant to rule 24 of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  contending  in  summary
    that the judge had directed  himself  appropriately,  was  entitled  to
    refuse an adjournment, considered the relevant case law,  and  did  not
    err in law.

10. The Tribunal issued directions that there should be  a  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier  Tribunal  erred
    in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

11. Mr Aitken applied to submit evidence that had not been before the First-
    tier Tribunal, pursuant to rule 15(2A) of  the  2008  Procedure  Rules.
    This evidence comprised 27 pages and included emails between Mr  Aitken
    and VF Services (UK) Limited relating to the possibility of a Pakistani
    citizen obtaining a visa to enter and settle in India.

12. Mr Whitwell had not seen the documents and therefore  the  hearing  was
    adjourned to allow him to consider these.  When the hearing resumed  Mr
    Whitwell confirmed he had had sufficient time to consider the documents
    and objected to any reliance being placed upon them, on the basis  that
    they had not been before the First-tier Tribunal.

13. I indicated that I would consider the documents, and decide whether  or
    not it was appropriate to place any weight upon them.

14. I then heard submissions from Mr Aitken who relied  and  expanded  upon
    the grounds contained within the application for permission to  appeal.



15. Mr Whitwell responded by relying upon the rule 24 response,  contending
    that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  disclosed  no  material
    error.

16. At the conclusion of submissions I reserved my decision.

My Findings and Conclusions

17. Firstly I consider whether the judge erred in law in failing  to  grant
    an  adjournment.   I  take  into  account  the  principles  in  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).  In brief  summary  if
    an adjournment  refusal  is  challenged  on  fairness  grounds,  it  is
    important to recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not
    whether the First-tier Tribunal acted reasonably, but the  test  to  be
    applied is that of fairness, and whether there was any  deprivation  of
    the affected party's rights to a fair hearing.

18. The Appellants' case is that the Presenting Officer before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal produced three documents at the  hearing,  which  it  was
    argued showed that there had been significant  changes  to  the  Indian
    visa categories such that the second Appellant would be able  to  apply
    for a "Long-Term Visa" (LTV) which would  provide  a  5-year  route  to
    settlement.

19. It was argued that the judge should have granted an  adjournment  which
    was requested, so that Dr Roger Ballard, an expert anthropologist,  who
    had already prepared a report, could comment on the documents that  had
    been produced at the hearing.  It was  contended  that  the  judge  had
    relied heavily upon this documentation.

20. It is apparent  that  the  judge  did  place  some  reliance  upon  the
    documentation as there is reference in paragraph 29 of his decision  to
    evidence from the  website  of  the  Indian  High  Commission  that  in
    December 2014 there was a significant  relaxation  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, and that a new 5-year visa was introduced which provided  people
    in the second Appellant's situation  with  a  route  to  settlement  in
    India.

21. The judge found at paragraph 30, that the  second  Appellant  may  have
    some difficulties in applying for this visa  from  the  United  Kingdom
    because she is here illegally.  He went on to find that she  would  not
    have significant problems or face a significant delay if she  travelled
    to Pakistan to apply for her visa to allow  her  to  enter  India  from
    there.  The judge recorded  the  following  in  the  last  sentence  of
    paragraph 30 of his decision;

         "However I have considered proportionality in respect  of  this  in
         any  event  and  I  cannot   see   how   it   would   possibly   be
         disproportionate to  expect  the  second  Appellant  to  travel  to
         Pakistan to make such an application for an Indian visa."

22. The Appellants have  now  had  the  opportunity  of  providing  further
    evidence, in response to the documentation submitted on behalf  of  the
    Respondent at the First-tier Tribunal Hearing.  This is  summarised  in
    part at paragraphs 18 - 20 of the grounds seeking permission to appeal,
    which for ease of reference I set out below;

         "18. Dr Roger Ballard now provides his  opinion  on  the  documents
             produced by the Respondent, a copy of which is  included  with
             this application.  He is of  the  opinion  that  the  position
             taken by  the  Respondent  at  the  hearing  that  the  second
             Appellant can obtain a Long-Term Visa (or LTV) for India  with
             relative ease is mistaken.   The  evidence  demonstrates  that
             LTVs can be sought once present in India.

         19. The passage within section 47 of the document from the  Indian
             Ministry of Home Affairs relied upon by the Respondent relates
             to the issuance of LTVs.  At section 47 this  relates  to  the
             categories of persons who are eligible for extensions of  LTVs
             in  respect  of  certain  Pakistani  nationals  and   includes
             Pakistani women married to Indian  nationals  and  staying  in
             India (emphasis added).

         20. This passage indicates that it is possible  to  apply  for  an
             extension of LTV once the applicant is  lawfully  resident  in
             India.  As a consequence, the second Appellant will  still  be
             required to apply for a visa to enable her to travel to  India
             in the first instance."

23. The position is confirmed in an email from  VF  Services  (UK)  Limited
    sent to Mr Aitken dated 10th July 2015, which states that;

         "As the applicant is a citizen of Pakistan, she will be  unable  to
         apply for a 5-year long term entry visa.  However,  she  can  apply
         for a tourist visa."

24. The position therefore appears to be, according to the Appellants'  own
    evidence, that the second Appellant could apply for a tourist visa from
    Pakistan, in order to enter India.  Thereafter she could  apply  for  a
    visa to enable her to remain in India.

25. I find that the decision to refuse an adjournment has not  resulted  in
    any unfairness to the  Appellants.   The  judge  at  paragraph  30  has
    recorded that the second Appellant could travel to Pakistan to make  an
    application for an Indian visa, and this has in fact been confirmed  by
    the evidence submitted  on  behalf  of  the  Appellants.   I  therefore
    conclude that the  judge  did  not  err  in  refusing  the  adjournment
    application, because no unfairness has resulted from that decision.

26. Secondly I consider whether the judge erred in relation to  the  burden
    of proof when considering Article 8.  The Appellants' case is that  the
    judge erred by recording at paragraph 6;

         "Accordingly  the  Appellants  must  prove  on   the   balance   of
         probabilities that their removal will result in a  disproportionate
         breach of their Article 8 rights."

27. Article 8 is set out below for ease of reference;

         "(1) Everyone has the right to respect for his private  and  family
             life, his home and his correspondence.

         (2)  There should be no interference by a public authority with the
             exercise of this right except such as is  in  accordance  with
             the law and is  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
             interests of national security, public safety or the  economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
             crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others."

28. In my view when an individual establishes that an Immigration  Decision
    interferes with his or her right to respect for a  right  protected  by
    Article 8(1) it is for the Respondent to  justify  the  decision  under
    Article 8(2).

29. Having read the decision as a whole, I find that this is  the  approach
    taken by the judge, although this could have been set out more  clearly
    in paragraph 6 of his decision.  However I do not find that  the  judge
    misapplied the burden of proof.

30. It is also contended that the  judge  erred  in  law  in  recording  in
    paragraph 7 that;

         "Considerable weight must be placed on the criteria set out  within
         the Immigration Rules which represent threshold criteria."

31. I do not find that the judge materially erred on this issue.  The Court
    of Appeal confirmed in SS (Congo) and Others [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  at
    paragraph 44 that the proper approach when considering Article 8 should
    always be to indentify first the substantive content  of  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules and if  the  application  cannot  succeed  under  the
    rules, Article 8 should be considered outside the rules if there  is  a
    reasonably arguable case which has not already been sufficiently  dealt
    with under the rules.

32. The Court of Appeal in paragraph 44 of Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ  558
    stated;

         "44. Mr Richardson's preferred position was that the Rules are only
             the starting point for an assessment of  proportionality.   It
             was with evident reluctance that he accepted that, at least in
             this court, in the light of the authorities, it  is  necessary
             to find  'compelling  circumstances'  for  going  outside  the
             Rules."

33. In my view the above authority from the Court of  Appeal  supports  the
    judge's conclusion that "considerable weight must be placed on criteria
    set in the Immigration Rules", even  if  the  judge  was  in  error  in
    referring to "threshold criteria".  This error is not material.

34. Thirdly I consider the submission that the judge  materially  erred  by
    finding that all four  Appellants  can  be  removed  to  India  as  was
    recorded in paragraph 27 of his decision.  This was an  error,  as  the
    second Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, and the Respondent's removal
    directions indicate a removal to Pakistan in her case.  However I  find
    that this error is not material.  The judge was clearly aware that  the
    second Appellant would  have  to  travel  to  Pakistan,  and  there  is
    reference to this in paragraphs 30 and 35 of his decision.   The  judge
    based his decision upon  the  fact  that  the  second  Appellant  would
    initially have to travel to Pakistan from the United Kingdom.

35. The fourth Ground of Appeal challenges the judge's conclusion that  the
    second Appellant would not face  significant  problems  or  significant
    delays in applying for a visa from Pakistan to enable her to travel  to
    India.  It is said that this finding is contrary to the evidence.

36. I find no error on this issue.  The judge took  into  account  all  the
    evidence placed before him, and made a finding which was open to him on
    the evidence.  My attention was drawn to page 419  of  the  Appellants'
    bundle which indicates that the processing  time  of  applications  for
    Indian visas from persons of Pakistani origin could take seven -  eight
    weeks or more, and the processing time for applications from  Pakistani
    nationals or  those  holding  dual  nationality  can  be  substantially
    longer.  The information provided does not stipulate what type of  visa
    is referred to, and does not state that all types of  visa  would  take
    such a length of time, and in fact does not state that all visas  would
    take at least seven or eight weeks to  process.   I  find  no  material
    error of law on this issue.

37. The final Ground of Appeal challenges the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    best interests of the third and fourth Appellants as children.   It  is
    submitted that the judge has failed to identify their  best  interests.
    I do not agree.  The  best  interests  assessment  is  carried  out  in
    paragraph 28, and the judge  takes  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    children were born in the UK, their ages, which are 5 and  2,  and  the
    fact that one of the children has not started school, and the other has
    only just started.  It is not suggested that the children  are  British
    citizens.  The judge finds in paragraph 35 that it is proportionate  to
    expect the Appellants to relocate to India, and therefore  has  made  a
    finding that the best interests of the children would be to remain with
    their parents.

38. There is a difficulty in this case, in that there  may  have  to  be  a
    separation of the children from the second Appellant for a  time  while
    she travels to Pakistan to apply for a visa to enter India,  but  I  do
    not find that this means that the judge erred  in  law  by  failing  to
    conclude that this means the best interests of the children must be  to
    remain in the United  Kingdom  with  both  their  parents.   The  judge
    correctly referred to Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC) noting  that
    the children had not resided in the UK for seven years,  and  that  far
    more weight ought to be attached to time spent in the UK after a  child
    has reached 4 years of age, rather than the first four years  of  life.
    The judge has decided that the best interests of the children lie  with
    remaining with their parents, and does not err in  concluding  that  if
    the parents are to be removed, so should the children, as there are  no
    adequate reasons to the contrary.

39. The findings made by the judge were open to him on  the  evidence,  and
    sustainable reasons for those findings have been  given.   The  grounds
    demonstrate a disagreement with findings made but  do  not  disclose  a
    material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law such that  the  decision  must  be  set
aside.  I do not set aside the decision.  The appeals are dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no
request for anonymity to the Upper Tribunal and no anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    5th October 2015



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeals are dismissed.  There are no fee awards.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    5th October 2015
