
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29821/2013
     ia/29826/2013
     ia/29828/2013
     ia/29830/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 April 2014                              |On 4 June 2014               |
|Oral Determination given following the Hearing|                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                              mr syed arif ali
                               mrs maria arif
                             miss syed urwa ali
                              mr syed shaz ali
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    No representation.  Mr Syed Arif Ali and Mrs M
Arif appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants in this appeal are Mr Ali together  with  his  wife  and
    children.  The first appellant was at the time of applications aged 42.
     All the appellants are nationals of Pakistan.  The immigration history
    of the family can be summarised briefly.  The first  appellant  entered
    the UK as a student on 17 September 2004 when  he  was  35  years  old.
    Before then he  had  lived  exclusively  in  Pakistan.   His  wife  and
    daughter arrived in the UK as his dependants on 17 March 2010 and  they
    have remained here ever since.  His daughter is now aged 6.   His  son,
    the fourth appellant was born in this country and  has  never  been  to
    Pakistan.

 2. The appellant applied for permission to remain in this country but this
    application was refused on 27 June 2013 and the respondent also at that
    time  issued  removal  directions  pursuant  to  Section  47   of   the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2007.  The application had been
    made on the basis of the appellants' private life  outside  the  strict
    requirements of the Rules.  The  respondent's  decision  was  contained
    within refusal letters which were sent to the  appellants  on  27  June
    2013.  The respondent considered the applications under the  provisions
    of paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Rules  but  decided  that  none  of  the
    requirements under these Rules were satisfied.  It is not suggested  on
    behalf of the appellants that they would be entitled  to  remain  under
    the provisions of paragraph 276ADE.  It is however submitted that  they
    should be allowed to remain on the basis of their private life  outside
    the provisions of paragraph 276ADE but the respondent  considered  that
    the application did not contain any exceptional  circumstances  "which,
    consistent with the right  to  respect  for  private  and  family  life
    contained in Article 8 of the [ECHR]  might  warrant  consideration  by
    [the respondent] of the grant of leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
    outside the requirements of the Immigration Rules".

 3. The appellants appealed against this  decision  and  their  appeal  was
    heard before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  B  Lloyd  sitting  at  Newport
    (Columbus House) on 3 February 2014, but in  a  determination  prepared
    the following day and promulgated  on  11  February  2014  Judge  Lloyd
    dismissed the appeals.   The  appellants  have  appealed  against  this
    decision and the grounds of appeal essentially  argue  that  the  judge
    failed to give proper consideration to the question of whether  or  not
    the removal of these appellants to Pakistan would be proportionate  for
    Article 8 purposes and in particular did not give proper weight to  the
    obligations he had to consider the interests of the  third  and  fourth
    appellants, who are children, in light of Section 55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizen and Immigration Act 2009.  It is said that "especially 6  years
    old child who has made considerable progress at school  in  such  early
    age".  It is submitted in the ground that "if uprooted then such  child
    shall not have a good opportunity to build her [career] in  a  peaceful
    society.  There appears  to  be  very  drastic  consequences  upon  the
    children future which are contrary  to  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009" and the relevant section, Section  55,  does  set
    out the obligations which the respondent has regarding the  welfare  of
    children, in particular at  Section  55(4)(a)  that  "the  Director  of
    Border  Revenue  must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring  that....  the
    Director's functions are  discharged  having  regard  to  the  need  to
    safeguard and promote the welfare of children who  are  in  the  United
    Kingdom."

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin  on
    26 March 2014, who when setting out his reasons for granting permission
    stated as follows:

         "...

         2.   The grounds are very long and repetitive but in essence  argue
             that the judge erred in law in failing  to  consider  properly
             the appellants' private and family life under Article 8 of the
             ECHR, in failing to consider the length of time for which  the
             first appellant has been here, in  failing  to  give  adequate
             reasons for his findings that the  respondent's  decisions  to
             return the appellants to Pakistan was  proportionate,  and  in
             failing to give adequate consideration to the  best  interests
             of the children under Section 55 of the 2009 Act.

         3.   It is arguable that the judge's failure  to  engage  with  the
             evidence and to make clear findings which were based upon  the
             evidence constitutes a material error of law which renders the
             judge's findings and conclusions unsustainable....".



The Hearing

 5. Before me the  first  and  second  appellants  appeared  but  were  not
    represented.  The respondent was represented by Mr Deller, Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.  I heard submissions on behalf  of  the  appellants
    and   also   on   behalf   of   the   respondent   which   I   recorded
    contemporaneously.  As these submissions are contained within my Record
    of Proceedings I shall not set out below everything which was  said  to
    me during the  course  of  the  hearing,  but  I  have  had  regard  to
    everything which was said as well as to all  the  documents  which  are
    contained within the file.

 6. The appellants between them told me in fluent English  that  the  first
    appellant had been in the UK for a long time and on that basis  he  had
    applied for permission to remain on the grounds of long  residence.   I
    should state in this regard that this is apparent from the  immigration
    history which was provided by the respondent and was  set  out  at  the
    time of the refusal letters.  He had apparently been  in  this  country
    for around nine years at the  time  of  application.   Essentially  the
    basis upon which the appellants claimed,  and  still  claim  that  they
    should be allowed to remain is that the situation in Pakistan is  worse
    than it is in this country, that their daughter is 6 and their son  who
    was born here is 3 and that their main objective  was  to  ensure  that
    their children would be  able  to  study  in  a  peaceful  environment.
    Perfectly understandably, the first and second appellants wanted  their
    children to have a bright future in  this  country  because  they  both
    considered their prospects would not be as good in Pakistan.  Their son
    was keen to play football here  and  their  daughter  wanted  to  be  a
    doctor.  Because the first appellant had  been  unemployed  since  2012
    when he applied for further leave to remain he did not have  any  money
    and borrowed from a friend.  If he was allowed to  stay  he  could  pay
    this friend back and if the family was returned to Pakistan they  would
    have no money to start a business and they would have  to  start  again
    from zero.  In this country he had been offered a job  which  he  could
    start.

 7. On behalf  of  the  respondent  Mr  Deller  submitted  that  there  was
    absolutely nothing wrong with  the  decision  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  He had looked at all the matters which were put before
    him for consideration and he had balanced the interests  of  the  first
    appellant's family including his children with the public interest in a
    consistent and properly applied  policy  of  immigration  control.   Mr
    Deller referred the Tribunal to the Immigration Rules which had been in
    force now since the middle of 2012 and which set out  the  respondent's
    position with regard to these matters and although the applications had
    been made before these new provisions came into force they  nonetheless
    have to be considered in the context of the new Rules because this  was
    where the proper balance now lay.  There was  no  suggestion  that  the
    requirements of the Rules (by which  Mr  Deller  clearly  had  in  mind
    paragraph 276ADE) could be met and  something  very  special  and  very
    compelling was needed before an applicant could succeed  outside  these
    provisions.  The task for this Tribunal was not to consider whether  or
    not it would itself had reached the same decision but whether the Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal got the law wrong.  The  fact  that  another
    judge might have reached a different decision was not a proper basis on
    which the decision could be challenged.



Discussion

 8. I am conscious of the compassionate aspects of this case  and  I  would
    not suggest for a moment that either the first or second appellant want
    anything other than the best that they can provide for their  children.
    I also accept that they both consider that their children  who  clearly
    are their main concern would  have  a  better  life  in  this  country.
    However as Mr Deller rightly submitted the task  of  this  Tribunal  at
    this stage is not to re-hear these appeals but to consider  whether  or
    not the judge who did hear the appeals did so properly and took account
    of everything which had been put before him.  In my judgment he clearly
    did.  His determination is  both  thorough  and  detailed  and  he  has
    reminded himself of all  the  relevant  jurisprudence  with  regard  to
    appeals such as this, the cases to which  he  has  given  consideration
    being set out in paragraph 25 of his determination.  He has set out  in
    detail the submissions which were made and his finding at paragraph  59
    that "I conclude there will not  be  a  disproportionate  interference"
    with the Article 8 rights of the family as submitted on behalf  of  the
    appellants was in my judgment entirely open  to  him  for  the  reasons
    which he has given.  It is clear from paragraph 63 of the determination
    that specific regard was in fact given to Section 55 of  the  2009  Act
    and to the need to have regard to the best interests  of  the  children
    and the judge's reasons for finding (at paragraph 64) that  "I  do  not
    consider that the children's interests will be  unduly  jeopardised  by
    their returning to Pakistan" are fully reasoned within that  paragraph.
    Essentially, the judge found as  he  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    appellants just did not appreciate that the first appellant having come
    to this country as a student and stayed here  for  some  time  did  not
    thereby acquire any right to remain in this country.  It must have been
    clear to him, and if it was not it should have been, that his  ultimate
    obligation was to  return  to  Pakistan  after  he  had  completed  his
    studies.  The judge's ultimate finding is set out at  paragraph  66  of
    his determination as follows:

         "66. I believe that the position of the appellant  was  in  reality
             well summed up during the course of his  cross-examination  by
             the Presenting Officer.  He said that he had been here  for  a
             long time.  He liked the UK.  He wanted to stay here with  his
             family.  He wanted to pursue his employment  here  because  he
             thought he would have a 'better' life than he  would  have  in
             Pakistan.  That may be so.  However, it  identifies  what  the
             true philosophy of the  appellant  is.   He  came  here  as  a
             student in September 2004 and he expected to be able  to  move
             his life and his career  here  without  question  and  without
             dispute.  He may not have realised that the Immigration  Rules
             and his rights under the ECHR does  not  necessarily  entitled
             him to do that automatically."

 9. Then at paragraph 67, in  the  course  of  weighing  up  the  competing
    interests, the judge continued as follows:

         "The appellant may desire a life in the UK and may have expected it
         to be given to him when he came here as a student.  The UK must  be
         entitled to maintain a proper system of  immigration  control.   He
         does not engage the Immigration Rules.  His rights under  the  ECHR
         and   the   Human   Rights   Act   1998   are    not    compromised
         disproportionately."

10. In my judgment although I understand fully why these  appellants  would
    wish to remain in this country the  judge  was  entirely  justified  in
    finding that they have no right to do so.  He weighed  up  the  factors
    which it was argued suggested that these appellants should  be  allowed
    to remain against the need of this  country  to  maintain  a  fair  and
    consistent policy of immigration control which  is  necessary  for  the
    economic wellbeing of this country and his decision  that  the  balance
    came down in favour of removal was entirely open to him.   It  follows,
    there being no error of law in the  judge's  determination,  that  this
    appeal must be dismissed and I will so find.



Decision

There being  no  error  of  law  in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, this appeal is dismissed on all grounds.





Signed:                                 Date: 30 May 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


