
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29587/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 October 2015                   |On 4 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR EVAN MIREKU BOATENG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Bradshaw  made  at  Glasgow  on  10
    November 2014.  It was a paper appeal. The First-tier Tribunal did  not
    make an anonymity direction, and I do not consider  that  the  claimant
    requires anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The facts of the case are that the  claimant  is  a  Ghanaian  national
    whose date of birth is 14 April 1983.  He entered the United Kingdom on
    7 March 2009 on a work permit visa valid until 12 August 2009.   On  10
    August 2009 he applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  a
    spouse of a settled  person.   His  application  was  rejected.   On  2
    December 2009 he submitted an application for leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a spouse of a settled person and this application was
    refused with no right of appeal.  On 24  March  2010  he  submitted  an
    application to the IAC First Tier for permission to appeal and this was
    refused  on  7  April  2010.   On  11  April  2010   he   requested   a
    reconsideration of his previous applications for leave to remain  as  a
    spouse of a settled person on human rights grounds under Article 8.  By
    a letter dated 2 July 2014 and notice dated 4 July 2014 the application
    was refused by the Secretary of State and the appeal which came  before
    Judge Bradshaw was an appeal against that refusal.

 3. There was no appearance by the claimant or by the Secretary  of  State.
    The claimant had requested his appeal should be decided on the basis of
    the information he had provided.  He did not wish an oral hearing.

 4. The material part of the judge's reasoning begins at paragraph 6 of his
    subsequent decision.   As far as he could  see  from  the  Home  Office
    bundle, the application which was under consideration by the  Secretary
    of State was the reconsideration request  made  on  11  April  2010  in
    respect of the previous application for leave to remain as a spouse  of
    a settled person on human rights grounds under Article  8.   The  judge
    continued:

         "7.   On  the  basis  that  the  original   application   was   the
             reconsideration request of 11 April 2010 I  do  not  know  why
             there has been a delay in  the  Respondent  issuing  the  said
             Refusal Notice of 2 July  2014  particularly  since  the  last
             letter referred to from the agents  was  apparently  dated  19
             October 2012.

         8.   The relative major changes to the Immigration Rules came  into
             force on 9 July 2012 and the said reconsideration  application
             of 11 April 2010together with the letters of  7  January  2011
             and 11 May 2012 predate these changes of 9 July 2012.

         9.   The relative Refusal letter of 2  July  2012  deals  with  the
             Appellant's reconsideration  application  principally  if  not
             wholly in terms of the new Rules.  In terms  of  the  relative
             case of Edgehill it seems to  me  that  the  decision  of  the
             Respondent in terms of the said Refusal letter of 2 July  2014
             is unlawful because the decision maker considered the  Article
             8  claim  of  the  Appellant  in  terms  of  the   new   Rules
             notwithstanding the date when  the  relative  application  was
             made."

 5. The judge went on to hold that it seemed appropriate to  him  to  allow
    the appeal to the extent the matter was remitted back to the  Secretary
    of State in order that the reconsideration application of 11 April 2010
    was considered in accordance with the law as it was prior to the  major
    changes to the Immigration Rules which came into force on 9 July  2012.



 6. On 12 January 2015 Designated Judge David Taylor granted the  Secretary
    of State permission to appeal against Judge Bradshaw's  decision.   The
    grounds claim the judge's approach was  wrong  in  that  he  failed  to
    consider  Haleemudeen.   His  reference  to  Edgehill  was  an   error.
    Accordingly, it was argued  by  the  Secretary  of  State  the  refusal
    decision was correct in law. Judge Taylor held that these grounds  were
    arguable.

 7. In advance of the hearing before me there was a communication  received
    from Ebrahim & Co, the representatives for the appellant.   They  asked
    the Upper Tribunal to note they  were  without  instructions  and  they
    therefore requested that the Upper Tribunal determine the appeal as  it
    deemed fit.  Their client had been informed of the date of the  hearing
    by post on two separate occasions.

 8. I received submissions from Mr Tufan who directed my attention  to  the
    case of Singh v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 74.  In short the ratio of that  case  is  that  there  is  nothing
    unlawful in the Secretary  of  State  applying  the  new  Rules  to  an
    application which predates the change to the Immigration Rules and  the
    case of Edgehill has to be confined to  special  facts.   Underhill  LJ
    summarised his conclusions at paragraph [56], which I quote:

         "(1) When HC 194 first came to force on 9 July 2012  the  Secretary
             of State was not entitled to take into account the  provisions
             of the new Rules (either directly or by  treating  them  as  a
             statement of their current policy) when  making  decisions  on
             private or family life applications made prior  to  that  date
             but not yet decided.  That is because, as decided in Edgehill,
             the  implementation  provisions  set  out  at  para  7   above
             displaces the usual Odelola principle.

         (2)  But that position was altered by HC565 - specifically  by  the
             introduction of the new paragraph A277C - with effect  from  6
             September 2012.  As from that date the Secretary of State  was
             entitled to take into  account  the  provisions  of  FM  under
             paragraphs 276ADE-276DH in deciding  private  or  family  life
             applications even if they were made prior to 9 July 2012.  The
             result is that law as it was  held  to  be  in  Edgehill  only
             obtained as regards decisions taken in the  two  month  window
             between 9 July and 6 September 2012.

         (3)  Neither decision with which we are concerned in this case fell
             within that window.  Accordingly the Secretary  of  State  was
             entitled to apply the new Rules in reaching those decisions."

 9. The reasoning of the judge in Singh applies with  equal  force  to  the
    facts of the case before me.  The decision in question  does  not  fall
    within the short window in which  Edgehill  applies.   Accordingly  the
    judge materially erred in law in finding that the  Secretary  of  State
    had acted unlawfully in applying the new Rules.  As the judge failed to
    make any findings of fact on the merits of the appeal that  was  before
    him the parties have been deprived of  a  fair  hearing  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the real issues in controversy. So I must remit the  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing on the papers.

Notice of Decision

10. The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,
    which requires the decision to be set aside and remade.



Directions

11. The appeal shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Glasgow,  or
    to another hearing centre if more convenient,  for  reconsideration  on
    the papers by any Judge apart from Judge Bradshaw.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

