
  [pic]
st


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29711/2014
                                                               IA/29710/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At  Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|on 18th September 2015               |on 3rd December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                     DKT
                                     DT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M.Dogran, Counsel, instructed by Robinson Ravini
                    and Co, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr.T.Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction


 1. Proceedings before the First tier Tribunal were not  anonymised.  I  am
    influenced by the fact that there is a child affected by this  decision
    and at this stage have made an anonymity order.

 2. Although it is the respondent who is appealing, for convenience I  will
    continue to refer to  the  parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. The first appellant is a national of  India.  She  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in October 2005 along with her husband on a  visit  visa  valid
    until March 2006.  They  overstayed.  She  gave  birth  to  the  second
    appellant, their son, in May 2007.

 4. On 8 June 2012, solicitors acting for the appellant's applied for leave
    to remain. It was stated that  shortly  after  the  birth  her  husband
    deserted them.

 5. This was refused on 12 August 2013. Judicial  review  proceedings  were
    then brought and resolved when the respondent agreed to reconsider  the
    matter. A further decision was issued on 7 July  2014  maintaining  the
    refusal and giving appeal rights.

 6. The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Judge Abebrese at Taylor
    House on 9 March 2015. In a decision promulgated on 26 March  2015  the
    appeals were allowed on the basis of Article 8.

The First tier decision.

 7. The judge found the first appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of
    appendix FM as a parent and  that  the  appellants  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276 ADE. At paragraph 15 the judge  concluded
    it was appropriate to carry out a freestanding  Article  8  assessment.
    This was on the basis the decision did not  fully  consider  the  first
    appellant's circumstances and her responsibilities towards  the  second
    appellant  as  a  sole  parent  and  the  second  appellant's   medical
    conditions. Reference was  made  to  the  decisions  of  Nagre  and  MF
    (Nigeria).

 8. The judge found family and private life established and referred to the
    length of time the appellants had been in this country.  Reference  was
    made to the medical treatment the second appellant had been  receiving.
    At paragraph 19 the judge noted his learning difficulties and  referred
    to a report from a psychologist. This mentioned  severe  receptive  and
    expressive language delay and other difficulties which impacted on  his
    ability to progress at school.  At paragraph 19 reference was  made  of
    section 117 (B), with the judge concluding  it  would  not  be  in  the
    public interest to remove the second appellant.

 9. At paragraph 21 and 22 the judge states:

         "21. ... The tribunal does agree that direct evidence has not  been
         brought forward by either the first or second appellant in relation
         to facilities in India which would be suitable, however this  point
         has not been dealt with by the respondents in their decision  under
         section 55  of  the  Borders  Act  2009  in  considering  the  best
         interests of the child. It  is  noted  by  the  Tribunal  that  the
         respondents do discuss this matter under Article 3 of the  European
         Convention on Human Rights but their decision is completely  silent
         on the issue of section 55 and the need to take into  consideration
         the best interests of  the  child.  The  Tribunal  takes  the  view
         therefore that the reasoning and decision  of  the  respondents  is
         defective in law and is not in accordance with  the  approach  that
         has been adopted in cases  such  as  JO  and  Others  (section  55)
         Nigeria [2014] UKUT  00517 (IAC). It is made clear in JO that it is
         an imperative duty on the part of the respondents in such cases  to
         consider the section 55 duties. The Tribunal has also further taken
         into consideration the cases such as Zoumbas -v- Secretary of State
         for the Home Department [2013] UK SC 74.

         22.  The Tribunal therefore takes the view  that  for  all  of  the
         above reasons it would not be  in  the  public  interest  when  one
         considers the case law, the statutory obligations of the  Secretary
         of State under section  55  and  also  the  public  interest  under
         Section 117 B of the Immigration Act 2014."

10. The judge concluded the decision to remove would not be  proportionate.
    In support of this the judge referred to the  psychologist  report  and
    the need for special requirements to be in place, the statutory  duties
    in relation to the best interests of the child and the fact that  child
    has never been to India and by then had resided in the  United  Kingdom
    for more than seven years. Finally, the judge  stated  that  the  child
    should not be penalised for his mother's actions in overstaying.

Permission to appeal

11. The application states  that  the  judge  should  not  have  considered
    Article 8 when the rules were not met. Reference was made to Singh  -v-
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74 where the court  said  there  was  no  need  to
    conduct an Article 8  examination  outside  the  rules  where,  in  the
    circumstances of the particular case, all  the  issues  were  addressed
    under the rules.  It  was  also  argued  that  in  the  proportionality
    assessment a relevant consideration should have  been  the  failure  to
    meet the rules.

12. The judge's reference to section 117B was also challenged on the  basis
    as an  overstayer  little  weight  should  be  placed  upon  the  first
    appellant's  private  life  in   the   circumstance.   There   was   no
    consideration of her ability to speak English or whether the appellants
    presented a burden upon the State.

13. It was also argued that at paragraph  21  of  the  decision  the  judge
    incorrectly placed the burden on the respondent to show what facilities
    would be available for the  second  appellant  in  India.  The  judge's
    comment that section 55 had not been considered was  incorrect  because
    this occurred when appendix FM was dealt with. In  any  event,  if  the
    judge felt the decision was  defective  the  matter  should  have  been
    remitted to  the  respondent  rather  than  the  appeal  being  allowed
    outright.

14. Finally, it was submitted that the judge failed to have regard  to  the
    fact that neither appellant had the right to be in the  United  Kingdom
    or to benefit from the facilities here. Reference was made to paragraph
    60-62 of EV (Philippines) and others -v- SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

15. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis the grounds advanced were
    arguable, particularly in relation to how the judge dealt with  section
    117 B  and  the  absence  of  consideration  of  what  facilities  were
    available in India for the second appellant .

The Upper Tribunal

16. Mr Wilding, Presenting Officer argued that the judge  should  not  have
    gone on to consider a freestanding Article  8  claim  and  referred  to
    paragraph 64 of Singh -v- SSHD [2015] EWCA 74. He also argued that  the
    consideration section 117B was inadequate bearing  in  mind  the  first
    appellant had been here illegally since 2006. He also submitted it  was
    incorrect to  place  the  burden  upon  the  respondent  to  show  what
    facilities existed in India for the second appellant.

17. Ms Dogra referred me to her skeleton argument in which  she  refers  to
    the decision of Dube (s117A-D) [2015] UKUT 90 which sets out that it is
    not an error of law to fail to refer to the considerations  in  section
    117 if the relevant test has been applied. She did acknowledge that the
    judge failed to refer to the English language requirement and  that  an
    interpreter was used at the hearing. Whilst there  was  expenditure  by
    the State on the second appellant there were serious medical issues.

18. She cites the decision of GAO and  others  (section  55  duty)  Nigeria
    [2014] UKUT 00517 which refers to the duty on a decision  maker  to  be
    properly informed of the position of a child affected by the  decision.
    She  submitted  that  it  was  for  the  respondent  to  consider  what
    facilities were available in India. A failure to do so does not place a
    burden on the  appellant.  She  submitted  that  in  the  decision  the
    respondent  failed  to  properly  consider   the   second   appellant's
    interests.

Consideration

Freestanding Article 8

19. I do not find it an error of  law  for  First-tier  Judge  Abebrese  to
    conduct a freestanding Article 8 assessment. It was accepted on  behalf
    of the appellants that the rules were not met. In Gulshan (Article 8  -
    new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) the Upper  Tribunal
    said  only if there are arguably good grounds  for  granting  leave  to
    remain outside the rules is it necessary for Article 8 purposes  to  go
    on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling   circumstances   not
    sufficiently recognised under them: R (on the application of)  Nagre  v
    Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home   Department   [2013]   EWHC   720
    (Admin).There can be no presumption that the rules will  be  conclusive
    of the Article  8  assessment  or  that  a  fact-sensitive  inquiry  is
    normally  not  needed.   The  second  appellant's  situation  justified
    consideration outside the rules because of his educational and  medical
    needs.

The second appellant

20. Section 55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009
    requires the decision maker to be properly informed of the position  of
    a child affected by the decision. There is an obligation to promote the
    best interests of the child, irrespective of their nationality.

21. In tandem with this it is the Article 8 assessment. The  welfare  of  a
    child is a primary but not a  paramount  consideration.  The  longer  a
    child is in the United Kingdom, then the more  unreasonable  it  is  to
    expect them to leave. The longer they are here the more  they  can  put
    down roots and integrate. Seven years has historically been  considered
    a milestone. It is believed the focus of young  children  until  around
    the age of four or thereabouts is to their parents  rather  than  their
    surroundings.  Furthermore,  seven  years  is  only  a  guide  and   an
    assessment of the individual circumstances must take place. A  decision
    maker is required to consider the family as a whole. Any health  issues
    have to be taken into account. A relevant consideration is whether  the
    family are being expected to leave as a  unit  and  whether  there  are
    wider members of the family settled. The ties with the home country  of
    the parents and the children have to be considered.  What  support,  if
    any, will be available  to  them  for  resettlement  is  relevant.  Any
    special features have to be factored into the  evaluation.  Exceptional
    circumstances means more than the unusual or the unique but is aimed at
    an outcome which will be particularly harsh.

22. An important consideration is  whether  the  children  or  one  of  the
    parents is British. ZH Tanzania [2011] UKSC 4 emphasised the  intrinsic
    importance of British citizenship.

23. In JO and Others (Section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC)  the
    Tribunal said the decision maker must conduct a careful examination  of
    all relevant information and factors. At  para 11  the  Upper  Tribunal
    President said :

         "I  consider  that,  properly  analysed,  there  are  two   guiding
         principles, each rooted in duty. The first  is  that  the  decision
         maker must be properly informed. The second is that, thus equipped,
         the decision maker  must  conduct  a  careful  examination  of  all
         relevant information and factors."

    At para 14 the President said:

         "One of the more intriguing questions thrown up by  section  55  is
         whether  it  has  a  procedural   dimension   in   certain   cases.
         Furthermore, does it impose a proactive  duty  of  enquiry  on  the
         Secretary of State's officials in some cases?"

24. This was not answered in  the  decision  but  in  another  Presidential
    decision, MK (section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone  [2015]  UKUT
    223 (IAC), it was held that where it is contended that  either  of  the
    duties  enshrined  in  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 has been breached, the onus rests on the appellant
    and the civil standard of the balance of probabilities applies.   There
    is no onus on  the  Secretary  of  State.  The  main  principle  to  be
    distilled from SS (Nigeria) is that in  cases  where  the  Tribunal  is
    assessing the best interests of an affected child it should normally do
    so on the basis of the available evidence without  more.  The  decision
    strongly discourages the  Tribunal  from  conducting  an  inquisitorial
    exercise.

25. The respondent's letter of the  7  July  2014  gives  reasons  for  the
    decision. At page 5 it sets out the section 55  consideration.  It  was
    noted the second appellant has been in the United Kingdom  all  of  his
    life and been here more than seven years. However, if returned to India
    the respondent believed his mother could support him  until  he  became
    used to living there. There is reference to objective information about
    India having a functioning educational system and a  lack  of  evidence
    from the appellant that she could not maintain a child or  provide  for
    him. Reference is made at page 6 to the appellant's health  issues  and
    the decision-maker refers to the Country of Origin Information Response
    on the availability of medication for epilepsy as  well  as  facilities
    for children with speech and communication problems.

26. First-tier Judge Abebrese did materially error in law at  paragraph  21
    of the decision in concluding the respondent had not considered section
    55. Furthermore, the judge appears to be suggesting that the onus is on
    the respondent to investigate what facilities are available  in  India.
    However, the onus is upon the appellant to show the respondent has  not
    discharged  her  section  55  obligations.  The  refusal  letter  shows
    consideration was given to the welfare of the second appellant. It  was
    open to the appellant's representatives to provide evidence to indicate
    facilities would be inadequate. I do not find the respondent's decision
    was defective. If the judge had concerns the proper course  would  have
    been remittal to the Secretary of State for reconsideration.

Section 117.

27. I find the judge materially  erred  in  law  in  the  consideration  of
    section 117.Consideration by judges of Article 8 outside the rules must
    be informed by the importance the Secretary of State  attaches  to  the
    public interest.  Section 117B  makes  public  interest  considerations
    applicable to all cases and states that it is in  the  public  interest
    and the economic well-being of the United Kingdom that persons who seek
    to remain are able to speak English. This  is  because  they  are  less
    likely to be a burden on the State and are  better  able  to  integrate
    into society. It is also in the  public  interest  those  who  seek  to
    remain in the United Kingdom are financially independent. Little weight
    should be given to a private life established by a  person  at  a  time
    when the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully. The judge makes no
    reference to the first appellant's command of English, or the  fact  an
    interpreter was used at the hearing. She claims to have been working as
    a carer but she must have been working  illegally  given  her  lack  of
    status.

Conclusion.

28. It is my conclusion First-tier Judge Abebrese failed to  demonstrate  a
    proper and balanced assessment of all the relevant  factors  had  taken
    place. I find the judge erred in law in the consideration of section 55
    and has not demonstrated adequate consideration of  section  117B.  For
    these reasons the  decision  cannot  stand.  Consequently,  the  matter
    should be remitted to the First-tier tribunal for a de novo hearing.

Decision.

29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  appeals  of  the
    appellants under Article 8 contains material errors of law  and  cannot
    stand. The decision is set aside and the appeals are to be  reheard  de
    novo in the First-tier Tribunal.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly


                                    [pic]
st


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29711/2014
                                                               IA/29710/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At  Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|on 18th September 2015               |on 3rd December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                     DKT
                                     DT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                 Directions

      1. Relist for a de novo anonymised hearing in the First-tier Tribunal,
         excluding Judge Abebrese.

      2. The appellant's representatives are to  advise  if  an  interpreter
         will be required.

      3. The appellant's representative should prepare a  skeleton  argument
         setting out the specific features in line with the current case law
         which they say justify allowing the appeals on  the  basis  of  the
         immigration rules or Article 8.  Bundles  for  hearing  are  to  be
         prepared by the parties and exchanged  in  advance  of  the  listed
         hearing.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly
