
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29387/2014
                                                               IA/29389/2014
                                                               IA/29392/2014
                                                               IA/29396/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 February 2016                      |On 23 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                          Mr Sachin Rasikbhai Patel
                         Mrs Nimishaben Sachin Patel
                          Master Dhruv Sachin Patel
                          Miss Preema Sachin Patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms L Targett-Parker
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The four appellants are a  family  who  live  together.  They  comprise
    mother, father, and two  children.  There  is  considerable  background
    history which is set out in the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Whalan. That decision was promulgated on 21 April 2015. In essence  the
    appellants appealed the refusal by the respondent to grant their  human
    rights applications and her decision to  remove  them  all  as  illegal
    entrants.

 2. The F-tT Judge dismissed the appeals under the  Immigration  Rules  and
    also on Article 8 human rights grounds.

 3. The appellants sought permission to appeal the decisions.  The  grounds
    of appeal stretch over some eleven pages.  The F-tT  Judge  considering
    those summarised them as follows:-

         "The submission is that the  judge  erred  in  law  by  failing  to
         properly (a) consider the relevant issue which is whether or not it
         was lawful to remove the appellants during the middle of the  third
         and fourth appellants' examinations; (b) assess that it  would  not
         be in the children's best interests to be removed in any event  and
         (c) consider Section 117A-D of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 in that the children  are  qualifying  children  in
         terms of Sections 117B(6) and 117D(1)(b)."

 4. The judge concluded that no arguable error of law had been shown.

 5. On a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal the grounds were to  the
    effect that the  judge  did  not  consider  the  circumstances  of  the
    children, which included their age, time spent  in  the  UK  and  their
    education; the removal of them from the UK would  have  a  recognisably
    negative impact on their education  as  they  are  in  the  process  of
    sitting for their A levels and GCSE examinations;  any  "discrepancies"
    experienced by the children at this stage of their academics will  have
    an adverse lasting impact on their future; in dealing with the issue of
    proportionality the Tribunal did not direct itself as to whether  there
    were  exceptional  circumstances;   the  proportionality  exercise  was
    "skewered" in that there was no focus on the consequences and impact on
    the family unit on return to India; it was  necessary  that  the  court
    direct itself as to whether the circumstances  of  the  return  of  the
    appellants to India were unduly harsh; the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    did not consider that the appellants would face a number  of  obstacles
    if forced to relocate, such  as  housing,  language,  social  life  and
    finances; the judge did not give  due  weight  to  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009;  and Section  117A-D  of
    the 2002 Act was not "accurately applied in the decision dated 19  June
    2015".

 6. An Upper Tribunal Judge granted permission to appeal  noting  that  the
    parties agreed that had the  fourth  appellant  applied  for  leave  to
    remain under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) at the date of the appeal  hearing
    she would have been successful.  It was said that that factor  did  not
    feature at all in the First-tier Tribunal's  reasoning  on  Article  8,
    which is all predicated on the appellants'  failure,  collectively  and
    individually to meet the requirements of the Rules.  Consideration  had
    not been given either to paragraph 276AO(iii) of the Immigration  Rules
    which expressly obviates the need to make a valid application if 276ADE
    is argued on appeal.

 7. At the oral hearing before me the respondent stated that no  indication
    could be found on  the  documentation  available  that  there  was  any
    concession by the parties at the  hearing  that  the  fourth  appellant
    would be successful under the Rules.

 8. I heard submissions from both parties and have taken them into  account
    in this decision.  I have also taken into account the skeleton argument
    filed on behalf of the appellants dated 12 February 2016.

 9. At paragraph 36  of  the  decision  the  F-tT  Judge  acknowledges  the
    concession by Counsel on behalf  of  the  appellants  that  none  could
    succeed under either Appendix FM and/or paragraph 276ADE of the  Rules.
    The F-tT Judge then acknowledged that if the fourth  appellant  was  to
    reapply under paragraph 276ADE she would now satisfy the provisions  of
    276ADE(iv) but acknowledged also the respondent's detailed reasoning in
    the decision letter dated 4 July 2014.

10. Of interest in relation to the respondent's decision letter is the fact
    that specific consideration was  given  to  the  circumstances  of  the
    fourth appellant that includes an acknowledgment that she has lived  in
    the UK for at least seven years. However, to meet the Rules there would
    also need to be a finding -- or a concession -- that it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect an applicant who has been here for that period  to
    leave the UK. The decision letter set out why the respondent considered
    that it was reasonable to expect the  fourth  appellant  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom and this is because she would be returning to India with
    her parents who are both Indian citizens.  They would be returning as a
    family unit and could help her adjust to change and  provide  her  with
    maintenance and accommodation.

11. It was obvious from the decisions  made  by  the  respondent  that  the
    entire  family  was  expected  to  return  to  India  from  whence  the
    appellants arrived some years ago and they would take  up  family  life
    there.  It was not envisaged that one or both children would remain  in
    the United Kingdom without their parents.

12. The case for the appellants was  put  firmly  on  the  basis  that  the
    children should be allowed to complete their education  and  to  enable
    them to do that their parents would and should  be  allowed  to  remain
    with them. The appellants wished to be treated as a family unit.

13. In the light of the decision letter it would be surprising indeed if  a
    concession was made by the respondent that  the  fourth  appellant  was
    able to satisfy the requirements of the Rules as at the date of hearing
    and I do not accept that such a concession was made. The respondent had
    already argued that  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  fourth
    appellant to leave the UK. The F-tT judge considered the position as at
    the date of hearing and reasoned also why it would  be  reasonable  for
    the fourth appellant to leave the UK in the  company  of  her  parents.
    None of this points to the fourth appellant  being  able  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules either at the date  of  decision  or  at  the
    hearing.

14. Viewed in the round and for these reasons, although the judge may  have
    made an error by recording the "concession" in the way that he  does  I
    don't find that it is of any materiality.

15. Regarding other  matters  this  is  a  very  carefully  and  thoroughly
    reasoned decision by the F-tT Judge in relation to Article 8. The judge
    has set out the circumstances of each appellant individually.   He  has
    referred to the voluminous documentation in support of (in  particular)
    the children's private lives and it cannot be argued with any  hope  of
    success that there has not been thorough consideration of all  relevant
    matters. He considers education in the UK and in India (paragraph  43).
    The judge did not exclude other relevant factors such as the third  and
    fourth appellants' society and friendships in the UK (paragraph  44  of
    the decision) and he was clearly cognisant of  and  took  into  account
    that the children must not be blamed for matters for which they are not
    responsible, such as the conduct of their parents -  see  paragraph  35
    and also paragraph 40 where Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC  74  is  quoted;
    neither can it be successfully argued that the judge has failed to take
    into account relevant parts  of  Section  117  of  the  2002  Act  (see
    paragraphs 47 and onward of the decision).

Notice of Decision

16. It is for these reasons that  such  errors  as  there  may  be  in  the
    decision are not such as to bring about a position that if  the  errors
    had not been made a different result would have ensued.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld and  the  appeals  of
    all four appellants are dismissed.

18. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

