
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29295/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11 March 2015                                |On 12 March 2015           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Kevin Boodhoo
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimant: Ms F Allen, instructed by Paul John & Co
For the respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Brown promulgated  8.12.14,  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the respondent, dated 2.7.14,
    to refuse his application for further leave to remain in the  UK  as  a
    Tier 2 (General) Migrant and to remove  him  from  the  UK  by  way  of
    directions under section 47 of the Immigration Asylum  and  Nationality
    Act 2006. The judge heard the appeal on 1.12.14.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Page granted permission to appeal on 23.1.15.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 11.3.15 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons set out herein, I find that there was an error  of  law
    in the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such that  the
    determination of Judge Brown should be set aside and remade.

 5. Judge Brown allowed the appeal on the basis that the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State was not in accordance with the  law  as  she  should
    have considered paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules and  requested
    further information from the claimant before refusing the application.

 6. The grounds rightly criticise the decision for failing to identify what
    in particular should have been clarified or requested from the claimant
    and what particular provision of 245AA was  relied  on.  245AA  has  no
    application to the facts of this  appeal.  The  claimant  submitted  an
    application relying on a 'used' Certificate of Sponsorship (CoS), which
    was found not to be valid when checked and in addition,  his  sponsor's
    licence had expired.  There  is  nothing  which  an  enquiry  with  the
    claimant could have revealed to enable  the  application  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules. This was not the case of a missing  document
    in a sequence, or a document in the wrong format, etc. No valid CoS had
    been submitted and the application  was  doomed  to  failure  from  the
    outset.

 7. Ms Allen accepted that the appellant did not meet the  requirements  of
    the application he had made and could not resist the submission  of  Ms
    Everett that there was a fundamental error of law in  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. I therefore set the decision aside and proposed to remake the  decision
    at the same hearing. Ms Allen submitted that it should be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, but I could  see  no  reason  to  do  so.  The
    standard directions issued in this  appeal  required  the  claimant  to
    prepare for this hearing on  the  basis  that  if  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decided to set the decision  aside,  any  further  evidence,  including
    supplementary oral evidence can be so considered at this  hearing.  The
    issues in the appeal are very clear and there is  no  reason  to  cause
    further delay by remitting the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. The claimant was not in attendance at the hearing, but I was  satisfied
    that he and his representatives had adequate notice of the hearing  and
    Ms Allen could offer no explanation for his absence and did not seek an
    adjournment of the hearing but was content to proceed.

10. It is clear that the claimant  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    application made. First-tier Tribunal judge did not deal  with  article
    8, for obvious reasons, and there was no cross-appeal by the appellant;
    there had been no application for permission to  appeal  on  the  basis
    that the judge omitted to consider article 8 ECHR. However, the grounds
    of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal raised article 8 ECHR. The

11. In addition, Ms Allen sought to argue 10-year long  residence  pursuant
    to paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules. That was never part of  the
    grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and  no  submissions  were
    made in any Rule 24 response to the grant of permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal. Further, it is clear that at the date of hearing of
    the First-tier Tribunal, the claimant did not meet the requirements  of
    10 years continuous lawful residence.

12. There was a section 120 notice, though the claimant did not respond  to
    that notice. The only reference to the 10  year  residence  requirement
    arose in his witness statement. As stated the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    could not have considered that matter  as  at  that  date  he  had  not
    reached the 10-year threshold.

13. The claimant's lawful residence having continued by virtue  of  section
    3C, the fact is that in remaking the decision today, I  am  faced  with
    the fact that the 10-year long residence requirement has been met.  The
    claimant came to the UK on 17.1.05 with leave as a student and  on  the
    information before me, that lawful leave was unbroken. Ms Allen pointed
    out the current long residence guidance (valid  from  17.10.14),  which
    considers the situation of a person completing the 10  year  continuous
    lawful residence whilst awaiting the outcome of an appeal  and  submits
    an application on this basis. However, it is not possible to  submit  a
    new application whilst an appeal is outstanding, "However the applicant
    can submit further grounds to be considered at appeal."  This  suggests
    that the tribunal is not  precluded  from  consideration  of  paragraph
    276B.

14. In the circumstances, I find there is force in Ms Allen's  submissions.
    The claimant appears to meet all the sub-clause conditions of paragraph
    276B, including the life in the UK qualification. Ms  Everett  did  not
    suggest any public interest  considerations  as  to  why  it  would  be
    undesirable for him to  be  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain.  It
    follows that the appeal should be allowed on that basis.

Conclusion & Decision:

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I re-make the decision in  the  appeal  by  allowing  it
                    under paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the
                    claimant now able  to  meet  the  requirements  of  that
                    route.
Signed: [pic]     Date: 11 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup





Consequential Directions

16. Forthwith on receipt of this decision the respondent  shall  grant  the
    appellant leave to remain for such  period  as  is  necessary  to  give
    effect to this determination.

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award     Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
(rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
2005 and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007).

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The application brought could never  have  succeeded.  It  is  only
because of the lapse of time that the claimant now  meets  the  requirements
of an alternative route for leave to remain.

Signed: [pic]     Date: 11 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
