

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Numbers: IA/29296/2014

                                     IA/29301/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 15 June 2016                  |On 4 October 2016               |
|                                 |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between

                        1) MR RUDOLFO APELADO MABALLO
                        2) MRS VIOLETA GARCIA MABALLO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Biggs, Counsel
      (instructed by Universal Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS





      1.    These appeals were heard several months ago and  the  tribunal's
           decision was reserved.  By administrative oversight,  the  files
           were misplaced and the preparation  of  the  determinations  was
           delayed, for which the tribunal expresses  its  regret  to  both
           parties.  The delay has, however, had  the  important  advantage
           that the relevant law has been clarified in Sala (EFMs: Right of
           Appeal [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC): There is no statutory  right  of
           appeal against the decision of Secretary of State for  the  Home
           Department not to grant a residence card to a person claiming to
           be an extended family member.  These  appeals  were  brought  by
           extended family members.  The effect of Sala is that the  First-
           tier  Tribunal  had  no  jurisdiction  to  hear  these  appeals.
           Accordingly the linked onwards appeals must be  allowed  to  the
           extent that they must be remade and dismissed.


      2.    In deciding to remake and dismiss these  appeals,  the  tribunal
           considered whether the appeal hearings should be  reconvened  in
           order to receive submissions concerning the effect of Sala.  The
           tribunal saw no point in doing so.  Neither of  the  parties  in
           Sala has appealed.  The decision was prepared by a senior  panel
           after  full  argument  and  long  consideration.   Its  official
           headnote is unequivocal.


      3.    The Appellants had appealed out of time with permission  granted
           on 2 May 2016 with evident  reluctance  by  First-tier  Tribunal
           Judge Nicholson against the decision and reasons  of  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Shepherd promulgated on 21 October  2015.   In  a
           full and careful decision,  Judge  Shepherd  had  dismissed  the
           appeals  of  the  Appellants,  the  grandparents  of  their  EEA
           national sponsor, who had claimed that they were his dependants.
            Adverse credibility findings were made against  all  witnesses.
           The reality was  that  the  sponsor  was  living  on  the  state
           benefits  received  by  his  grandparents.     Judge   Nicholson
           nevertheless considered that some of the authorities  relied  on
           by the Appellants, such as Lebon C-316/85 [1987] ECR 2811, Jia v
           Migrationsverket C-1/05 and Pedro [2009] EWCA Civ 1358,  merited
           further examination.


      4.    As noted above, however, whether or not the grant of  permission
           to appeal was generous, the effect of Sala means that the First-
           tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear  the  appeals  in  the
           first place.  To that extent, and through no fault of the  judge
           as Sala had not at that stage been reported, it was an error  of
           law to hear  the  appeals.  The  decision  is  set  aside.   The
           arguments based on the cases mentioned in  [3],  above,  do  not
           arise for consideration in those circumstances and the  tribunal
           can express no opinion on them.  The only decision which can  be
           made is to set aside the original decision and  to  dismiss  the
           linked appeals.


      DECISION


      The appeals to the Upper Tribunal are allowed.  The original decisions
      are set aside for want of jurisdiction.   The  following  decision  is
      substituted:


      The appeals are dismissed


      There can be no fee awards




      Signed                                  Dated 4 October 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
