

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/29731/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision  7 Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 16 May 2017                        |On 18 August 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                            MD FAZLUR RAHMAN KHAN
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr Z. Malik
                       Counsel instructed by Haque & Hausman Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr S. Staunton
                       Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to  refuse  a
    human rights claim. First-tier Tribunal Judge T.  Jones  ("the  judge")
    dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 07 September 2016.

2.     The  appellant  appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  In  a   decision
    promulgated on 19 May 2017 (annexed) I found no errors of  law  in  the
    judge's findings relating to the immigration rules. It was open to  the
    judge to conclude that there was insufficient  evidence  to  show  that
    there would be 'insurmountable obstacles' to the appellant and his wife
    continuing their family life in  Bangladesh.  I  also  found  that  the
    appellant failed to show that there was an error of law in the  judge's
    findings relating to the 'Suitability' requirements of the  immigration
    rules and the  ETS  allegation  made  by  the  respondent.  However,  I
    concluded that the judge erred in his assessment of the best  interests
    of the child. The factual findings were preserved and that part of  the
    decision considering the balancing exercise under Article 8 outside the
    immigration rules was set aside.  It  was  said  that  there  had  been
    developments in the appellant's family circumstances and  that  further
    evidence would be needed.  As  such,  the  hearing  was  adjourned  for
    further evidence to be produced and for the decision to be remade at  a
    resumed hearing.

3.    Although the appellant and his wife both made  witness  statements  in
    support of the appeal, and the appellant was called to  give  evidence,
    in fact, neither representative had any questions for  the  witness.  I
    have taken into account the submissions made by both  parties  and  the
    evidence before the Tribunal before coming to a decision in relation to
    the outstanding aspects of the appeal.

Decision and reasons

4.    The appellant does not meet the requirements of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    immigration rules for leave to remain as a spouse or as a parent or the
    alternative requirements contained  in  Appendix  FM,  because  he  was
    refused leave to remain under the  'Suitability'  requirements  on  the
    ground that his presence in the United Kingdom is not conducive to  the
    public good. The respondent considered that his conduct, in  submitting
    a false document in support of a previous application,  meant  that  it
    was undesirable to allow him  to  remain  in  the  UK.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal judge made findings against the appellant in relation  to  the
    'ETS issue', which were not challenged successfully in  the  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

5.    I have gone on to consider whether  the  circumstances  of  this  case
    might engage Article  8  outside  the  immigration  rules.  It  is  not
    disputed that the appellant has a wife and child in the UK who are both
    British citizens. It is reasonably foreseeable that a second  child  is
    likely to be born in September 2017. I concluded that  removal  of  the
    appellant in consequence of the decision is likely  to  interfere  with
    his family life in a sufficiently grave way to engage the operation  of
    Article 8 (points (i) & (ii) of Lord Bingham's five stage  approach  in
    Razgar v SSHD [2004] INLR 349).

6.    The state can lawfully interfere with an appellant's  family  life  if
    it is pursuing a legitimate aim and it is necessary  and  proportionate
    in all the circumstances of the case. In cases involving  human  rights
    issues under Article 8, the heart of  the  assessment  is  whether  the
    decision strikes a fair balance between the due weight to be  given  to
    the public interest in maintaining an effective system  of  immigration
    control and the impact of the decision on the individual's  private  or
    family life. In assessing whether the decision strikes a fair balance a
    court or tribunal should give appropriate weight  to  Parliament's  and
    the Secretary of State's assessment of  the  strength  of  the  general
    public interest as expressed in the relevant rules  and  statutes:  see
    Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60.

7.    Section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    ("NIAA 2002") sets out a number of public interest considerations  that
    a court or Tribunal must take into  account  in  assessing  whether  an
    interference with a person's right to respect for  private  and  family
    life is justified and proportionate.

8.    The maintenance of an effective system of immigration  control  is  in
    the public interest. The appellant entered the UK on 14  February  2009
    with entry clearance as a student. His leave to remain was extended but
    was then  curtailed  because  the  college  licence  was  revoked.  The
    appellant made an in-time application  for  further  leave  to  remain,
    which was granted until 28 February  2015.  His  leave  to  remain  was
    curtailed a second time to end on 26 August 2014. He  made  an  in-time
    application for leave to  remain  as  a  spouse.  The  application  was
    refused in a decision dated 24 August 2015, which  is  the  subject  of
    this appeal. The appellant's immigration history shows that he remained
    in the UK lawfully throughout his period of residence.

9.    On the evidence currently before the Tribunal the only aspect  of  the
    appellant's immigration history that gives weight  to  public  interest
    issues is the allegation  that  the  appellant  used  deception  in  an
    earlier  application  for  leave  to  remain  because  he  produced   a
    fraudulent English language certificate. The First-tier Tribunal  judge
    found that  the  appellant  failed  to  give  a  sufficiently  credible
    explanation in response to the allegation and that the  respondent  had
    discharged the burden of proof. He found the appellant's evidence about
    the nature of the testing to be vague and lacking in  detail.  He  even
    went so far as to cast some doubt on whether the appellant had  been  a
    genuine student. These are  negative  findings  that  give  significant
    weight to the public interest in removal.

10.   The appellant speaks some English and there is evidence to  show  that
    his wife is working and that the family are likely  to  be  financially
    independent.  Although  these  are  factors  that  section  117B(2)-(3)
    requires a Tribunal to take into account, the fact that  the  appellant
    is not an additional burden on public finances is a neutral factor that
    does not add weight to the individual circumstances  of  his  claim  to
    remain in the UK: see AM (Section 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260.

11.   The appellant entered a relationship and married his wife  at  a  time
    when he had leave to remain as  a  student.  Section  117B(4)  requires
    little weight to be given to  a  relationship  formed  with  a  British
    partner at a time when a person was in the  UK  "unlawfully".  Although
    the appellant would have known that his immigration  status  was  in  a
    temporary category and was precarious, section  117B(4)  only  requires
    little weight to  be  given  to  the  relationship  if  his  leave  was
    unlawful, which it was not. As such, I find that I can give some weight
    to the fact that the appellant has established a family life in the  UK
    with a British partner. However, the First-tier  Tribunal  has  already
    considered whether there would be  'insurmountable  obstacles'  to  the
    couple continuing their family life in Bangladesh  and  concluded  that
    there were none. Those findings were preserved. The fact that there are
    no insurmountable obstacles to the couple continuing their family  life
    in Bangladesh does reduce the weight to be given to the assertion  that
    it would be disproportionate to remove the appellant when there are  no
    obstacles to them continuing their family life in Bangladesh.

12.   The appellant has lived in the UK for a  period  of  eight  years.  No
    meaningful evidence is produced to show that  he  has  established  any
    particularly strong ties in the UK. The appellant falls  far  short  of
    the private life requirements contained  in  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    immigration rules both in terms  of  his  length  of  residence  or  in
    showing that there are likely to be  'very  significant  obstacles'  to
    integration in Bangladesh, where he grew up and still  has  family  and
    cultural connections. Any private life that he might  have  established
    in the UK was during a time when he  was  remaining  in  the  UK  in  a
    temporary immigration category. The Tribunal  is  required  by  section
    117B(5) to give little weight to any private life that  is  established
    at a time when a person's immigration status is precarious.  For  these
    reasons, I place little weight on any private life that  the  appellant
    might have established when considering where a fair balance should  be
    struck.

13.   I turn to consider the best interests of the  appellant's  three-year-
    old son. I also take into  account  the  fact  that  it  is  reasonably
    foreseeable that the appellant's second child is about to be  born.  In
    assessing the best interests of the child I have taken into account the
    statutory guidance "UKBA Every  Child  Matters:  Change  for  Children"
    (November 2009), which gives further detail about the  duties  owed  to
    children under section 55. In that guidance the UKBA  acknowledges  the
    importance of a number of international instruments relating  to  human
    rights including the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child  (UNCRC).
    The guidance goes on to confirm: "The UK Border Agency must fulfil  the
    requirements of  these  instruments  in  relation  to  children  whilst
    exercising its functions as expressed in UK  domestic  legislation  and
    policies." I take into account the fact that the UNCRC sets out  rights
    including a child's right to survival and  development,  the  right  to
    know and be cared for by his or  her  parents,  the  right  not  to  be
    separated from parents and the  enjoyment  of  the  highest  attainable
    standards of living, health and education without  discrimination.  The
    UNCRC also recognises the common responsibility of both parents for the
    upbringing and development of a child.

14.   I have also taken into account the decisions in ZH (Tanzania)  v  SSHD
    [2011] UKSC 4, Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 and EV  (Philippines)  and
    others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874. The best interests of the child  are
    a primary consideration in this case  but  may  be  outweighed  by  the
    cumulative effect of other matters that weigh in the public interest. I
    take into account that the younger the child  the  more  important  the
    involvement of a parent is likely to be:  see  Berrehab  v  Netherlands
    (1988) 11 EHRR 322.

15.   The fact that the appellant's son is a British citizen is a matter  of
    intrinsic importance. The child had rights and advantages arising  from
    his citizenship. However, at this stage he is still a young  child.  He
    is due to start nursery in September 2017, but is  not  yet  in  formal
    education. His life still revolves very much around his parents. As one
    might expect of a child of that age, there is no evidence to show  that
    he has established any significant ties outside the family unit.  There
    is no evidence to  suggest  that  the  child  has  any  health  issues.
    Although the appellant's wife states that the child has been  receiving
    speech and language therapy no further information is  provided  and  I
    have not been referred to any evidence to support this bare  assertion.



16.   The appellant and his wife were inconsistent in their evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal as to what language the child speaks  at  home.
    The appellant said that the household language is  Bengali  whilst  his
    wife said that the child only speaks or is spoken to in English.  Given
    that the appellant and his wife  were  both  born  and  brought  up  in
    Bangladesh it seems likely that Bengali is spoken in the  family  home.
    Even if the child predominantly speaks English, it is  likely  that  he
    also understands some Bengali. He is of an age where he would  be  able
    to adapt to a new situation and learn a new language if necessary.

17.   I accept that the child is likely to have access to  higher  standards
    of living, health and education if he remains in the UK. However, there
    is no evidence to show that the appellant and his wife could not earn a
    living and provide for their children in Bangladesh  if  they  want  to
    remain as a family unit. The appellant and his wife  both  have  family
    members in Bangladesh who are likely to be able to assist them  to  re-
    establish themselves there. The appellant is an  educated  person.  His
    wife also has work experience. There is nothing to  suggest  that  they
    would be unable to give their children the  love  and  care  that  they
    need, including access to  education  and  healthcare.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal judge noted that the appellant referred to his father being  a
    wealthy entrepreneur in an earlier application for entry clearance.

18.   The evidence contained  in  the  witness  statements  shows  that  the
    appellant's wife is reluctant to relocate  to  Bangladesh  because  she
    considers that the children will have a better education and  lifestyle
    in the UK. It is a matter for her whether she chooses to remain in  the
    UK or continues her family life with the appellant  in  Bangladesh.  If
    she chooses to remain in the UK the appellant's removal would  lead  to
    the separation of the appellant from his  wife  and  children.  At  the
    moment his wife is the  main  bread  winner  and  the  appellant  takes
    responsibility for a large part of the child care while she is at work.
    The separation of the appellant from his child  would  not  be  in  the
    child's best interests. While it is not difficult to  assume  that  the
    separation of the child from his father is likely to  have  an  adverse
    impact on the child there is no evidence before me to show  that  there
    would be an unduly harsh impact on this particular child over and above
    what one might expect if a young child is separated from a parent.

19.   For these reasons I conclude that the best interests of the child  and
    any soon to be new-born are to remain in the UK with both parents where
    they will be able to access the benefits of citizenship, including what
    are likely to be higher attainable  standards  of  living,  health  and
    education. Although I find that it is in the child's best  interest  to
    remain in the UK with both parents this is only marginally  so  because
    of the rights and advantages of his British citizenship.  There  is  no
    evidence to  suggest  that  there  would  be  any  significant  welfare
    concerns if the child relocated to Bangladesh  with  both  parents.  At
    this stage, these findings would apply equally to any new-born child.

20.   In assessing whether public interest considerations  are  sufficiently
    serious to outweigh the best interests of the child I have  taken  into
    account the statutory provisions contained in  section  117B(6),  which
    states that the public interest will not require the  person's  removal
    where he has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a  'qualifying
    child' and it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
    United Kingdom.

21.   As a British citizen the appellant's son is a 'qualifying  child'  for
    the purpose of section 117B(6). It is not disputed that  the  appellant
    has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with the child.  The
    crux of the appeal rests very much on whether it would be  'reasonable'
    to expect the child to leave the  UK  within  the  meaning  of  section
    117B(6). In MA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  the  Court  of
    Appeal expressed some doubt as to  whether  the  'reasonableness'  test
    should include consideration of public interest factors,  but  declined
    to depart from the earlier decision in MM (Uganda) v SSHD  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 450, which concluded that it did. In  MA  (Pakistan)  Lord  Justice
    Elias emphasised that significant weight should still be given  to  the
    interests of a child, especially with  reference  to  the  respondent's
    published  policy  guidance:   Immigration   Directorate   Instructions
    "Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life (as  a  Partner  or  Parent)  and
    Private Life: 10 Year Routes" (August 2015).

22.   The guidance makes a distinction between qualifying children who  have
    been continuously resident in the UK for a period of  seven  years  and
    British children. This reflects the different rights that  might  arise
    from British  citizenship  in  terms  of  immigration  status,  and  in
    particular, under European law. The  relevant  section  of  the  policy
    guidance relating to British children is as follows:

                        "11.2.3.  Would  it  be  unreasonable  to  expect  a
    British Citizen child to leave the UK?
           Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must not
           take a decision in relation to the parent or primary carer of  a
           British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be
           to force that British child to leave the EU, regardless  of  the
           age of that child. This reflects the European Court  of  Justice
           judgment in Zambrano.
           ........
           Where a decision to  refuse  the  application  would  require  a
           parent or primary carer to return to a country outside  the  EU,
           the case must always be assessed on the basis that it  would  be
           unreasonable to expect a British Citizen child to leave  the  EU
           with that parent or primary carer.
           In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant  leave  to
           the parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the  UK
           with the child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence  of
           a genuine and subsisting parental relationship.
           It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant  leave  where
           the conduct of  the  parent  or  primary  carer  gives  rise  to
           considerations of such weight as to justify separation,  if  the
           child could otherwise stay with another  parent  or  alternative
           primary carer in the UK or in the EU.
           The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:

            . criminality falling below the thresholds set out in paragraph
              398 of the Immigration Rules;
            . a very poor immigration history, such as where the person has
              repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.

           In considering whether refusal may be appropriate  the  decision
           maker must consider the impact on the child of  any  separation.
           If the decision maker is  minded  to  refuse,  in  circumstances
           where separation would  be  the  result,  this  decision  should
           normally be  discussed  with  a  senior  caseworker  and,  where
           appropriate, advice  may  be  sought  from  the  Office  of  the
           Children's Champion on the implications for the welfare  of  the
           child, in order to inform the decision."

23.   The policy applies in circumstances where the effect of  the  decision
    is to force the parent or primary carer of the British child  to  leave
    the EU. In this case the appellant's wife and child  are  both  British
    citizens. Neither of them  can  be  removed.  Contrary  to  Mr  Malik's
    submissions, there is no evidence to suggest that the appellant's  wife
    would be forced to leave the UK if he is removed. She may choose to  do
    so if she wishes to continue their family life together, but she is not
    forced to do so. She made quite clear in her witness statement that she
    would want to remain in the UK where she considers her  children  would
    have access to better quality education and healthcare. Undoubtedly  it
    would be more difficult for her to work and support the family  without
    the appellant. At the moment, she is the main breadwinner of the family
    and the  appellant  looks  after  the  child.  No  doubt  it  would  be
    increasingly difficult for her to work full-time  and  look  after  two
    children in the absence of any other close  relatives  in  the  UK.  It
    seems likely that the appellant's wife might become more  dependent  on
    public  funds  if  she  is  less  able  to  work   due   to   childcare
    responsibilities. This is a factor that I have taken  into  account  in
    assessing what weight should  be  placed  on  the  public  interest  in
    removing the appellant from the UK.

24.   The guidance goes on to recognise that, even if another  parent  would
    be able to remain in the UK with the  child,  weighty  public  interest
    considerations would be needed to justify the separation of  a  British
    child from a parent. The circumstances outlined in the policy  guidance
    are not exhaustive,  but  indicate  that  significant  public  interest
    considerations such as criminality or a very poor  immigration  history
    might be sufficient to justify a decision that would lead to a  British
    child being separated from a parent.

25.   Mr Malik asserts that the appellant does not have a  poor  immigration
    history, but the findings of the First-tier Tribunal do not support the
    assertion. It is the case that the appellant remained in  the  UK  with
    leave to remain, but that  is  not  the  only  measure  of  a  person's
    immigration history. In this case a serious allegation was made by  the
    respondent, which the First-tier Tribunal accepted.

26.   The ETS allegation involves two serious matters.  Firstly,  ETS  found
    that there was evidence to show that the appellant was likely  to  have
    obtained an English language certificate by using a proxy  test  taker.
    The use of a proxy test taker involved the use of fraud to  obtain  the
    certificate. The individual fraud formed part of a widespread organised
    fraud involving thousands  of  tests.  It  is  clearly  in  the  public
    interest to discourage such widespread fraud. Secondly, in relying on a
    fraudulent  test  certificate  the  appellant  sought  to  deceive  the
    respondent when he applied for further leave to remain  as  a  student.
    The fact that he knowingly sought  to  use  a  fraudulent  document  to
    obtain leave to remain is a breach of immigration law  at  the  serious
    end of the scale.

27.   The appellant was granted leave to remain as a student but the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  expressed  doubts  about  the  genuine  nature  of  the
    appellant's studies in the UK given the vague evidence he gave  at  the
    hearing. Despite his claim to have studied in the UK since  2009  there
    is little evidence to show that the appellant made any progress in  his
    studies or obtained any meaningful qualifications. This casts doubt  on
    whether he was remaining in accordance with the conditions of his leave
    to remain. The appellant has not addressed any of  the  serious  public
    policy issues in his most recent witness statement.

28.   The  allegation  that  the  appellant  obtained  an  English  language
    certificate by fraud,  and  then  sought  to  use  it  to  deceive  the
    respondent  in  an  application  for  further  leave  to   remain,   is
    sufficiently serious to justify refusal of leave to  remain  under  the
    'Suitability' requirements of the immigration rules. The effect of  the
    decision to refuse leave to remain under the 'Suitability' requirements
    is that the appellant does not meet the requirements of the immigration
    rules despite the fact that it is accepted that  he  is  in  a  genuine
    relationship with a British  citizen  and  has  a  British  child.  The
    respondent asserts that the rules strike a  fair  balance  between  the
    public  interest  and  individual  family  and  private  life   issues.
    Appropriate weight should be given to the respondent's  policy  as  set
    out in the rules and relevant statutes.

29.   There  appear  to  be  no  particularly  compelling  or  compassionate
    circumstances to take into account in an assessment outside  the  rules
    save for the appellant's understandable desire to remain in the UK with
    his family. I have found that the best  interests  of  the  appellant's
    child (and soon to be second child) are to remain in the UK  with  both
    parents where they are likely to have access to a  better  standard  of
    living, health and education. However, I have found that  the  evidence
    only shows that it is marginally in the child's interests to remain  in
    the UK because his status as a British citizen, there is no evidence to
    show that his needs would not be catered for if  the  family  chose  to
    relocate to Bangladesh in order to continue their family life. The fact
    that the child is a British citizen is a primary consideration  but  is
    not a 'trump card' that will outweigh  the  public  interest  in  every
    case. The best interests of a child can be outweighed by the cumulative
    effect of countervailing considerations.

30.   I have given significant weight to the interests  of  the  appellant's
    child and the impact that it might have on him if he were to  lose  the
    advantages of citizenship by relocating to  Bangladesh  or  if  he  was
    separated from his father if his mother chose to remain in the UK.

31.   The appellant entered into marriage and began a family at a time  when
    he knew his immigration status was precarious. Although he remained  in
    the UK with leave to remain, in fact, he has a  very  poor  immigration
    history involving serious abuse of the immigration system.  It  is  not
    necessary to show repeated incidents of  abuse.  The  allegations  made
    against him of fraud and deceit go  to  the  heart  of  maintaining  an
    effective system of immigration control. The appellant  does  not  meet
    the requirements of the immigration rules because his conduct makes  it
    undesirable to allow him to remain in the UK. The consequence  of  this
    decision is that the family have to make a difficult  decision  whether
    to relocate to  Bangladesh  or  suffer  separation  in  order  for  the
    children to access the advantages of life in the UK. I have found  that
    it is marginally in the child's best interest to remain in the UK  with
    both parents, but there is nothing to suggest that his needs would  not
    be  adequately  catered  for  if  he  relocated  with  his  family   to
    Bangladesh. Although it would  not  be  in  his  best  interest  to  be
    separated from his father, for the reasons given above, I conclude that
    his father's actions are sufficiently serious to outweigh the interests
    of the child in this particular case. Having given  significant  weight
    to the best interests of the child and weighed it  against  the  public
    policy considerations I conclude  that  it  would  be  'reasonable'  to
    expect the child to leave the UK within the theoretical  meaning  given
    to the phrase contained in section 117B(6).  I conclude that removal in
    consequence of the decision strikes a fair balance between  the  weight
    to be given to the public interest and the impact  on  the  individuals
    involved in this case (points (iv) & (v) of Lord Bingham's  five  stage
    approach in Razgar).

32.   I conclude that the decision to refuse a human  rights  claim  is  not
    unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

Decision

The appeal is DISMISSED on human rights grounds


Signed   [pic]   Date 16 August 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


