
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29770/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Heard on 8th of June 2017                 |on 26th June 2017                |
|Prepared on 16th of June 2017             |                                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                                    [K K]
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Masood of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on  [  ]  1986.  She  appeals
      against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Andrew  sitting
      at Birmingham on 4th of October 2016 in which the Judge dismissed  the
      Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 10th  of
      July 2014. That decision was to refuse to issue the Appellant  with  a
      residence card as confirmation of a right of residence under  the  EEA
      Regulations 2006 as the spouse of a qualified  person.  The  Appellant
      had previously appealed that decision to the First-tier  Tribunal  but
      her appeal was dismissed. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to
      the Upper Tribunal. The Upper Tribunal finding a material error of law
      in the First-tier Tribunal's decision remitted the matter to the First-
      tier for a fresh hearing de novo. It thus came before Judge Andrew who
      also dismissed the Appellant's appeal.  The  Appellant  appealed  that
      decision and permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal
      Judge Chapman on 22 April 2017. Thus the  matter  came  before  me  to
      determine whether there was a material error of law in the  First-tier
      decision of Judge Andrew such that it fell to be  set  aside  and  the
      matter reheard. If there was not, then the decision would stand.


   2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 26 January 2013 with leave
      to remain as a Tier 4 student.  She married  [WK]  ("the  husband")  a
      Polish citizen (born on [ ] 1985) on 7th of  February  2014  in  Luton
      having met him in September of the previous year.  Her  student  leave
      expired in or about June or July 2014. She had attended  the  European
      Higher College studying for a business diploma but did  not  pass  the
      course. She last attended college in March 2014.


The Refusal


   3. On 10th of February 2014 the Appellant applied for  a  residence  card
      and she and her husband were invited to an interview with  immigration
      officers on 13th of June 2014. The  Appellant  and  her  husband  were
      interviewed separately and at length. Questions were asked in relation
      to their first meeting, how the relationship developed,  the  proposal
      of marriage, the wedding day, their  respective  religions  addresses,
      occupations, studies and recent events. The Appellant  was  asked  641
      questions and her husband was asked  248.  The  Respondent  considered
      there were several major discrepancies throughout the interview and it
      appeared to the Respondent that the Appellant and her husband did  not
      know each other very well. Certain of the discrepancies were  set  out
      in the reasons for refusal letter dated 10th of July 2014.


The Appeal


   4.  The Appellant's explanation for the interviews'  inconsistencies  was
      that there was a communication gap. She  regretted  being  interviewed
      without an interpreter. The Appellant and her husband had had  a  long
      journey just before the interview and the interviews  were  too  long.
      Her husband was drinking too much, his eyes were very red and she  had
      had travel sickness problems on the way. She nevertheless acknowledged
      to Judge Andrew that she had said to the interviewing officer that she
      was all right to be interviewed.


   5. The Appellant complained in an amended witness statement dated 14th of
      May 2015 that her relationship with her husband  had  gone  through  a
      violent patch. She stated that she was  pregnant  with  her  husband's
      child but had a miscarriage as the result  of  his  domestic  violence
      against her. Her family believed that she had brought shame upon  them
      by marrying a Polish Christian and they disowned her. She was  adamant
      that the marriage to her husband was  genuine  and  it  was  wrong  to
      suggest that it was a marriage of convenience. She was afraid that  if
      returned to India she would be subject to an  honour  killing  because
      she had brought shame to her family. India was not  safe  for  a  lone
      woman.


   6. In support of her claim that she  had  been  the  victim  of  domestic
      violence at the hands of her  husband  she  produced  in  one  of  her
      bundles a letter dated 7th of October 2014 from a firm  of  solicitors
      in Leighton Buzzard, Usmani King. They had attended with  the  husband
      at Luton police station on 4th of October 2014 following an allegation
      of assault made by the Appellant against her husband.  The  allegation
      was that the couple had argued on the doorstep and  that  the  husband
      had struck the Appellant. The solicitors repeated in their letter  the
      instructions they had received from the husband that although  he  had
      had something to drink and had cross words with the Appellant  he  did
      not lay a finger on her. She was  arguing  with  him  because  he  was
      comfortably sitting on the doorstep drinking a can of beer but she did
      not want him to be seen by the neighbours  sitting  outside  drinking.
      The solicitor's advice  was  that  the  husband  should  give  a  full
      explanation of what had happened as on those instructions  no  assault
      had taken place.


   7. On 29th of October 2014 just over four weeks after  the  incident  the
      Appellant made a statement for her  appeal.  Her  explanation  of  the
      incident was that when she asked  her  husband  to  drink  indoors  he
      shouted very loudly at  her  and  the  neighbours  called  the  police
      because they thought she and her husband had had a fight  and  perhaps
      he had beaten her up. Her husband was arrested but, she said, she  was
      not in fact hit.

The Hearing at First Instance

   8. On the 4th of October 2016, the matter came before Judge  Andrew  when
      both the  Appellant  and  the  Respondent  were  represented.  At  the
      commencement of the hearing the Judge handed to both representatives a
      copy of a letter sent to the court apparently from the  husband  dated
      22nd of September 2016. She granted a short adjournment in order  that
      the  Appellant's   representative   might   take   instructions.   The
      representative objected to the letter being put in  evidence  but  was
      overruled. The letter was written in broken English.


   9. The letter stated that all allegations made against  the  writer  were
      false and moreover his marriage to the Appellant  "has  been  finished
      and the divorce has  been  done".  He  complained  that  the  domestic
      violence case against him was a fake allegation  and  the  Magistrates
      court had given a decision in his favour. The police report "[about] a
      miscarriage was also not real as I never ever been [in] a relation  at
      that time [with] the Appellant". Although he had  married  her  for  a
      good reason he later came to know she just needed a visa. Her  brother
      also offered him money to continue the relationship until  she  got  a
      visa. It was when he refused this that  both  the  Appellant  and  her
      brother created the false allegations to prove that she was  a  victim
      of domestic violence. He was not attending court because the  marriage
      had broken down and the divorce had been made. He had been cleared  of
      all false allegations.


  10.  The Judge noted  at  paragraph  10  of  her  determination  that  the
      discrepancies identified by the Respondent in the refusal  letter  had
      not been addressed in the Appellant's statement or  the  statement  of
      her husband. The Judge was satisfied on the evidence that  there  were
      substantial inconsistencies in the answers given by the Appellant  and
      her husband at interview and these were not  satisfactorily  explained
      merely by saying the interview was long or that there had been a  long
      journey.


  11. The Judge noted a number of letters confirming that the Appellant  was
      depressed and had been prescribed medication and  that  the  Appellant
      had  had  a  miscarriage  in  January  2015.  However,  there  was  no
      indication from the medical documentation that the miscarriage was the
      result of an assault on the Appellant by her husband as  she  claimed.
      Further there was no indication as to the paternity of the child. When
      the assault matter had gone  to  court,  the  husband  was  found  not
      guilty.


  12. The Judge acknowledged at paragraph 19 that the evidence  showed  that
      at least at some point the Appellant and her husband  were  living  in
      the same house. This was acknowledged by the  husband  in  his  letter
      upon which the Judge  said  she  placed  some  weight.  The  Appellant
      confirmed in her evidence that she was in the process of divorcing her
      husband although she was still awaiting the decree absolute  from  her
      divorce solicitors. I pause to note at this point that towards the end
      of the hearing before me counsel  for  the  Appellant  explained  that
      there had been a decree absolute on 7th of April 2016 in other words 6
      months before the hearing before Judge Andrew.  Why  that  information
      was not given to Judge Andrew was not explained. Instead she was  told
      that the Appellant was still awaiting the  decree  absolute  from  her
      divorce solicitors.


  13. This was obviously highly relevant to the issue Judge  Andrew  had  to
      decide because if the Appellant and her husband were not  married  the
      Appellant was not entitled to a residence card as his spouse. The case
      was not put to Judge Andrew on the basis that the Appellant retained a
      right of residence  because  the  marriage  had  broken  down  due  to
      violence by her husband. Instead the issue before Judge Andrew and the
      issue that was to take up most  of  the  time  of  the  onward  appeal
      against her decision was whether the Judge was correct in finding that
      the marriage of  the  Appellant  and  her  husband  had  been  one  of
      convenience. The marriage was certainly short, just over 2 years.  The
      Judge, influenced by the letter and the  failure  of  the  parties  to
      explain the interview discrepancies, found that it was a  marriage  of
      convenience and dismissed the appeal.


  14. The Judge could have dismissed  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
      parties were not married and thus the Appellant was not entitled to  a
      residence card. Even if the  Judge  was  wrong  in  finding  that  the
      Appellant's marriage was one of convenience, such an error was  not  a
      material one since the appeal could not succeed in any event. That  is
      not quite the end of the matter for the reasons which I will  now  set
      out in more detail. In doing so I will of  necessity  give  some  more
      detail about  the  onward  appeal  and  the  submissions  made  to  me
      particularly about the weight the Judge placed on the letter from  the
      Appellant's husband.

The Onward Appeal

  15. In her grounds of onward appeal  the  Appellant  complained  that  the
      Judge had erred in finding that the Appellant's marriage  was  one  of
      convenience. The Judge  had  given  weight  to  the  husband's  letter
      ignoring objections to its admission. It was doubtful whether in  fact
      it was sent by the husband. The presumption in a case where the  child
      is that of a married couple is that the husband  is  the  father.  The
      Judge had not considered this but was looking for  evidence  from  the
      Appellant. Evidence of domestic violence was clearly  relevant  as  it
      showed that the couple were cohabiting. It was difficult  to  see  why
      parties to a fake marriage would go to the trouble of having  a  child
      together.


  16. Permission was refused by a Judge in the First-tier but  when  renewed
      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman found  that  there  were  arguable
      errors. The Judge may have erred in finding that  the  Respondent  had
      discharged the burden of proving the marriage was one  of  convenience
      in the light of the evidence submitted on the Appellant's  behalf.  It
      was arguable she had erred in apparently accepting the  contention  by
      the husband that he was deceived into thinking that the  marriage  was
      real. There was evidence from reputable sources that  the  Appellant's
      case was identified as a high-risk  case  of  domestic  abuse.  Whilst
      domestic violence and a marriage of convenience were  not  necessarily
      mutually exclusive it was arguable that since the parties were  living
      in the same house and the Appellant had during  the  duration  of  the
      marriage become pregnant the Judge may have erred in her assessment of
      the evidence as a whole. In finding that she could  not  know  whether
      the Appellant's husband was the father of the child the Judge arguably
      erred given the presumption in English law  that  a  husband  was  the
      father of any child born of the marriage. Although no child  was  born
      it was the case  on  the  medical  evidence  that  the  Appellant  had
      suffered a miscarriage.

The Hearing Before Me

  17. At the hearing before me counsel concentrated on her  complaint  about
      the treatment of the letter said to be from the husband. The Judge had
      placed significant weight on the letter.  Whilst  the  First-tier  had
      more flexibility  than  a  court  would  and  under  rule  14  of  the
      Procedural Rules might admit evidence, the  letter  from  the  husband
      should not have been admitted. Firstly, the relationship  between  the
      Appellant and her husband  had  broken  down  in  less  than  amicable
      circumstances and the letter may have been motivated by  ill  feeling.
      Secondly, what he said in the letter was inconsistent with what he had
      said in his witness statement in support of the appeal. Thirdly, there
      was nothing to show that he had signed the letter.  The  signature  on
      the letter was inconsistent with the signature on the statement  taken
      by the previous solicitors. Fourthly, the letter could not  be  tested
      in cross examination and that affected the weight to be given  to  it.
      If the Judge had wanted to probe this aspect of the case  further  she
      could have issued a witness summons to compel the husband's attendance
      in order that he could be cross  examined.  That  would  have  been  a
      fairer course of action.


  18. The husband's letter appeared to suggest that this was a  marriage  by
      deception yet there was clear evidence that the Appellant had  been  a
      victim of domestic violence. It was not open to the  Judge  to  simply
      dismiss that. The fact that no further action was taken by the  police
      and/or the Appellant's husband was acquitted by  the  Magistrates  did
      not mean that no domestic violence had taken place since the  criminal
      standard  was  higher  than  the  civil   standard   of   balance   of
      probabilities.


  19. Counsel relied on an extract from Phipson on evidence that there was a
      presumption that husband was the father of a child  born  in  wedlock.
      She accepted that the decree absolute dated 7th of  April  2016  meant
      that the  Appellant  could  not  succeed  in  her  application  for  a
      residence card as a spouse. However, the Appellant might succeed under
      the provisions for a retained right of residence (under Regulation  10
      of the 2006 Regulations). The  Upper  Tribunal  should  therefore  set
      aside the decision of the First-tier and either  remake  the  decision
      itself or remit the matter back (which would be for a third  time)  to
      be re-determined under Regulation 10. In reply, the Presenting Officer
      indicated that the case came down to the weight to be ascribed to  the
      letter from the husband. It was not perverse to attach some weight  to
      the letter. There was other evidence that the marriage might be one of
      convenience. Counsel added that the  date  of  the  domestic  violence
      incident was 27th of September 2014. There was a handwritten statement
      from the Appellant to the police about what had happened but the  main
      submission in this case was about the husband's letter.

Findings

  20. As I have indicated this appeal cannot succeed before  me,  indeed  it
      could not succeed before Judge  Andrew  for  the  simple  reason  that
      although the parties were married at  the  time  of  the  application,
      appeals in relation to the 2006 (and 2016) Regulations are  determined
      on the basis of the facts at the date  of  hearing  not  the  date  of
      decision. In this case  that  has  worked  to  the  detriment  of  the
      Appellant since by the time of the hearing  before  Judge  Andrew  the
      Appellant was no longer married. The Appellant may  or  may  not  have
      prospects of success with an application under Regulation 10 but  that
      would have to be a separate application made to  the  Respondent.  The
      Appellant cannot vary an application once the Respondent  has  made  a
      decision on the application. There was no section 120 notice  in  this
      case and no application to Judge Andrew (or me) to vary the grounds of
      appeal.


  21. In any  event,  I  do  not  consider  that  having  to  make  a  fresh
      application would be to the detriment of the Appellant. Firstly, there
      is no fee payable on an EEA application. Secondly, it is not necessary
      to have leave before making an EEA application and so  the  fact  that
      the Appellant has no leave at the present time is irrelevant. Thirdly,
      the Appellant would retain full rights of appeal  by  making  a  fresh
      application if that fresh application under Regulation 10  was  to  be
      refused  by  the  Respondent.  As  against  that  I   understand   the
      Appellant's concern that she has at present  a  decision  against  her
      from a First-tier Judge finding that her marriage to an EU citizen was
      one of convenience. It would follow that she  would  not  be  able  to
      demonstrate that she retained a right of residence if the marriage  to
      which she had been a party was one of convenience.


  22. This perhaps explains why the Appellant has persisted  in  her  onward
      appeal against the decision of Judge Andrew. In truth, it  is  not  an
      onward  appeal  against  the  dismissal  of  her  appeal  against  the
      Respondent's decision since that was hopeless following  the  divorce.
      It is however an appeal against the findings that  Judge  Andrew  made
      that the marriage was one of convenience. A better  course  of  action
      might have been for the Appellant to withdraw  her  notice  of  appeal
      before the matter came before Judge Andrew to make a fresh application
      under Regulation 10. The Respondent might have repeated  her  decision
      in relation to the marriage of convenience when  considering  a  fresh
      application under Regulation 10 but the Appellant could  have  put  in
      more evidence to counter that.


  23. The issue for me is whether in the light of the submissions it is open
      to me to find that  the  First-tier  arrived  at  the  right  decision
      (dismissing the appeal) but by the wrong route (wrongly  finding  that
      the Appellant's marriage was one of convenience). It was urged upon me
      by counsel for the Appellant that I should not seek to put  myself  in
      the position of a factfinder when the case before me was one in  which
      I was only to determine whether there had been an error of  law.  That
      submission is somewhat self-defeating since it would mean that I would
      not deal with the issues raised in the onward grounds  of  appeal  but
      reaffirm that the decision at first instance was correct insofar as it
      dismissed the Appellant's appeal.


  24.  What then of the allegation that this was a marriage of  convenience?
      The Judge was entitled to admit the letter and it was a matter for her
      to decide how much weight she intended to place on it. The  author  of
      the letter was not present to be cross examined  and  ordinarily  that
      would significantly reduce the weight to be placed on such  a  letter.
      The important point is whether the letter in fact says what the  Judge
      interpreted it as saying.


  25.  Taking this letter into account together with  the  letter  from  the
      husband's solicitors regarding the dismissal of the domestic  violence
      matter it seems clear that the Appellant's husband regarded himself as
      being in a genuine and subsisting marriage with the Appellant. What he
      was  disappointed  to  find  out  was  that  the  Appellant  did   not
      reciprocate his feelings for her but  rather  he  felt  she  was  more
      calculated, she very much wanted to  stay  in  this  country  and  was
      prepared to use a European Union Citizen for that purpose. The husband
      indicated that he had been offered money  "to  continue  relation  ...
      until she got a visa". He was suggesting he had been offered money  to
      continue an existing relationship, not to enter into the  relationship
      in the first place. The husband does not say that he was paid money to
      marry the Appellant.


  26. In his letter dated 22nd of September 2016 he  acknowledged  that  the
      divorce had taken place. That weighs  significantly  on  the  question
      whether the letter is  from  him  since  it  indicates  that  he  knew
      something about the marriage which the Appellant  apparently  did  not
      (if her evidence to the Judge at first instance was to  be  believed).
      In the absence of a handwriting expert it is not possible to say  that
      the signature on the letter differs significantly from  the  signature
      on the statement to the extent that they must have been  made  by  two
      different people. A careful reading of the husband's letter shows that
      far from being the prejudicial material that the  Appellant's  counsel
      feared  it  was,  in  certain  important  respects,  it  supports  the
      Appellant's case.


  27.  The husband does not make the Appellant out to be a  pleasant  person
      but that is an irrelevant consideration. The  husband  instructed  his
      solicitors that the Appellant was his partner. He told a  third  party
      (the solicitor) that he was in a relationship with the  Appellant.  He
      denies he is the father of the baby that was tragically miscarried not
      because he had never had  sexual  relations  with  the  Appellant  but
      because he was not having sexual relations with her  at  the  relevant
      time. The husband indicated in his letter that the relationship  began
      as a genuine husband and wife relationship but quickly broke down when
      he realised that his feelings for the Appellant were not  reciprocated
      by her but that she had her own agenda whereby she wished to obtain  a
      visa.


  28. Such a marriage would not be the first in which one party had  entered
      into it more from material reasons than affection. That does not  stop
      the marriage being genuine and subsisting if the parties  were  as  in
      this case living together, apparently  at  some  point  having  sexual
      relations and having rows about each other's personal habits that they
      disapproved of. Against that on the Respondent's side of the scales is
      the fact that this was a short marriage and the  parties  appeared  to
      know very little of each other when questioned. As the  Judge  pointed
      out the parties did not make detailed statements  detailing  why  they
      had failed to answer the questions accurately.  By  the  time  of  the
      hearing before Judge Andrew that would have been very difficult  since
      the Appellant was clearly no longer in communication with her  husband
      so could not expect him to prepare  a  statement  explaining  why  his
      answers were inconsistent. All the Appellant could have done would  be
      to explain her own answers but  without  a  corresponding  explanation
      from her husband her statement on its own might not have taken matters
      very much further.


  29. Judge Andrew was, in my view, right to admit the husband's letter  and
      place significant weight on it. Possibly another Judge might have come
      to a different decision to the Judge at  first  instance  and  instead
      have found that this was a  genuine  albeit  short  lived  and  stormy
      marriage between two people from different cultures who needed to know
      more about each other before rushing into  marriage.  That  would  not
      make Judge Andrew's decision wrong in law but these  observations  may
      be of relevance to  the  Appellant  in  making  an  application  under
      Regulation 10. Rather more detail about  her  married  life  with  her
      husband  is  I  would  suggest  of  some  importance  if  she  is   to
      successfully proceed with a Regulation 10 application. At present, she
      is still in the position of having an  adverse  Respondent's  decision
      against her which could not be successfully challenged in the Tribunal
      because of  the  Appellant's  own  decision  to  divorce  her  husband
      (seemingly against his wishes) before the hearing of her  appeal.  Her
      decision to divorce as soon as she could is understandable  if  indeed
      she has been a victim of domestic violence. There is a  one  year  bar
      before a divorce petition can be issued.


  30. It will be a matter for the Appellant should she make a Regulation  10
      application to satisfy  the  Respondent  that  she  comes  within  the
      requirements. Regulation 10 (5) provides that a person  satisfies  the
      necessary conditions if  they  cease  to  be  a  family  member  of  a
      qualified  person  with  a  permanent  right  of  residence   on   the
      termination of the marriage and that continued right of  residence  in
      the  United   Kingdom   is   warranted   by   particularly   difficult
      circumstances such as that she has been a victim of domestic  violence
      while the marriage was subsisting. As the marriage had not lasted  for
      at least 3 years subparagraph (d) (i) of Regulation  10(5)  would  not
      apply.


  31. It will be necessary for the Appellant to  be  able  to  show  to  the
      Respondent that her husband had had a permanent right of residence and
      that she has been a victim of domestic violence. Judge Andrew was  not
      persuaded of this second point. I make no comment thereon  as  I  have
      not heard sufficient evidence on the point  and  as  counsel  for  the
      Appellant pointed out I am not a fact finder in this appeal.  I  would
      observe that the evidence is  at  present  somewhat  muddled.  On  the
      Appellant's case the September 2014 incident was not one  of  domestic
      violence but there was a second incident. Some clarity is required.  I
      also make no comment on the Appellant's fears  of  what  might  happen
      should she return to India. This part of the claim did not feature  in
      the appeal at first instance (because human rights cannot be argued in
      an EEA appeal, see the Court of Appeal decision in Amirteymour  [2017]
      EWCA Civ 353)  and  would  have  to  be  the  subject  of  a  separate
      application if so advised. I dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.

Signed this 23rd of June 2017

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 23rd of June 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


