
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29944/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 November 2015                  |On 29 December 2015                  |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A R
                             and FIVE appellants
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma, Counsel instructed by Woodford Wise
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the respondent's appeal but for the sake of convenience I  will
    refer to the parties as the "appellants" and to the Secretary of  State
    as the "respondent" as per  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   There  was  an
    anonymity direction made which I continue.

2.   The appellants are  citizens  of  Mauritius.   The  main  appellant  is
    married with three  sons  and  a  daughter.  His  wife  is  the  second
    appellant. The children's dates of  birth  are  30  September  1994,  6
    November 1996, and 3 June 2000 and are the third to  fifth  appellants.
    The eldest daughter is not a party to these proceedings,  her  date  of
    birth is 20 November 1990.  The appellant made an application for leave
    to remain on human rights grounds, which was refused  on  5  July  2014
    with reference to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration rules.

3.   In a  Decision  and  Reasons  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Coffey) ("FtT") promulgated on 15  April  2015,  the  FtT  allowed  the
    appeal.  The appeals of the appellant and  his  wife  were  allowed  on
    human rights grounds under Article 8 outside of the Rules.  The appeals
    of the children were allowed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  paragraph
    276ADE [32 to 34].  The FtT determined that either the pre-2012 version
    of the Rules applied [36] or alternatively that it was  not  reasonable
    for the children to  return  to  Mauritius  [37].  The  FtT  considered
    relevant case law including EV (Philippines) and others v  SSHD  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 874 and Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions affecting children;
    onwards appeals) Iran [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC)  [39  &  40].   Section  55
    "best interests" considerations were also taken  into  account,  namely
    the family as a unit and education in  Mauritius.  The  refusal  letter
    made reference to the ages of the  children  as  at  the  time  of  the
    decision.  They were minors at the date of application.

4.   The  respondent  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  on  the  grounds
    firstly, that the third and fourth appellants could not  succeed  under
    the Rules as they were no longer under 18 years of age; being 18 and 20
    years of age respectively.  That ground was withdrawn by Mr Clarke  and
    I do not propose to deal with that further.

5.   The second ground was that the  FtT  erred  by  considering  the  "best
    interests" of all the children  in  addition  to  those  of  the  fifth
    appellant aged 14 years.  The FtT failed to place weight on the  public
    interest  following  EV  (Philippines)  and  in  particular  failed  to
    consider that it was reasonable for  the  fifth  child  to  follow  the
    parents given that neither parent have leave to remain in the  UK.   It
    was contended that the FtT erred by concluding that the best  interests
    of the children who were in education in the UK outweighed the  benefit
    to the children of remaining with their parents.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Judge Heynes on 23  July
    2015 on the grounds as argued.  In its Decision  and  Reasons  the  FtT
    found that the family entered the UK as visitors in  2004.  The  eldest
    son was a minor at the time the application  was  made  which  the  FtT
    found was on 4 September 2012.

Decision

7.   I have heard submissions from both representatives  this  morning.  The
    only ground pursued by the respondent  was  the  second  ground,  which
    relates to the issue of the best interests of the  children.   The  FtT
    established that the appeals were to be considered under the  rules  in
    force during transitional period namely the pre 13.12.2012  version  of
    paragraph  276ADE  [37].  Alternatively  the  FtT  concluded  that  the
    reasonableness test was met in any event [38]. I am satisfied that  the
    First-tier Tribunal was correct to consider the best  interest  of  all
    the children and did so having looked at all relevant factors including
    length of residence, connection with Mauritius, education, ties  in  UK
    [39-41].  The FtT placed weight on the length of residence  in  the  UK
    [40] during significant years and that fact that the children  were  in
    full time education at critical times studying at  secondary  level,  A
    level and GCSE, and would  be  disadvantaged  by  lack  of  fluency  in
    French[39].

8.   I also find that  the  FtT  also  considered  the  public  interest  in
    returning the children to Mauritius in circumstances where the  parents
    had no lawful status in the UK and further had  regard  to  the  public
    interest as expressed in  Section 117 nationality, Immigration & Asylum
    Act (as amended)[54].  The FtT concluded that the  Rules  were  met  or
    alternatively that it was not reasonable for the family  in  particular
    the children, to return to Mauritius such was  the  strength  of  their
    private lives in the UK.

9.   It is my firm view therefore that the decision  discloses  no  material
    error of law.  The FtT cannot now be criticised for a matter which  was
    not raised before it at the hearing and where the  Secretary  of  State
    was represented.  The grounds of appeal amount to a clear  disagreement
    with the decision made and it is of some surprise  that  permission  to
    appeal was granted.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

The decision of the FtT shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 14.12.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 14.12.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
