
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/29874/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20 April 2017                          |On 3 May 2017                     |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                               DAVINDER SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 22 April 1988. He entered
      the UK on 20 September 2009 on a Tier 4 Student visa. He was
      subsequently granted leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student, most
      recently from 6 March 2013 until 5 November 2014.  On 4 November 2014
      he applied for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of his family
      and private life with his partner and her son (whom I shall refer to
      as the appellant's "step son"), both of whom are British citizens.


   2. On 24 August 2015 the application was refused. The respondent's
      position was that the appellant had, in respect of a previous
      application, obtained test results from Educational Testing Service
      ("ETS") by deception.  Consequently, it was concluded he did not meet
      the suitability requirements for consideration to be given to his
      claim under the Immigration Rules. The respondent also determined that
      there were not exceptional circumstances to warrant allowing his
      application under Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules.


   3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was
      heard - and dismissed - by First-tier Tribunal Judge Whitcombe. The
      appellant now appeals against that decision.


 Decision of First-tier Tribunal


   4. The judge, firstly, considered whether the appellant had used
      deception to obtain test results from ETS and concluded that he had.


   5. The judge then turned to the question of whether removal of the
      appellant from the UK would be contrary to Article 8 ECHR.  The judge
      found that, because the appellant had used deception to obtain test
      results, he fell foul of the suitability requirements in the
      Immigration Rules and therefore his appeal could only succeed outside
      the Rules under Article 8 ECHR.


   6. The judge directed himself that there would need to be compelling
      circumstances to justify a free standing Article 8 assessment, and
      concluded that there were none. He stated that the suitability
      requirement relating to false information has a very obvious public
      policy justification. He noted that it was accepted by the appellant
      that he could return to India to make an application for entry
      clearance without encountering "very significant obstacles" and that
      he has the language and cultural knowledge to live in India whilst
      making an application. The judge then concluded that "there do not
      appear to be any compelling circumstances that would justify a free-
      standing Article 8 assessment."


 Grounds of appeal, permission to appeal and submissions on error of law


   7. The grounds of appeal argue that:
   a) the judge misapplied the burden of proof in considering whether there
      was deception in obtaining the English language test result; and that
   b) the judge, in assessing the appellant's family life, failed to give
      consideration to the relationship between the appellant and his step
      son.


   8. Permission to appeal was not given in respect of the deception issue
      and was limited to the alleged error in respect of Article 8. In
      granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley stated that it was
      arguable the judge had failed to make findings on the relationship
      between the appellant and his step son and to apply s117B(6) of the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").


   9. The appellant's representative did not attend the hearing due to
      sickness. I gave the appellant the option of adjourning the hearing.
      However, he decided to proceed. The appellant's case, in sum, was that
      the judge had not taken account of the relationship between him and
      his step son.


  10. Mr Jarvis stated that no issue was taken in respect of there being a
      genuine relationship between the appellant and his step son. He
      accepted the judge had not dealt in detail with the relationship
      between the appellant and his step son but argued that the judge had
      dealt with the case as put to him by the appellant's representative
      and had balanced Article 8 in an appropriate way, given the weight
      that should properly be given to the appellant's deception.


 Error of Law


  11. There are, in my view, two clear errors of law in the decision.


  12. The first error is that the judge has failed to consider whether it
      would be reasonable for the appellant's step son to leave the UK.


  13. Judges are required statutorily to take into account the enumerated
      considerations specified in Section 117B of the 2002 Act. This
      includes Section 117B(6).


  14. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act states that:

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public
         interest does not require the person's removal where-
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with
         a qualifying child, and
         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom.


  15. The decision does not include any consideration of Section 117B(6). It
      was common ground between the parties that the appellant was not
      subject to deportation, that his step son was a qualifying child, and
      that he had a genuine and subsisting relationship with him. What was
      at issue was whether it would be reasonable for the appellant's step
      son to leave the UK. Failure to consider this factor was a material
      error of law.


  16. A second error of law arises from the failure of the judge to consider
      the best interests of the appellant's step son. It is well established
      that the best interests of a child affected by a decision must be
      taken into account. See, for example, Makhlouf (Appellant) v SSSHD
      [2016] UKSC 59. At no point in the judge's assessment of the
      appellant's private and family life, either under or outwith the
      Immigration Rules, are the best interests of the appellant's step son
      considered or is an explanation given as to why, in these particular
      circumstances, such an assessment is not required. This, too, is a
      material error of law.


 Remade decision


  17. The factual matrix is not in dispute and my findings of fact are as
      follows:


   a) The appellant is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with his
      partner, with whom he lives. She is a British citizen.


   b) The appellant's partner has a son (the appellant's step son), born on
      27 December 2010. The appellant's step son has known the appellant for
      most of his life and considers him to be his father. He does not have
      a relationship with his natural father.


   c) The appellant has a close relationship with his step-son and is his
      primary 'day to day carer', whilst his mother goes to work (at
      Heathrow Airport). For example, the appellant gets his step son ready
      for school and take and collects him from school.


   d) The appellant's parents and wider family live in India.


   e) The appellant's partner is originally from India but her close family
      live in the UK.


   f) If the appellant were removed from the UK, his partner and step-son
      would remain in the UK.


   g) The appellant entered the UK in September 2009 on a student visa and
      subsequently extended his right to remain (remaining in the UK
      lawfully) before applying for leave to remain on the basis of his
      relationship with his partner and step son.


   h) The appellant obtained test scores through ETS on 26 June 2012 as a
      result of deception where a proxy sat the test for him.


  18. The appellant cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules. The
      deception used when applying for leave to remain in the UK as a
      student in 2012 means that he does not satisfy the "suitability"
      requirements under the Immigration Rules. Consequently, the
      Immigration Rules relating either to private life or family life are
      not available to him as a basis upon which to be granted leave to
      remain in the UK.


  19. Accordingly, the only basis upon which the appellant is able to
      succeed in his appeal is if he is able to establish that removing him
      from the UK would be contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8
      ECHR.


  20. As the appellant lives with and is in a genuine relationship with his
      partner and step-son in the UK, it is clearly the case that he has a
      family life in the UK which engages Article 8.  It is also clear that
      the appellant's removal would be in accordance with the law and in
      pursuit of a legitimate aim. The issue in contention, and upon which
      this appeal turns, is whether his removal would be proportionate.


  21. My starting point is to consider the interests of the appellant's step
      son, whose interests are "a" (but not "the") primary consideration.


  22. I am satisfied that it is undoubtedly in the appellant's step-son's
      best interests for the appellant to remain in the UK. The appellant's
      step-son views, and treats, the appellant as his father. They have a
      genuine parent/child relationship. The appellant looks after and
      provides care to his step-son. In these circumstances, I am satisfied
      that is in the appellant's step-son's best interests for the appellant
      to remain in the UK so that this relationship can be maintained.


  23. The fact that it is in the appellant's step son's best interests for
      the appellant to remain in the UK is not determinative of the appeal
      but is a factor - and an important one - in the assessment of whether
      the appellant's removal would be proportionate. Other factors, either
      individually or cumulatively, can outweigh the best interests of a
      child.


  24.  Section 117B of the 2002 Act sets out mandatory considerations in the
      proportionality assessment under Article 8 ECHR. I apply the relevant
      parts of that section to this appeal as follows:


  25. Section 117(B)(1): Maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
      the public interest. This is important in all cases. However, where,
      as here, an appellant has used deception when making an application
      for leave to remain, particular weight should be given to this factor.
      Accordingly, as a result of the deception used by the appellant, the
      public interest weighs heavily against him.


  26. Section 117(B)(2 and 3):The appellant speaks English and, through his
      relationship with his partner, is financially independent.


  27. Section 117(B)(4 and 5): The appellant's relationship with his partner
      was entered into when his immigration status was precarious. Although
      section 117B(4) of the 2002 Act only refers to private life, I am of
      the view, having regard both to the Strasburg jurisprudence and the
      facts of this case, that only little weight should be attached to the
      appellant's family life with his partner. The relationship commenced,
      and developed, at a time when the appellant was in the UK as a
      student. There was no basis for him, or his partner, to have had, at
      that time, any expectation that the appellant was entitled to remain
      permanently in the UK. The appellant and his partner entered into a
      relationship in the full knowledge that the appellant did not have a
      basis to remain in the UK, other than temporarily as a student. I
      therefore attach little weight to the relationship.


  28. I now turn to consider Section 117B(6).


  29. It was common ground that the appellant is not liable to deportation,
      is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with his step son, and
      that his step son is a qualifying child. The only issue under Section
      117B(6), therefore, is whether it is unreasonable to expect the
      appellant's step son to leave the UK.


  30. MA (Pakistan) concludes that the reasonableness test in this context
      is wide ranging, effectively bringing back into play all potentially
      relevant public interest considerations, including the matters
      identified in section 117B. Accordingly, when considering the
      reasonableness of the appellant's step-son's removal, a relevant
      factor is that the appellant used deception in an application for
      leave to remain, conduct which weighs heavily against him and
      strengthens the public interest in his removal.


  31. However, regardless of how egregious the conduct of the appellant may
      have been in using deception, I am not satisfied that it would be
      reasonable to expect his step-son to leave the UK. The appellant's
      step-son is a British citizen with a mother who is a British citizen.
      The respondent's own guidance recognises that it would not normally be
      reasonable to expect a child who is a British citizen to leave the UK.
      See the Immigration Directorate Instruction - Family Migration -
      Appendix FM, Section 1.0(B) "Family Life as a Partner or Parent and
      Private Life, 10 year Routes" dated August 2015.


  32. It might be reasonable to expect the appellant to leave the UK without
      his step-son, but that is not the issue Section 117(B)(6) requires to
      be considered.


  33. I do not underestimate the strength of the public interest in the
      appellant's removal, but the language of Section 117(B)(6) is clear.
      As clarified in MA(Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705
         1. In my judgment, therefore, the only questions which courts and
            tribunals need to ask when applying section 117B(6) are the
            following:
            (1) Is the applicant liable to deportation? If so, section 117B
            is inapplicable and instead the relevant code will usually be
            found in section 117C.
            (2) Does the applicant have a genuine and subsisting parental
            relationship with the child?
            (3) Is the child a qualifying child as defined in section 117D?
            (4) Is it unreasonable to expect the child to leave the United
            Kingdom?
         1. If the answer to the first question is no, and to the other
            three questions is yes, the conclusion must be that article 8 is
            infringed. (emphasis added).
  34. This is a case where the answer to first question is no and other
      three questions  is yes. Accordingly, in accordance with MA (Pakistan)
      and applying the plain meaning of Section 117B(6), it follows that
      that conclusion must be that Article 8 is infringed.  I therefore
      allow the appeal.


Decision

A. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law
and is set aside.

B.  I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 28 April 2017                 |

