
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/29452/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 17 July 2017                          |On 01 August 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                               ms vida amoako
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Akohene, instructed by SLA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a national of Ghana who was born  on  17  April  1969.
    Her application for leave to remain was refused  by  the  Secretary  of
    State under the partner route, the parent route and under  the  private
    life route in a decision dated 13 August 2015.  The Appellant  appealed
    the Secretary of State's decision under section 82 of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and her appeal was dismissed by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Moxon in a decision promulgated on 7 November 2016.
     The Judge noted at paragraph 3 of  the  decision  that  the  Appellant
    conceded that she did not meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and argued her case on Article 8 grounds only outside the  Rules.
    Judge Moxon dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

2.   The Appellant then sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on
    18 May 2017.  The grant of permission states that evidence was provided
    to Judge Moxon of the ill-health of the Appellant's  partner  and  that
    the Judge had not referred to  it.  Judge  Hollingworth  found  it  was
    arguable the Judge fell into error by not setting out  a  consideration
    of that factor.

     The Hearing

3.   I heard submissions from both representatives.  Mr  Akohene  on  behalf
    of the Appellant submitted that the Respondent had accepted that  there
    was a genuine and subsisting relationship between the Appellant and her
    partner and that fell to be considered under  the  partner  route.   At
    this point I reminded Mr Akohene that at the hearing before the  First-
    tier Tribunal it had been conceded on behalf of the Appellant that  she
    could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.   Mr  Akohene
    then submitted that  the  Judge  accepted  at  paragraph  24  that  the
    Appellant's partner suffered from liver problems.  There  was  evidence
    that the partner had not been working  and  he  had  become  a  British
    citizen in 1998. He further  submitted  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    caring for her partner at home and that he had been receiving treatment
    as a British citizen in the UK and that care would have to continue  in
    Ghana which would prevent the Appellant from working.  He submitted  it
    was not reasonable that they be placed in  that  position  due  to  her
    partner's alcoholism.

4.   In response Mr Tufan referred me to the Supreme Court  case  of  R  (on
    the application of Agyarko) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11.  The mere fact  that
    the Appellant's partner was a British citizen and had a job here  could
    not   constitute   insurmountable   obstacles.    The    question    of
    precariousness was assessed in Agyarko and it was concluded that it was
    a stringent test and there had to be very strong compelling factors  in
    order for her claim to succeed.

5.   Mr Akohene responded that the  test  of  reasonableness  had  not  been
    adequately considered as the Appellant was caring for her husband.

Discussion

6.   I concluded that there was no error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The grounds seeking permission  to  appeal  assert
    that the First-tier Tribunal failed to place sufficient weight  on  the
    effect of the British Citizenship of the Appellant's partner and failed
    to have regard to his medical problems.    I  find  that  there  is  no
    substance in either of these allegations. It is manifestly evident that
    due consideration was given to the Appellant's partner's health in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The First-tier Tribunal  referred
    at paragraph 11 to his ill-health  when  recording  the  evidence.  The
    Judge noted that the Appellant's partner had fallen ill  and  lost  his
    job and she was required to care for him.  The Judge  also  noted  that
    the Appellant had adduced a fitness at work statement for  her  partner
    dated 19 April 2016 which stated that her partner suffered from  atrial
    fibrillation and would benefit  from  a  phased  return  to  work.   He
    further noted that a further statement of fitness for work stated  that
    her partner was not fit to work  due  to  alcoholic  cirrhosis  of  the
    liver.  At paragraph 13 of  the  decision  the  Judge  noted  that  the
    Appellant adduced medical documents to show that her  partner  suffered
    liver problems as a result of alcoholism and then at paragraph  16,  in
    recording the Appellant's oral  evidence,  stated  that  the  Appellant
    confirmed that save for his liver, her partner  had  no  other  current
    medical conditions and that she did not know if he could be treated  in
    Ghana.

7.   The First-tier Tribunal then proceeded to make a number of findings  of
    fact which then subsequently fed into the  Article  8  assessment.   At
    paragraph 24 the Judge found that given the various  types  of  medical
    documents he had seen he was satisfied  that  the  Appellant's  partner
    suffered liver problems on account of his alcoholism and noted that  he
    had seen no cogent evidence that he would not be able  to  relocate  or
    that he would not be treated for any medical conditions in  Ghana.   On
    the basis  of  those  findings  of  fact  he  conducted  an  Article  8
    assessment noting that the Appellant was in a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with  a  British  partner,  addressing  all  the  relevant
    considerations under s117B of the Nationality, Immigration, Asylum  and
    Asylum Act 2002, and finding that little weight could  be  given  to  a
    relationship with her partner as she was present in the United  Kingdom
    unlawfully when it commenced.  He further took into  account  that  the
    Appellant's partner was a British citizen at paragraph 38 and  attached
    considerable weight to that fact at paragraph 41.  He  also  took  full
    account  of  the  fact  that  the  relationship  had  been  established
    precariously.

8.   The grounds also assert that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  failing
    to accept that a birth certificate,  purportedly  for  the  Appellant's
    child, was authentic. I find that the First-tier Tribunal gave  a  full
    and adequately reasoned decision as to why  the  Appellant  was  not  a
    credible witness and did not accept that the  Appellant  was  a  parent
    (paragraphs 18 to 25). The Appellant had given an inconsistent  account
    and made no reference to having children in her  application.  Further,
    she gave inconsistent evidence as to her purported child's age.

9.   In my judgment therefore  it  is  clear  the  Judge  did  consider  the
    evidence regarding the state of health of the Appellant's  partner  and
    weighed it in  the  balance  when  considering  the  reasonableness  of
    relocation. He made a specific finding, which was open to  him  on  the
    evidence, that he had seen no cogent evidence that  her  partner  would
    not be able to relocate or that he could not be treated for any medical
    conditions in Ghana. The Appellant's representative had  conceded  that
    the Appellant could not meet the requirements of the Rules and  it  was
    implicit in this concession that she did not meet the  requirements  of
    paragraph EX.1 (b) of Appendix FM and did not  argue  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life with  that  partner  continuing
    outside the UK. In conducting the Article 8 assessment  the  First-tier
    Tribunal took all relevant factors into account, weighed  them  in  the
    balance and gave them appropriate weight. I conclude there is no  error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  I  dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

There is no error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  I
do not set it aside.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 31 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray






