
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29684/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 10th August 2015                  |On 17th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                     Mr Darshitkumar Shaileshkumar Patel
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kannangara, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mr Darshitkumar Shaileskumar Patel date of birth 6th May
    1986, is a citizen of India.  Having considered all  the  circumstances
    and no application having been made for such I do not make an anonymity
    direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge George promulgated on  1st April 2015, whereby  the
    judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against  the  decisions  of  the
    Respondent dated 10th July 2014. The decisions by the  Respondent  were
    to refuse the Appellant further leave to remain in the UK as a  student
    and to remove the Appellant from the UK to India.

 3. By decision made on the 11 June 2015  leave  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted. Thus the matter appears before me to determine in
    the first instance whether or not there is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    original determination.

 4. The Appellant had entered the UK in 2nd July 2009  as  a  student.  His
    leave as a student had been extended at various times until 28th  March
    2014. In March 2014 the Appellant  had  made  application  for  further
    leave supported by a CAS dated 28th March  2014  from  the  Centre  for
    Teaching Management Ltd [CTM].  The appellant was seeking to commence a
    new course. It appears that the appellant's  previous  course  had  not
    been completed through no fault of the appellant.

 5. For reasons that are not apparent the CAS was withdrawn by CTM  on  the
    29th May 2014. CTM continues to have a licence as a sponsor, so it  was
    unrelated to the status of the college. There being no valid  CAS,  the
    respondent  on  the  10th  July  2014  made  a  decision  refusing  the
    appellant's decision.

 6. I note, although its significance is unclear, that on the CAS  computer
    print out there is reference to the "latest acceptance date"  as  being
    the 25th April 2014. It would be speculation on my part as to what that
    means. However no evidence had been submitted by the appellant  of  any
    correspondence between him and the sponsoring  college.  There  was  no
    evidence before the judge

 7. The CAS having been withdrawn  post  the  application  the  appellant's
    representative is seeking to argue that the appellant should have  been
    given 60 days in which to find an alternative sponsor/college.

 8. There being no reason given for withdrawing the  CAS,  the  appellant's
    representative argued that there  was  a  duty  on  the  respondent  to
    establish the reason for the withdrawal of the  CAS.  In  arguing  that
    there was such a duty, the appellant's representative argued  the  duty
    was on the respondent because in the CAS print out there is  a  section
    below the CAS details headed "Sponsor Note", which  the  representative
    argued was where the sponsoring college "had to"  fill in  the  reasons
    for withdrawing the CAS. It was argued that it was incumbent  upon  the
    respondent to check the reason for the CAS being withdrawn.

 9. Further to that the representative was arguing that the  respondent  in
    the guidance relating to Tier 4  (General)  Student  Migrant  indicates
    that decisions would be made within 60 days.  The  respondent  had  not
    followed the guidance in making the decision in the  present  case.  If
    the respondent had followed the guidance the CAS would still have  been
    valid at the time a decision should have been made.

10. The appellant seeks to rely upon the  cases  of  Patel  (Revocation  of
    Sponsor's licence) [2011] UKUT 00211 and Patel  (Tier  4  -no  "60  day
    extension") India [2011] UKUT 187 [Patel B] to support the  claim  that
    the appellant should have been granted  an  extension  of  60  days  to
    enable him to find a new sponsor. The judge had  failed  to  apply  the
    case law and the appeal should be allowed to the extent that he  should
    be given 60 days in which to find a new sponsor.

11. For the respondent it was argued that there was  no  responsibility  on
    the respondent to check the reason for the withdrawal of  the  CAS  and
    that as the appellant could not show  the  reason  for  the  CAS  being
    withdrawn, the Judge was entitled to make the decision  he  did.  There
    was no duty or obligation on the respondent. The  judge  had  therefore
    been entitled to make the findings  that  he  did.  The  appellant  had
    failed to establish any reason for the withdrawal of the CAS. The judge
    was entitled in line with the cases of Kaur v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  13
    and Rahman v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ  11  to  find  that  there  was  no
    obligation on the respondent to establish the reason for withdrawal and
    to find that the appellant did not meet the requirements of the rules.

12.  From reading Patel B it is clear that  the  decision  centres  on  the
    Policy Document of  the  respondent  relating  to  where  a  sponsoring
    college loses its licence and the circumstances in  which  that  policy
    can be relied upon. From reading paragraph 15 the  policy  in  question
    was specifically related to situations in which the sponsoring  college
    lost its licence. That is not applicable in the present circumstances.

13. The cases otherwise cited clearly deal with the limits of  the  policy.
    There was no obligation on the respondent to enquire or  establish  the
    reason that the CAS was withdrawn. That was a matter for the  appellant
    to prove. Here it was not as a result of the college losing its licence
    that the CAS was withdrawn. It  was  for  the  appellant  to  show  the
    reasons for the CAS being cancelled. There is  no  obligation  or  duty
    respondent to check what the reasons for withdrawal are. There  was  no
    obligation on the respondent to give 60 days to enable an applicant  to
    find an alternative college  nor  any  policy  where  a  CAS  had  been
    withdrawn by the sponsoring college that an applicant would be given 60
    days to find an alternative sponsor.

14. In the circumstances the judge has properly considered the case law and
    was entitled to make the decision that he did. There was  no  error  of
    law in the decision and the decision to dismiss  this  on  all  grounds
    stands.

Decision

15. I find that there is no arguable error of law in the determination  and
    the decision to dismiss this on all grounds stands.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
