
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29332/2013
                                                               IA/10043/2014
                                                               IA/10044/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 September 2015                 |On 20 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    SS-A
                                     SMA
                                     ODA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr C Jacobs instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity order under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/2698  as  amended)  in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of the parties (the second and third respondents)
    who are children.  This order  prohibits  the  disclosure  directly  or
    indirectly (including by the parties) of the identity  of  any  of  the
    respondents.  Any disclosure or breach of this order may  amount  to  a
    contempt of court.  This order shall remain in force unless revoked  or
    varied by a Tribunal or court.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the respondents as the "claimants" in this determination.

Introduction

 3. The claimants are citizens of Nigeria who were born respectively on  18
    March 1972, 28 December 2003 and 29 February 2008.  The first  claimant
    is the mother of the second and third claimants  who  are  respectively
    her son and daughter.  The claimants all came to  the  UK  in  February
    2012 with entry clearance as visitors.

 4. On 24 July 2012,  the  first  claimant  claimed  asylum  with  her  two
    children as her dependants.  In a decision dated 23  August  2012,  the
    Secretary of State rejected the first claimant's claim for asylum  (and
    that of her two children as her dependants) and also refused them leave
    to remain under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 5. Further submissions were  made  on  21  August  2013.   Thereafter,  in
    decisions dated 11 December 2013, the Secretary of State again  refused
    each of the claimants leave to remain in the  UK.   In  consequence  of
    those decisions, the Secretary of State made decisions  to  remove  the
    claimants under s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 to Nigeria.

 6. The claimants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    dated 2 May 2014,  Judge  Trevaskis  allowed  each  of  the  claimants'
    appeals under Art 8.

 7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal and on 29 May  2014,
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Lever) granted the  Secretary  of  State
    permission to appeal.

 8. The appeal first came before me on 23 September 2014.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 16 October  2014,  I  concluded  that  Judge  Trevaskis'
    decision could not stand as he had erred  in  law  in  finding  in  the
    claimants' favour under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 9. As a consequence, the appeal was re-listed for a resumed hearing before
    me in order to remake the decisions under Art 8.

10. That hearing took place on 21 September 2015.

The Issues

11. At the hearing, the claimants were represented by  Mr  Jacobs  and  the
    Secretary of State was represented by Mr Diwnycz.

12. It was common ground that the central issue in the appeal concerned the
    position of the third claimant.  The third claimant suffers from sickle
    cell anaemia, a number of related physical conditions and suffers  from
    learning difficulties and has special educational needs.

13. On behalf of the claimants, Mr Jacobs placed no reliance upon Art 3  of
    the ECHR.  However, he relied upon Art 8 of  the  ECHR  and  the  third
    claimant's health, social and educational needs.  It was common  ground
    between the parties that if the  third  claimant's  return  to  Nigeria
    would breach Art 8, then the appeals  of  all  three  claimants  should
    succeed.

14. At the hearing, the  first  claimant,  SS-A  gave  oral  evidence.   In
    addition, I heard  oral  evidence  from  the  first  claimant's  social
    worker, KH.

15. Mr Jacobs also relied upon documents in the claimants' bundle submitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal and a  further  bundle  of  some  265  pages
    submitted for this appeal in the Upper Tribunal.

16. Mr Jacobs relied upon his skeleton argument for his central  submission
    that it would breach Art 8 to return  the  third  claimant  to  Nigeria
    having regard to the impact that would  have  on  her  health  (in  the
    absence of comparable treatment  for  her  sickle  cell  anaemia),  the
    evidence of increased risk of stroke both in travelling to Nigeria, the
    impact upon the third claimant as a result of  the  disruption  to  her
    environment both social and educational  including  that  her  "social"
    needs could not be matched in Nigeria and the risk to her of the  first
    claimant, her mother  being  unable  to  cope  and  putting  the  third
    claimant at risk.

17. Mr Jacobs elaborated upon his skeleton argument  in  his  helpful  oral
    submissions and he placed reliance upon the Court of Appeal's  decision
    in GS (India) and Others v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40 and in AE  (Algeria)
    v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 653 for his submission that,  having  regard  to
    the fact that the third claimant  was  a  child,  on  the  unusual  and
    complex facts of these appeals, the impact upon  the  third  claimant's
    private  life  was  such  as  to  engage  the  humanitarian  protection
    principle recognised in the "health"  case  law  and  her  removal  was
    disproportionate.

18. Mr Diwnycz briefly stated that he stood by  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to reject the claimants' cases under Art 8.  However, he  made
    no further submissions or arguments beyond taking that position.

Discussion

    The legal principles

19. I begin with the relevant legal principles.

20. The claims are based upon Art 8 of the ECHR.  Article  8  provides  for
    the right to respect for an individual's private and family life.  If a
    sufficiently serious infringement with that family or private  life  is
    established by an individual on a balance of probabilities, then it  is
    for the Secretary of State to justify that  infringement  as  being  in
    accordance with the law, for a legitimate aim as set out in Art 8.2 and
    that the decision is a proportionate one in the sense that  it  follows
    from a proper balance of the public interest against  the  individual's
    (and other family members') rights protected by Art 8.1.

21. It is not suggested that any of the claimants  can  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  It is, therefore, necessary for them  to  establish
    "compelling circumstances" to justify a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
    Rules (see Singh and Khalid v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74).

22. Much of the claimants' cases turns  upon  the  impact  upon  the  third
    claimant's health and wellbeing if returned to Nigeria.   It  is  clear
    from  the  so-called  "health   cases"   that   only   in   exceptional
    circumstances where there are  compelling  humanitarian  considerations
    can an individual succeed under Art 3 of the ECHR when the  essence  of
    the claim is the impact caused by a differential in  the  provision  of
    healthcare between this country and the country to which the individual
    is to be removed (see D v UK (1997) 24 EHRR 423; N v UK (2008) 47  EHRR
    39 and N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31).

23. The reason for that is, in essence, that  such  an  individual's  claim
    does not fall within the "paradigm" for which Art 3 provides protection
    namely, an intentional act by or with  the  approbation  of  the  state
    (see, for example GS and Others per Laws LJ at [36]-[43]).  However, in
    a "health" case the Strasbourg and domestic case law recognises that in
    exceptional   cases   where   there   are    compelling    humanitarian
    considerations, an individual  may  still  succeed  in  establishing  a
    breach of Art 3 (see, for example the passages cited by Laws LJ at [62]
    of GS and Others).

24. Equally, it is clear that the approach in "health" cases  also  applies
    to other cases concerned with "social or other forms of assistance  and
    servicing" provided by a state (see, for example N v UK at [42]).   The
    Strasbourg Court in SHH v UK  (2013)  57  EHRR  18  accepted  that  the
    approach in "health" cases was equally applicable in a case  where  the
    needs of the individual included support for  his  disability  and  the
    consequences arose from "inadequate social provision" (see [92]).  That
    case was cited without any suggestion of disapproval by Laws LJ  in  GS
    and Others at [60].

25. In short, exceptional cases of compelling  humanitarian  considerations
    apart, the case law at both the Strasbourg  and  domestic  level  makes
    plain that a state is under no obligation to provide medical, health or
    social care to an individual.

26. The claimants' case is, of course, not framed under Art 3  but  instead
    under Art 8.   Mr Jacobs did not seek to argue that the position  under
    Art 8 was significantly different from that taken under Art 3 in health
    and social care cases.  In my judgment, that follows from the  decision
    of the Court of Appeal in GS and Others.  Applying the earlier decision
    of the Court of Appeal in MM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 279, the
    Court of Appeal recognised that Art 3 and Art 8 mark very much in  step
    in this  respect.   So,  at  [87],  Laws  LJ  said,  referring  to  the
    exceptional case identified in D that:

         "MM (Zimbabwe) also shows that the rigour of the  D  exception  for
         the purposes of Article 3 in such cases as these  applies  with  no
         less force when the claim is put under Art 8 ..."

27. Likewise Underhill LJ recognised that  the  "no  obligation  to  treat"
    principle applied in Art 8 cases (at [111]).

28. Underhill LJ (at [111]) went on to identify two essential points:

         "First, the absence or inadequacy of  medical  treatment,  even  if
         life-preserving treatment, in the  country  of  return,  cannot  be
         relied on at all as a factor engaging Article 8:  if  that  is  all
         there is, the claim  must  fail.   Secondly,  where  Article  8  is
         engaged by other factors, the fact that the claimant  is  receiving
         medical treatment in this country which may not be available in the
         country of return may be a factor in the proportionality  exercise;
         but that factor cannot be treated as by itself  giving  rise  to  a
         breach since that would contravene the  'no  obligation  to  treat'
         principle."

29. At [109], Underhill LJ recognised that Art 8 - and  the  protection  of
    "private life" - could be engaged by the consequences  of  physical  or
    mental illness.  Underhill LJ, also referred to two  decisions  of  the
    Court of Appeal, AE (Algeria) (to which I have already referred) and  R
    (SQ (Pakistan)) v  the  Upper  Tribunal  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1251  which
    concerned claims under Art 8 by children.  In those cases, as I pointed
    out in my error of law decision, the Court of  Appeal  recognised  that
    claims by children may have greater purchase  under  Art  8  than  when
    those claims are made by adults.  That may follow from  the  nature  of
    compelling or humanitarian considerations when looking at the impact on
    the health and wellbeing of a child rather than an adult.  It may  also
    gain strength from the requirement to take into account a child's "best
    interests" as a primary consideration (see ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD  [2011]
    UKSC 4).  However, even in children cases it is appropriate to consider
    the public interest reflected in the economic wellbeing of the  country
    and the implications for the public finances  of  the  future  cost  of
    treatment or care (see AE at [9]).

30. In my judgment, therefore, the fact that an individual  claiming  under
    Art 8 is a child may provide momentum to an  argument  that  there  are
    "compelling" circumstances of a  humanitarian  nature  so  as  to  fall
    within the exception recognised in the Strasbourg and domestic case law
    when applied in the Art 8 context.

31. Equally, it is clear from the case law that the assessment under Art  8
    requires a full and rounded consideration of all the  circumstances  of
    all the claimants.  This will include  any  impact  upon  a  claimant's
    private life by removal including any direct impact by the very act  of
    removal itself.  Indeed,  that  situation  probably  falls  within  the
    "paradigm" rather than requiring  an  individual  to  fall  within  the
    exceptional case recognised in the "health" cases.

    The evidence and findings

32. With those principles in mind, I  now  turn  to  the  evidence  and  my
    findings.  In large measure, the facts  are  not  in  dispute  and  the
    evidence was not challenged by Mr Diwnycz before me.

33. The first claimant is 43 years old.  She is the mother  of  the  second
    and third claimants.  She came to the UK in February 2012 as a  visitor
    and has since overstayed.  Her asylum claim was unsuccessful and is  no
    longer pursued.  The first claimant is  highly  educated.   She  has  a
    Masters degree in Artificial Intelligence.

34. The second claimant is her son and is now aged 11 years  old.   He  has
    recently commenced his secondary education in South Wales.

35. The third claimant is 7 years old.  She suffers from a number of health
    conditions and has learning difficulties, behavioural problems and  has
    special educational needs.  All of these factors are helpfully  listed,
    with reference to the relevant supporting documentation, in Mr  Jacobs'
    skeleton argument at paras 4 and 10.  The third claimant  suffers  from
    sickle cell anaemia  and,  as  a  result,  has  suffered  a  number  of
    occipital cortical infarcts or strokes.   She  receives  monthly  blood
    transfusions and iron chelation which is necessary to prevent or  lower
    the risk of iron overloading which is  a  detrimental  side  affect  of
    regular blood transfusions.  She also takes a number of medications.

36. The expert medical evidence from Dr  Connor,  a  Consultant  Paediatric
    Haematologist at the University Hospital of Wales  Cardiff,  which  was
    not challenged before me and which I accept, is that as a result of her
    treatment the third claimant's  risk  of  a  further  stroke  has  been
    reduced to 2% but, without the treatment there would be a 50% chance of
    stroke in the next one to two years.  The risk of strokes can  only  be
    prevented through a bone marrow transplant and there are,  at  present,
    no suitable donors.

37. The expert evidence is that the third claimant  would  be  unlikely  to
    receive the necessary treatment which she requires to reduce  the  risk
    of strokes in Nigeria (see Dr Connor's letter dated 24 November 2014 at
    page 209 of the UT bundle).  Dr Connor  notes,  having  regard  to  the
    required treatment plan for the third claimant in the light of her risk
    of stroke that:

         "It is my view that she ...  is  unlikely  to  get  this  level  of
         treatment in Nigeria and if she were to return to Nigeria it  would
         be to [her] detriment."

38. Dr Connor is, of course,  based  in  the  UK.   However,  his  view  is
    strongly supported by the evidence of Dr Otu who is at  the  Department
    of Haematology  and  Blood  Transfusion  at  the  University  of  Abuja
    Teaching Hospitals in Nigeria (see email  at  pages  236-7  of  the  UT
    Bundle) .  There, Dr Otuo points out that the state  hospitals  do  not
    have the facility to carry out the full care package required  for  the
    third claimant's condition, in particular "iron  chelating  agents  are
    not commonly available or affordable ...."  Dr Otu concludes  that  the
    third claimant's "revised treatment plan is not available in  any  part
    of Nigeria."

39. Further, Dr Otu states that even in a private hospital there are not:

         "... the required facilities for standard management of sickle cell
         disease patients  with  stroke  or  who  had  previous  history  of
         stroke."

    That latter category, of course, includes the third claimant.

40. Mr Jacobs did not raise specifically in his skeleton argument the risk,
    if any, to the third claimant  of  contracting  HIV  infection  through
    blood transfusions.  Instead, as I have already made clear, he  focused
    upon the unavailability of  the  required  treatment  given  the  third
    claimant's particular circumstances, including her history  of  stroke.
    In the light of that, I note that  the  material  put  before  me  does
    identify a risk  of  HIV  transmission  through  blood  transfusion  to
    patients with sickle cell disease  (see  Adewoyn  and  Obieche,  "Hyper
    Transfusion Therapy In Sickle Cell Disease  In  Nigeria",  Advances  in
    Haematology Vol 2014,  pages  1-8  at  5-6).   Nevertheless,  the  real
    absence of care that the evidence establishes, in my judgment,  is  the
    unlikely availability  of  "iron  chelation"  treatment  and  the  full
    revised treatment plan "required by the third  claimant  in  order,  in
    particular, to avoid a 50% risk of stroke".

41. There is one further matter which I must consider in  relation  to  the
    third claimant's health.  Dr Webb, a Reader and Honorary Consultant  in
    Child Health in a letter at page 38 of the First-tier Tribunal's bundle
    states, in the light of the third claimant's history of stroke, that:

         "Flying is contra indicated in people with sickle cell  disease  as
         the low pressure, and thus drop in  oxygen  saturation,  can  prove
         serious sickling crises which result  in  severe  pain  and  tissue
         damage.  A serious crisis can be fatal."

42. By contrast Dr Connor in a letter dated 25 July 2013 (at page 36 of the
    First-tier Tribunal's bundle) states that:

         "Sickle cell does  not  preclude  [the  third  claimant]  from  air
         travel".

43. Mr Jacobs submitted that Dr Connor's  letter  was  written  before  the
    third claimant's history of  strokes  had  been  identified.   However,
    after that point in time, Dr Connor in a letter dated 26 February  2014
    (at pages 32-34 of the First-tier bundle) wrote that

         "There is no data about the likelihood of a stroke following an air
         flight but patients with  sickle  cell  tolerate  air  travel  very
         well."

44. However, in his letter of 6  February  2014  (in  other  words  shortly
    before the letter I have just referred to), Dr Connor states that:

         "Discovery of this stroke is a significant finding and changes  how
         we would manage [the third claimant].  She is at very high risk  of
         another stroke and we have been rather lucky that she has  not  had
         another one in the last year or so since she has been in the UK."

45. Whilst the expert evidence could, perhaps, be a little  clearer,  there
    is at least some evidence that travel for the  third  claimant  is,  in
    itself, dangerous and leads to an increased risk of stroke; remembering
    always that the necessary treatment plan is unlikely to be available to
    the third claimant in Nigeria.

46. I turn now to consider the third  claimant's  educational  and  special
    needs.  A Statement of Special Needs dated 12 June 2015, together  with
    a number of documents relating to social services' intervention, is  at
    pages 1-204 of the UT bundle.  It is difficult to summarise  succinctly
    the whole of this evidence.  The essence of it is, however, as follows.
     The third claimant suffers from a number of behavioural  problems  and
    has  special  educational  needs.   She  has  a  marked  delay  in  her
    development, particularly in her speech, language  and  early  learning
    skills.  She has a number of behavioural/physical consequences.   These
    are fully set out in the supporting material and also in  the  evidence
    of the first  claimant.   Her  behaviour  is  challenging.   The  first
    claimant told me, and I accept, that if her daughter does not get  what
    she wants, she can become verbally abusive, hits the first claimant and
    can throw things around the house.  She told me that she sometimes  has
    to use physical force to control the third claimant.  Her behaviour  is
    particularly challenging  in  the  mornings.   She  told  me  that  the
    arrangements for the third  claimant  to  attend  school  had  recently
    changed and there had been difficulties with  the  new  taxi  including
    that she had soiled it.   The  evidence  is  that  the  third  claimant
    suffers from incontinence and wears incontinence  pads  throughout  the
    day and night.

47. It is clear that the special education needs of the third claimant have
    resulted in her being placed in a school which  can  specifically  meet
    those needs.  At that school she receives 1:1 attention.

48. The first claimant told me that her daughter did not adjust  to  change
    easily.  She had adapted to  her  new  school,  however,  and  now  has
    friends at that school where there  are  other  children  with  special
    needs.

49. The third claimant told me  about  the  social  services'  intervention
    earlier this year.  It arose because the third claimant had  physically
    chastised  her.   The  first  claimant  told  me  that  she  found  her
    daughter's behavioural problems  very  challenging  and  sometimes,  in
    effect, simply could not cope.

50. The social services' intervention was also dealt with  in  the  written
    and oral evidence of KH, Principal  Social  Worker  within  the  Health
    Disability Team.  There had been a reference to social services by  the
    third claimant's school.  As a result, the third claimant  was  now  on
    the child protection register and  the  first  claimant  had  a  family
    support worker whom she  could  contact  if  she  needed  support.   In
    addition, there were a number of other elements to the child protection
    package, including transport to school,  bi-monthly  overnight  respite
    care and weekly respite care of 3.5 hours to relieve the first claimant
    and play school access during holidays.  The  first  claimant  told  me
    that her daughter enjoyed that respite  care.   She  said:  "It's  like
    checking into a hotel for her with lots of toys in".

51. The first claimant told me that she would not have the support she  now
    receives through the social services if she returned to Nigeria and she
    was concerned that she would not be able to cope.  KH told  me  in  her
    oral evidence that the intervention had been very  successful  and  had
    addressed the needs of the  third  claimant.   She  said  that  if  the
    support  was  removed  that  would  place  the  first  claimant   under
    additional stress and the progress that the  third  claimant  had  made
    developmentally and socially would be lost.  KH told me that she  would
    have protection concerns if the third  claimant  went  to  Nigeria,  in
    particular physical chastisement from her mother.

52. That evidence was reflected in KH's written statement. In her statement
    (para 7), KH stated that:

         "... the risks to [the third  claimant]  had  decreased  since  our
         involvement."

53. KH's evidence was that the third claimant has developed socially  since
    she has been attended a school for her special needs.  KH  observed  in
    her statement (para 11):

         "I believe that if  [she]  was  to  be  returned  to  Nigeria,  her
         development will retrogress and she will withdraw into herself.   I
         also believe that any social interaction abilities that  [she]  has
         developed will be lost."

54. KH's  evidence  was  that  the  Home  Office  has  not  approached  the
    responsible social services in  respect  of,  or  to  comment  on,  any
    protection measures which would be needed for the third claimant is she
    were removed to Nigeria (see para 9 of the statement).  I only observe,
    given the duty of the Secretary of State under  s.55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, that that is  surprising  to  say
    the least.

55. Mr Diwnycz did not seek, in his very brief  submissions,  to  challenge
    the evidence of SH or, indeed, of the  first  claimant  concerning  the
    situation of the third claimant in the UK and the possible consequences
    to her if returned to Nigeria.  There is no  doubt  that  she  presents
    very challenging behavioural problems and  has  particular  educational
    needs.  The social services' intervention, together with the  placement
    of the third claimant  in  an  appropriate  school,  has  brought  some
    stability to the third claimant.  In particular, I was  impressed  with
    the evidence concerning the difficulties faced by the first claimant in
    managing  her  daughter  without  appropriate   support.    There   are
    significant  protection  concerns  for  the  third   claimant   without
    appropriate  support,  such  as  the  need  for  the  child  protection
    intervention this year well illustrates.  It is not  suggested  that  a
    similar level of support, or indeed any support of this  nature,  would
    be available in Nigeria.  The support which the  first  claimant  could
    obtain from her family in Nigeria would, in my judgment, be not of  the
    same nature and limited.  Her father is dead and her mother is 80 years
    old and  frail  needing  assistance  herself.   Although  four  of  her
    siblings live in Nigeria, they have their own families and  would  not,
    in my judgment, be in a position to provide anywhere near the  kind  of
    support provided by social services in the UK.   Likewise,  I  was  not
    directed to any material which would suggest that the third  claimant's
    special educational need would be met in Nigeria.

56. Consequently, I find that if the third claimant returned to Nigeria her
    health and wellbeing is likely to significantly suffer.

57. First, there will be an increased risk  of  stroke  (and  consequential
    harm) by travelling to Nigeria and, in any event, in Nigeria as she  is
    unlikely to have access to the full treatment plan, in particular  iron
    chelation which she benefits from in the UK.  I am  satisfied  that  if
    the third claimant returns to Nigeria her health there is a  real  risk
    of her health being significantly harmed.

58. Secondly, given her learning disabilities and behavioural problems, the
    very change of circumstances in itself  is  likely  to  exacerbate  and
    damage her wellbeing.  Her behaviour is  likely  to  deteriorate.   The
    change  in  the  third  claimant's  social  environment  is  likely  to
    exacerbate her behavioural problems in Nigeria.

59. Thirdly, the third claimant is unlikely to have her special educational
    needs met in Nigeria which, in itself, will harm her  development  and,
    as part of an enforced change of circumstances, result in detriment  to
    her health and wellbeing.

60. Fourthly, the first claimant is unlikely to have the necessary  support
    (such as provided by social services in the UK) to cope with the  third
    claimant's behavioural  problems.   There  is  a  very  real  prospect,
    therefore, that the third claimant will be subject to ill-treatment  by
    her mother as occurred in the UK  before  social  services  intervened.
    The absence of the support provided by social services in the  UK  will
    expose the third claimant to child protection risks from her mother who
    will lack the necessary  coping  mechanisms  to  deal  with  the  third
    claimant's resulting behavioural problems.

61. Taking all these matters into account, I am satisfied that it is not in
    the third claimant's best interests to return to Nigeria.

62. I turn now to consider the five-stage approach in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL
    27.

63. Although it is undoubtedly the case that "family life"  exists  between
    the three claimants, the Secretary of State  proposes  to  remove  them
    together, or not at all, therefore they would be  able  maintain  their
    family life in Nigeria.  The crux of this appeal concerns  the  private
    life of the claimants, in particular that of the third claimant.

64. I am satisfied that the removal of the claimant will engage Art 8.1  on
    the basis of their private life.  All have an established private  life
    in the UK.  That was not challenged.  As regards  the  third  claimant,
    for the reasons I have already given the impact  upon  her  health  and
    wellbeing will be significant if she  is  returned  to  Nigeria.   That
    significant impact falls within the concept of "private life" and  also
    engages Art 8.1 (see Singh and Khalid at [109]).  For these reasons,  I
    am satisfied that the Secretary of State's decision  engages  Art  8.1.
    There is no doubt that the respondent's  decisions  are  in  accordance
    with the law and  also  for  a  legitimate  aim,  namely  the  economic
    wellbeing of the country and its more usual avatar, the maintenance  of
    effective immigration control which is  in  the  public  interest  (see
    s.117B(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIA Act
    2002")).

65. The issue is one of proportionality bearing in  mind  that  this  is  a
    "health" or "social care" case.

66. None of the claimants have any right under the Rules to remain  in  the
    UK.  Their removal is in the public interest (see s.117B(1) of the  NIA
    Act 2002).  While I note  that  at  least  the  first  claimant  speaks
    English (see s.117B(2)) that does not dilute the public interest in her
    removal.  The same follows for the second claimant who, it is  fair  to
    assume as he has been educated in the UK, also speaks English.   I  was
    not told whether the first claimant (and the  other  claimants  as  her
    dependants) were or were not financially independent for the purpose of
    s.117B(3).  Also, I note that the  claimants'  private  life  has  been
    formed whilst their immigration  status  was  precarious  or  unlawful.
    However, in relation to the second and  third  claimants,  given  their
    ages and the third claimant's learning difficulties, that private  life
    was not established knowing of their immigration status.

67. In carrying out the proportionality assessment, I must consider all the
    circumstances, in the light of the "health" or "social care"  cases  it
    cannot be disproportionate to return an individual simply on the  basis
    that they will receive less adequate treatment or  care  in  their  own
    country.  I bear in mind what was said by Underhill LJ at [111]  of  GS
    and others:

         "... where article 8 is engaged by other factors, the fact that the
         claimant is receiving medical treatment in this country  which  may
         not be available in the country of return may be a  factor  in  the
         proportionality exercise; but that factor cannot be treated  as  by
         itself giving rise to a breach since that would contravene the  "no
         obligation to treat" principle."

68. For the following reasons I have concluded  that  the  removal  of  the
    third claimant has not been established to be proportionate.

69. First, the very act of removing the third claimant is likely to have  a
    real and significant detrimental effect upon her health and  wellbeing:
    (a) due to an increased risk of stroke in travelling; and  (b)  because
    the environmental and social changes to the third claimant,  given  her
    behavioural problems, will exacerbate those  very  problems.   That  is
    independent of any absence of health or social care in Nigeria..

70. Secondly, I am satisfied that the very particular facts of this  appeal
    fall within the "humanitarian" exception.  It has been recognised  that
    cases such as D, and N are  examples  of  the  exceptional  case  where
    humanitarian concerns justify a claim under the ECHR and the categories
    are not closed (see N at [70] per Lady Hale and the Strasbourg Court in
    N v UK at [43]).  None of the  Strasbourg  decisions  have  involved  a
    child.  As  the  Court  of  Appeal  pointed  out  in  AE  and  SQ,  the
    "humanitarian" exception may more easily arise in a case concerned with
    a child.  I agree that that is in principle correct and applies in this
    appeal.

71. This is an appeal where the child claimant suffers from both health and
    other conditions which require medical and social  care  support.   Her
    needs are multifaceted.  The impact upon her of not receiving treatment
    and necessary social  care  support  is,  in  my  judgment,  acute  and
    compelling in humanitarian terms.  She is, even  with  intervention,  a
    very challenging child.  If treatment is removed, she runs a  50%  risk
    of suffering further stroke and further physical and mental consequence
    that entails.  It is difficult to  see  how,  applying  a  humanitarian
    yardstick, creating that danger is justified.   But,  further,  in  the
    absence of  educational  provision  to  meet  her  special  needs,  her
    behavioural problems and development will also suffer significantly.

72. Thirdly, in the absence of the  kind  of  support  provided  by  social
    services in this country to the  first  claimant,  the  risk  of  child
    protection issues in relation to the third claimant arises.   There  is
    the  potential,  spoken  to  by  both  the  first  claimant  and   more
    importantly KH, the social worker of the  first  claimant  harming  the
    third claimant through  chastisement.   Again,  I  do  not  see  how  a
    humanitarian perspective can turn its gaze away from those factors  and
    the impact they  would  have  upon  the  third  claimant's  health  and
    wellbeing.

73. This, in my judgment, is an appeal which cries out for  a  humanitarian
    response despite the fact that, in some measure, the  implications  for
    the third claimant arise from the inadequate provision  of  health  and
    social care in Nigeria compared to this country.

74. In my judgment, the circumstances are compelling and the potential harm
    to the third claimant of removal cannot be  justified  in  a  civilised
    society.  In my  judgment,  those  circumstances  outweigh  the  public
    interest in the particular circumstances of this unusual case.

75. For these reasons, I  am  satisfied  that  the  removal  of  the  third
    claimant would breach Art 8 of the ECHR.

76. It was common ground that if the third claimant could not  be  removed,
    then the first and  second  claimants  should  also  succeed  in  their
    appeals.

Decision

77. For the reasons set out  in  my  earlier  decision  promulgated  on  16
    October 2014, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow each  of
    the claimants' appeals under Art 8 involved the making of an  error  of
    law and those decisions were set aside.

78. I remake the decisions in relation to each claimant and allow  each  of
    their appeals under Art 8 of the ECHR.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Since I have allowed the appeal I make a fee award in  full  in  respect  of
any fee that has been paid.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
