
IAC-HW-MP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29174/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 March 2015                              |On 9 April 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MOHAMAD CHIT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr A Chohan, Counsel, instructed by Marks and Marks
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I  will  refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant, a citizen of Lebanon, was in the UK as  a  student,  and
    subsequently for Post-Study Work, before applying for leave  to  remain
    on the basis of his relationship with a British citizen,  Jessica  Luke
    (the sponsor).  The sponsor  has  retinitis  pigmentosa,  an  incurable
    condition that has resulted in her having very limited sight.

3.   The appeal was allowed by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Sweet,
    following a refusal of the application by the Secretary of State  on  1
    July 2014.  The decision allowing the  appeal  was  promulgated  on  27
    November 2014.  The judge allowed the appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(vi)   of   the
    Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended), on the basis that he had no ties
    to Lebanon.  The factual background was that the appellant was born and
    brought up in Kuwait, as the child of Lebanese parents who were working
    there, and it was only after he turned 18, and was no longer allowed to
    remain in Kuwait, that he spent five years in Lebanon as a student.  In
    addition to allowing the appeal under paragraph 276ADE the  judge  also
    allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.  This was on the basis of  the
    appellant's relationship with the sponsor.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McDade
    on 17 January 2015.  The  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  had
    complained that the judge had not properly assessed the no ties test in
    paragraph 276ADE, and that on the facts of the case the  appellant  did
    not satisfy that Rule.  The second ground argued was that no weight had
    been given to the appellant's inability to meet the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules.  The second ground also mentioned a  possible  entry
    clearance option, although it was accepted at  the  hearing  before  me
    that this had not been mentioned in the refusal letter.

Error of Law Submissions

5.   At the start of the hearing Ms Brocklesby-Weller, for the Secretary  of
    State, sought leave to add a further ground, namely that there had been
    no consideration of the statutory public interest  factors  at  section
    117B of the 2002 Act (inserted by section 19 of the 2014  Act).   There
    was no objection to this from Mr Chohan, and  I  gave  leave  for  this
    additional ground to be added.  It was further agreed that there was an
    additional point, also not raised in the grounds, which  was  that  the
    wrong version of paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  had  been
    considered by the judge.  The version of 276ADE should  have  been  the
    one using the words "significant obstacles to integration" rather  than
    "no ties".

6.   At this stage I indicated my view that  the  decisions  in  respect  of
    paragraph 276ADE and Article 8 could not stand.  Mr Chohan did not  put
    forward submissions to the contrary, and this was effectively a  matter
    of agreement.  It appeared to me that the consideration  of  the  wrong
    version of the Rules, and  the  lack  of  any  mention  of  the  public
    interest factors, or the significance of the failure to meet the Rules,
    were sufficient in themselves to show that the judge's decisions rested
    on legal errors; and that they should be set aside.

Re-making of the Decision

7.   I invited submissions as to the appropriate  manner  of  re-making  the
    decisions that had been set aside.  Mr Chohan was happy  to  deal  with
    the re-making immediately by way of submissions, on the basis that  the
    facts were not disputed, there had been no change in circumstances, and
    there was no need for additional evidence.  I gave Ms Brocklesby-Weller
    time to consider her position.  She indicated  that  the  matter  could
    proceed to an immediate re-making by way of submissions,  or  could  be
    adjourned to a re-making hearing in the Upper Tribunal, but  she  noted
    two areas of concern.  The first was that the judge had not  considered
    the integration test in paragraph 276ADE and  had  therefore  not  made
    relevant findings, and the second was that the judge  had  not  made  a
    clear finding as to whether the relationship amounted to  family  life,
    rather than an aspect of the appellant's private life.

8.   I indicated to the parties my decision that the  appeal  could  proceed
    at once to a re-making, based on the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  and  the  judge's  findings.   These  findings  covered   the
    appellant's history, mentioned above.   The  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant had very few links to Lebanon, where he had only resided  for
    four years whilst at university.  His only relations  in  Lebanon  were
    his  paternal  grandparents  with  whom  he  did  not  have   a   close
    relationship.  The judge also accepted that it would be  difficult  for
    him to obtain employment, and that there were political  and  religious
    tensions in Lebanon.

9.   As to the appellant's relationship with the  sponsor  in  the  UK,  the
    judge found that the appellant had been in the  UK  continuously  since
    September 2010.  He accepted the medical evidence about  the  sponsor's
    genetic eye condition, as a result of which she was  registered  blind.
    He accepted that the couple had met in  March  2012;  that  the  couple
    lived near to each other, and that the appellant often stayed the night
    with the sponsor, but that they did not live together because there  is
    insufficient space in the sponsor's  specially  adapted  accommodation,
    where she lives with her siblings (who suffer from the  same  condition
    as her) and one of their partners.  The judge accepted that  they  were
    in a genuine relationship, and that the  only  reason  they  could  not
    satisfy the definition of "partner" in Appendix FM was because they had
    not been living together.  The relationship started when the  appellant
    was in the UK with leave for Post-Study Work, and the  application  was
    made in time.

10.  The submissions on the re-making can  be  summarised  as  follows.   Ms
    Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the  appellant  had  not  demonstrated
    very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  into  Lebanon.   He  had
    paternal grandparents there, and had not shown that he was incapable of
    integrating.  He was an adult and in good health, and  had  spent  five
    years  there  as  a  student.   He  would   have   no   problems   with
    reintegration, and the political and religious tensions  mentioned  had
    not  been  established  by  evidence.   His   relationship   with   his
    grandparents could be pursued and strengthened on return (Balogun v  UK
    [2012] at paragraph 51).  As to the relationship  this  should  not  be
    said to amount to family life, and should be given little weight as  an
    aspect of private life.  The requirement of cohabitation for two  years
    was one that was reasonable as it showed a  genuine  relationship,  and
    they could not meet this aspect of  the  Rules.   There  was  no  clear
    finding as to their future intentions in the decision.  Article  8  had
    to be considered through  the  prism  of  the  Rules  (Singh)  and  the
    sponsor's British citizenship alone was not enough to  argue  that  the
    appellant should be allowed to stay.  They could communicate with  each
    other through modern methods.  Although it was accepted that it had not
    been mention in the refusal, entry clearance could be  regarded  as  an
    option, and removal  was  therefore  not  a  bar  to  the  relationship
    continuing.  The sponsor did not actually need the  appellant  for  her
    essential needs.  The public interest factors  were  important.   As  a
    student his presence had been temporary.  His  immigration  status  had
    been precarious even if it was accepted that he had never been  in  the
    UK unlawfully.  It was accepted that  he  had  been  financially  self-
    supporting, both through working, and through  financial  support  from
    his parents.

11.  Mr Chohan, for the appellant, relied on the skeleton argument that  had
    been  prepared  for  the  First-tier  hearing,  the  detailed   witness
    statements, letters, and supporting statements from family members, and
    the medical evidence.   The  sponsor  was  a  British  citizen  with  a
    disability resulting from a genetic disorder and had unique adaptations
    to her accommodation.  The Immigration Rules  could  not  envisage  all
    situations.  The unique aspect of the inability of the couple  to  live
    together had not been taken into account, despite  the  fact  that  the
    Secretary of State had been provided with evidence.  The appellant  had
    provided unique support to the sponsor  both  in  London  and  Warwick.
    This had been essential.  The relationship was akin to marriage.  There
    were significant problems with entry clearance.  For the couple to live
    together they would need to obtain adequate accommodation with  all  of
    the relevant adaptations.  It was not possible for the sponsor to  move
    to Lebanon given her specific needs, and if the sponsor were to  be  in
    Lebanon he could not offer her  much  support.   The  relationship  did
    amount to family life.  If the disability factor  had  not  been  there
    they would have been living together for two years, and could have come
    within Appendix FM.  As a matter of public policy it was  objectionable
    for there to  be  discrimination  against  a  British  citizen  with  a
    disability, where it was not a realistic option  for  her  to  live  in
    Lebanon.  The appellant had a good immigration  history.   It  was  not
    right to say that he was here  on  a  precarious  basis  because  other
    options were open to Post-Study Workers.  As to paragraph 276ADE he was
    in an unusual position because of being the son of a migrant worker  in
    Kuwait, and he had no ties with his grandparents.

Decision

12.  In re-making the decision in this appeal I have decided to allow it  on
    Article 8 grounds.  I have also decided that the appeal, in  being  re-
    made, does not fall  to  be  allowed  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

13.  The key to this case, in my view, lies in the inability of  the  couple
    to meet the requirement of having co-habited for  two  years.   It  was
    suggested on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  this  was  a
    reasonable way to test whether a relationship was  genuine.   I  accept
    that point, but I also accept the submission made  on  the  appellant's
    behalf that the Immigration  Rules  in  general,  and  Appendix  FM  in
    particular, cannot envisage all factual situations.   This  is  a  case
    that is highly unusual on the facts.  There are  detailed  reasons  for
    the inability of the couple to live together, which  were  set  out  at
    some length in the witness statements.   These  reasons  flow  directly
    from the sponsor's disability, and those of her siblings.  As the judge
    found, the appellant and  the  sponsor  are  a  couple,  in  a  genuine
    relationship, in every respect other  than  that  they  have  not  been
    living together for these specific reasons.

14.  The significance of this is that  this  is  the  only  reason  for  the
    inability of the appellant  to  have  his  case  considered  under  the
    exception in Appendix FM (EX.1.(b) and EX.2.).  In every other  respect
    it  appears  to  be  accepted  that  the  appellant  would   fall   for
    consideration on the basis of his relationship with the  sponsor.   The
    only bar is that the appellant does not meet the requirement, in  order
    to be defined  as  a  "partner",  in  Appendix  FM  GEN.1.2.(iv)  which
    requires living together in a relationship akin to a marriage or  civil
    partnership for at least two years prior to the  date  of  application.
    In this case the couple meet the requirement of being in a relationship
    akin to a marriage or civil partnership for at least two years prior to
    the date of application, but they have not been  living  together,  for
    the particular reasons mentioned above.

15.  For the purposes  of  Appendix  FM,  if  the  couple  had  been  living
    together and the appellant did meet the definition  of  "partner"  then
    the case would turn on whether there were insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life with the appellant's partner  continuing  outside  the  UK.
    That is defined in EX.2. and includes "very serious  hardship  for  the
    applicant  or  their  partner"  or  very  significant  difficulties  in
    continuing family life together outside  the  UK  which  could  not  be
    overcome.  On these facts it appears to me to be reasonably clear  that
    the sponsor, because of her unusual condition, would face very  serious
    hardship if she were to be required to leave the UK.  Even if I were to
    accept the submission made for the Secretary of State that the  sponsor
    would get assistance from others if the appellant were to  be  removed,
    that is not the test within EX.1.  If it were not  for  the  definition
    issue, based on the fact that the couple had not been living  together,
    it appears to me to be clear that the appellant would succeed under the
    exception, with the consequence that  his  case  would  therefore  come
    within Appendix FM, as there appear to be no other relevant  issues  of
    suitability or eligibility.

16.  I accept that Article 8 needs to be considered  through  the  prism  of
    the Rules.  In doing  so  it  appears  to  me  to  be  of  considerable
    significance that the appellant would succeed under  the  Rules  if  it
    were not for the issue of living together.  I  have  no  difficulty  in
    accepting in general terms that the requirement within  the  definition
    of a partner for a couple to have been living together is a  reasonable
    one.  There can be no quarrel with that requirement in  general  terms,
    but it is well-established that there can  be  circumstances  where  it
    becomes necessary to look at Article 8 outside the Rules,  where  there
    are exceptional or compelling circumstances not covered by  the  Rules.
    The circumstances in this case appear to me to fall exactly  into  that
    category.

17.  Turning to the public interest factors  in  section  117B  I  note  the
    first factor, that the maintenance of effective immigration controls is
    in the public interest.  On that point I note that  the  appellant  has
    always been in the UK lawfully.  I would accept that his overall status
    has been of a  temporary  nature,  with  some  reservations  about  the
    various options open to those that have completed  Post-Study  Work  to
    remain in the UK under other aspects of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    reality, however, is that the appellant, at the end of  his  Post-Study
    Work, is only seeking to remain on Article 8 grounds, on the  basis  of
    his relationship.  The maintenance of  effective  immigration  controls
    being in the public interest point to him being removed  if  he  cannot
    comply with the Rules, but that returns to the question of exactly  why
    it is  that  he  cannot  comply  with  those  Rules,  and  the  special
    circumstances flowing from the sponsor's disability.

18.  Turning to the second factor in section 117B it does not appear  to  be
    in dispute that the appellant speaks good English.  As to the third  it
    was also accepted that he has been financially independent.  As to  the
    fourth it has not been suggested that his relationship with the sponsor
    was established at a time when  he  was  in  the  UK  unlawfully.   The
    definition of precariousness is somewhat unclear,  but  it  would  seem
    that presence as a student and Post-Study Worker would be likely to  be
    regarded as a precarious immigration status.

19.  There is no mention of an entry clearance alternative in the  statutory
    public interest factors at section 117B,  and  neither  was  there  any
    mention of an entry clearance alternative in the  refusal  letter.   In
    addition the structure of Appendix FM, including the exception and  the
    definition of insurmountable obstacles, makes no  mention  of  such  an
    option.  In the circumstances it appears to me to be  doubtful  whether
    the entry clearance option  is  of  relevance  to  the  proportionality
    assessment.  It  is  notable  that  the  only  problem  presented,  the
    definition issue relating to not living together,  has  nothing  to  do
    with the appellant's lack of entry clearance, and  if  he  were  to  be
    considered under the exception it would also be the case that he  could
    succeed without entry clearance being an issue.

20.  What was clear from the  various  statements  and  supporting  letters,
    that  went  into  the  judge's  finding  that  this   was   a   genuine
    relationship, was the overall strength of  the  relationship,  and  the
    degree of interdependence.   The  extent  of  this  interdependence  is
    clearly unusually high because of the sponsor's lack of  sight.   There
    appears to me to be nothing in the evidence or  in  the  findings  that
    would suggest the need for any qualification  of  any  sort  about  the
    couple's future intentions.  The relationship appears to be  solid  and
    well-established, and there is nothing in the evidence to raise a doubt
    on that score.  The nature of the relationship appears to me to  amount
    to family life rather than an aspect of private life.  This is  because
    relationships between a married couple, or a couple in  a  relationship
    akin to marriage, are generally held to  amount  to  family  life,  and
    there is nothing here to justify departing from that approach.

21.  For all these reasons my conclusion is that the unusual nature  of  the
    failure to meet the definition,  and  thereby  the  inability  to  take
    advantage of the exception, justifies turning  to  a  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside the  Rules  in  this  particular  case.   In  such  a
    consideration I find that the appellant's relationship with his partner
    amounts to family life; that the proposed removal  would  represent  an
    interference in that family life of sufficient  seriousness  to  engage
    the operation of  Article  8;  that  the  decision  to  remove  was  in
    accordance with the law and in pursuit of the legitimate aim; but  that
    the decision to remove amounted to a disproportionate interference with
    family life, particularly when looked  at  through  the  prism  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and the unusual reasons for the  inability  to  meet
    the requirements, and also when looked at in the light of the statutory
    public interest factors at section 117B.

22.  In contrast with the strength of the Article 8 case it  appears  to  me
    that the case under paragraph  276ADE  is  correspondingly  weak.   The
    appellant has some  family  connections  in  Lebanon,  which  could  be
    pursued.  He is a citizen of the country and, despite not  having  been
    brought up there, he has spent some years there as a student.  He is in
    good health.  He has continuing financial support from his parents  who
    live in Kuwait.  If the relationship  issue  is  set  to  one  side  it
    appears to me that his situation falls well short of one  in  which  it
    could be said that he could succeed on private life grounds.   He  does
    not appear to me to have shown that there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to his reintegration into Lebanon.

23.  Having reached this conclusion I am aware of the  fact  that  it  could
    have been argued, from the start, that any error of law  by  the  judge
    was not a material one, because I am  reaching  the  same  decision  on
    Article 8, if not under the Immigration Rules.  That may well be right,
    but the process of working through the error of law and  re-making  the
    decision nevertheless followed this course in this particular case, and
    the end result would remain the same, at least in relation  to  Article
    8, whatever route was taken.

24.  Neither side said anything about anonymity or fee awards.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge made a full fee award, and made no anonymity order.
     There is no basis to alter the position in either respect.   There  is
    therefore no anonymity order, and the fee award stands.

Notice of Decision

25.  The judge's decision allowing the appeal is set aside, an error of  law
    having been shown.

26.  The decision in the  appeal  is  re-made  as  follows.  The  appeal  is
    allowed on human rights grounds, with reference to  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.



Signed        Date 1 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb
