
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29168/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham City Centre Tower         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 March 2016                              |On 15 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                         MR Harjinder Singh Dhaliwal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms D Dhaliwal, Counsel, instructed by Charles
                  Simmons Immigration Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal refusing to vary his leave to remain as the  spouse
    of a person present and settled here on the grounds, inter  alia,  that
    his application fell for refusal under paragraph 322(2) and paragraph S-
    LTR.2.2  of  Appendix  FM,  and  against  the  Secretary   of   State's
    concomitant decision to remove him pursuant to Section 47 of  the  2006
    Act.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction,  and
    I do not consider that  the  appellant  requires  anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

 2. On 17 December 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer granted permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:

         1.   The appellant is a national of India born on 2 may  1985.   He
             appealed against the respondent's decision dated 26 June  2014
             refusing his application to remain in the UK as a spouse.   It
             was contended that he failed to meet  the  requirements  under
             paragraph 287(a)(vi) and 322(2) of the Rules.

         2.   In a determination promulgated on 4 November 2014, FTT  Pickup
             dismissed the appeal under 322(2) finding that the  respondent
             exercised her discretion properly  [20-21].   The  appeal  was
             also dismissed under Article 8.

         3.   The grounds assert that the Judge did not make it  clear  that
             the burden of proof was on the respondent.  No issue was taken
             under paragraph 322(1A) and that '...... meant that  paragraph
             322(2) on its own could not possibly be satisfied.'  There are
             also grounds relating to Article 8.

         4.    This  was  an  application  for  further  leave  to   remain.
             Paragraph 322(2) provides a  discretionary  ground  to  refuse
             leave to remain, where false representations have been made or
             the there has been a failure to disclose any material fact for
             the  purpose  of  obtaining  leave  to  enter  or  a  previous
             variation of leave.

         5.   Arguably this did not apply in the circumstances  as  it  does
             not appear that the  case  against  him  related  to  a  false
             representation for the purpose of obtaining leave to enter  or
             a previous variation of leave.

         5.   Permission is granted on all grounds.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant's appeal was heard by Judge Pickup at Stoke on  Trent  on
    22 October 2014.  Both parties were legally represented.

 4. In his subsequent decision, Judge Pickup observed there was an  unusual
    history to the appeal, which was not assisted by the way in  which  the
    refusal decision was  drafted.   It  relied  on  false  representations
    without specifying exactly what those false representations were.

 5. The judge went on to summarise  the  relevant  background  facts.   The
    appellant had been granted probationary leave to remain as a spouse  on
    23 January 2012 until 23 January 2014.  As he had been in the UK  since
    2009, the relevant Immigration Rules which governed his application for
    indefinite leave to remain as a spouse were  those  in  paragraph  287,
    including  paragraph  287(vi),  which  required  him   to   demonstrate
    sufficient knowledge about life in the UK in accordance  with  Appendix
    KoLL.

 6. In his application for ILR the appellant stated in answer  to  question
    5.2 that he had passed the Life in the UK test.  He indicated  both  in
    the application form and the covering letter that he was  submitting  a
    Life in the UK test pass notification letter.  It was disputed  by  the
    respondent that he  had  done  so,  but  the  judge  had  accepted  the
    appellant's evidence that he had indeed submitted a notification letter
    dated 10 December 2014 purporting to show that he had taken the Life in
    the UK test on that date at Exchange Group Coventry.  The  respondent's
    case was that this certificate was not produced until May 2014, but the
    judge was satisfied on a balance of probabilities  that  the  appellant
    had submitted a notification letter dated 10  December  2013  with  his
    application.

 7. However, when  checking  the  notification  letter  in  May  2014,  the
    respondent found that there was no independent  record  in  the  online
    accessible warehouse to confirm  the  certificate  was  genuine.   This
    prompted further enquiries.  Miss  Griffiths  on  behalf  of  the  Home
    Office adduced in evidence a redacted  email  thread  setting  out  the
    enquiry and the response, which confirmed the notification letter dated
    10 December 2013 was false.  She stated that  Learn  Direct  had  never
    used the Exchange Group in Coventry to deliver  tests  and  furthermore
    Exchange Group ceased being a life in the  UK  test  provider  in  July
    2013.  It thus followed that not only was the notification letter false
    but that the appellant could never have taken the  test  with  Exchange
    Group Coventry in December 2013, as the outfit had closed down in  July
    2013.

 8. The enquiries of the Secretary of State  had  also  revealed  that  the
    appellant had failed the test on four  separate  occasions:  7  October
    2013, 26 November 2013, 14 November 2013  and  29  November  2013,  all
    tests taken in Birmingham.  The judge continued:

         "18. When the application was refused on 26.6.14, it is significant
             that the appellant proceeded  to  take  the  test  twice  more
             before he finally passed it, with a notification letter  dated
             27.9.14.  In his witness statement, and that of his  wife,  it
             is stated that he understood the only reason for  refusal  was
             that the 'certificate'  sent  with  the  application  was  not
             genuine and that he had used deception in the application.  At
             no time did the Secretary of State  communicate  that  to  the
             appellant or his solicitors.  Even more  significant  is  that
             the appellant claims that he went to look for the  centre  but
             found it had closed down, and made a complaint to  the  police
             on 16.7.14, which is documented.  For reasons set out  herein,
             I am satisfied that the appellant panicked when  he  knew  his
             application had been refused and in order  to  cover  himself,
             made a complaint to the police.   That  he  took  this  action
             without ever being told by the Secretary  of  State  that  the
             notification letter was false is strongly indicative  that  he
             knew he had submitted a false document with  his  application.
             The fact that he went on to take the test 3 more  times  lends
             support to this conclusion.  If the  appellant  was  satisfied
             that the document he had submitted  was  genuine  there  would
             have been no reason to report the matter to the police  or  to
             go  on  to  take  the  test  again.   It  is  interesting  and
             significant that in taking the test  again,  he  failed  twice
             before finally passing in  September  2014.   That  he  failed
             twice more after 4 failed attempts  in  October  and  November
             2013 rather suggests that the alleged pass  in  December  2013
             was most unlikely.

         19.  In all the circumstances, I find that this behaviour  strongly
             suggests that the appellant submitted  the  10.12.13  document
             with his application in full  knowledge  that  it  was  false.
             Apart from anything, else it is plain from  the  evidence  now
             adduced by the Secretary of State that he could not have taken
             the test at Exchange Centre Coventry in December 2013, as they
             ceased operation in July 2013.  It follows that the  appellant
             must have known  that  the  notification  submitted  with  his
             application was false, and taking all the  evidence  together,
             in the round, as I must, I so find.  To the extent  that  both
             the appellant and his wife gave oral evidence to the contrary,
             I am satisfied that  they  were  entirely  dishonest  and  not
             telling the  truth,  all  of  which  entirely  undermines  the
             appellant's credibility.  I am satisfied  that  the  appellant
             has been entirely dishonest from the outset of his application
             and not only did he rely on a document which he knew could not
             be genuine, but also made a false  representation  by  stating
             that he had passed the test.  I  am  satisfied  that  at  that
             stage he had not passed the test and that he knew that  to  be
             the case.

         20.  I have reached this conclusion, as stated, by taking  all  the
             evidence together in the round, making an overall  assessment.
             I acknowledge that a finding of dishonesty should not be  made
             lightly and that cogent evidence  should  be  required  before
             such a finding ought to be made.  I am satisfied that there is
             good  evidence  both  in  the  information  provided  by   the
             Secretary of State, but also in the evidence  and  history  of
             the  appellant.   His  behaviour  subsequent  to  the  refusal
             decision is entirely consistent with his personal knowledge on
             his part that the notification letter was false when submitted
             by him or  on  his  behalf.   The  Secretary  of  State  never
             notified the appellant or his solicitors that the document was
             false, the appellant could have  only  known  that  and  taken
             steps to take the test again and cover  himself  by  making  a
             police complaint because he knew  from  the  outset  that  the
             submitted document was false."

 9. The judge went on to find that the  Secretary  of  State  had  properly
    exercised her discretion,  and  she  had  been  entirely  justified  in
    refusing the application under paragraph 322(2).  At paragraph  22,  he
    found that because of the appellant's dishonesty, at  least  his  false
    representations and attempt to deceive the Home Office, he also  failed
    the suitability requirements of Appendix  FM.   He  accepted  that  his
    partner was a British citizen with all her family in the UK,  but  even
    if EX.1 was reached, the appellant had failed to demonstrate that there
    were very significant difficulties to be faced by him and  his  partner
    continuing family life together outside  the  UK.   The  appellant  had
    family in India and he had been  in  the  UK  for  a  relatively  short
    period.  Whilst he had a relationship  with  his  partner,  he  had  no
    relationship with any child in the UK and so that consideration did not
    arise.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

10. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms  Dhaliwal  developed  the  appellant's  case.   The  judge  had
    materially misdirected himself in law in applying paragraph  322(2)  of
    the Rules.  The judge had also erred in failing to set out the  correct
    legal burden and standard of proof  in  respect  of  an  allegation  of
    forgery and or false representations.  The third error was the  judge's
    failure to consider the impact of paragraph 320(7) of  the  Immigration
    Rules in his Article 8 assessment.

11. On behalf of the Secretary of State,  Mr  Wilding  submitted  that  the
    judge had not made any material error.  Both parties had gone into  the
    hearing aware that the factual issue which was in dispute  was  whether
    the  appellant  had  made  a  false  representation  in   his   current
    application and/or had provided a false notification letter.   Everyone
    knew  what  the  case  was  about,  and  so  there  was  no  procedural
    unfairness.

Discussion

12. The decision letter was defective.  The respondent's case in respect of
    the appellant's Life in the UK test notification  certificate  was  not
    clearly set out when  the  respondent  purported  to  explain  why  the
    appellant had not provided satisfactory  evidence  of  knowledge  about
    life in the United Kingdom and as such his application did not  satisfy
    the criteria specified in  Appendix  KoLL;  and  furthermore  that  his
    application also fell for refusal under paragraph 322(2) on the  ground
    that  false  representations  had  been  made  or  false  documents  or
    information had been submitted.

13. The potential confusion was  compounded  by  the  fact  that  paragraph
    322(2) applies only to a previous application of leave to  remain,  not
    to a current application.

14. On the other hand, paragraph S-LTR.2.2 of  Appendix  FM  applies  where
    false information, representations or documents have been submitted  in
    relation to the (current) application.   At  page  3  of  the  decision
    letter  the  relevant  provisions  of  this  paragraph  are  set   out.
    Moreover, when purporting to  explain  why  the  application  fell  for
    refusal under paragraph 322(2) at page 1, it is reasonably  clear  from
    the context that the allegation of falsity is in respect of the current
    application, and not in respect of some previous application.

15. In short, as submitted by Mr Wilding, the defects in the refusal letter
    did not generate procedural unfairness as the appellant and  his  legal
    representatives understood the case which  they  had  to  meet  at  the
    appeal hearing, namely that he had provided a false notification letter
    dated 10 December 2013 in support of his current application.

16. This is illuminated by the judge's finding  at  the  end  of  paragraph
    [20].  Although the Secretary of State did not in terms in the  refusal
    decision notify the appellant or his solicitors that  the  notification
    letter was false, the appellant's behaviour in response to the  refusal
    decision was indicative of  him  knowing  that  it  was  false;  and  a
    fortiori being in no doubt as to the specific reason why the respondent
    was asserting in the refusal letter that his Life in the UK test result
    was unacceptable.

17. Judge Pickup should have directed himself  that  paragraph  322(2)  was
    inapplicable, and the Rule  which  should  have  been  invoked  in  the
    decision letter was paragraph 322(1A).

18. However, the  judge's  failure  to  make  a  finding  by  reference  to
    paragraph 322(1A) in substitution for paragraph 322(2) is not material,
    as the wording of the two provisions is identical in terms of what  the
    Secretary of State has to prove in order to  make  out  the  ground  of
    refusal.

19. Indeed, it was potentially to the appellant's advantage for the  matter
    to be considered under 322(2) as the refusal under  this  provision  is
    discretionary,  whereas  the  refusal  under   paragraph   322(1A)   is
    mandatory.

20. Ms Dhaliwal argued the contrary proposition, relying on  extracts  from
    the relevant IDIs as of 4 February 2016.

21. She pointed out that page 5 of the IDIs  stated  that  where  paragraph
    322(1A) was applicable, staff should  refer  the  matter  to  a  senior
    caseworker before refusing, and that staff must  also  check  the  harm
    matrix before consideration.  She submitted that as  a  result  of  the
    matter not being  considered  under  paragraph  322(1A)  the  screening
    process had not taken place, to the appellant's potential disadvantage.

22. There is however no reason to suppose that a refusal  on  discretionary
    grounds would be any less  rigorous.  On  the  contrary,  logically  it
    should be more rigorous, precisely because the  ground  of  refusal  is
    discretionary.  Moreover, at page 11 of the same IDIs,  it  is  plainly
    stated that when a representation is confirmed as false and is made  in
    connection with a current application, the caseworker "must" refuse the
    application under paragraph 322(1A).  It is thus wholly unrealistic  to
    postulate that the outcome would have been any different if  the  right
    Rule had been referred to and/or applied.

23. The second ground of challenge is that the judge failed to set out  the
    correct legal burden and standard of proof.  The judge rendered himself
    vulnerable to such criticism by  stating  at  paragraph  [6]  that  the
    burden of proof was on the appellant, and in stating at  paragraph  [7]
    that in considering documents produced by or on behalf of the appellant
    he had to bear in mind the guidance given in Tanveer Ahmed  IAT  [2002]
    UKAIT 00439, where it was held that  the  onus  was  on  an  individual
    claimant to show that a document on which he sought to  rely  could  be
    relied on.

24. This was arguably not a misdirection  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
    asserted non-compliance with paragraph 287(vi).  The  burden  of  proof
    rested with the appellant to show that he had  demonstrated  sufficient
    knowledge about life in the United Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix
    KoLL.

25. But clearly at this point the judge had not directed himself  that  the
    burden rested with the respondent  to  prove  that  the  appellant  had
    dishonestly submitted a false test certificate.

26. However, when making his findings on this question, it  is  clear  that
    the judge treated the respondent as being  required  to  discharge  the
    burden of proof on the  balance  of  probabilities,  and  he  expressly
    recognised that a finding of dishonesty should not be made lightly  and
    that cogent evidence should be required before such a finding ought  to
    be made.  So I find that the  judge  applied  the  correct  burden  and
    standard of proof with respect to the Secretary of  State's  allegation
    that the appellant had knowingly submitted a false notification letter.

27. The genesis for ground 3 is the judge's comment at the end of paragraph
    [21] that it remained open for the appellant to make a new  application
    with a valid notification letter.  In fact, as Ms Dhaliwal submits, the
    appellant cannot make a new in-country application relying on  a  valid
    notification letter  in  circumstances  where  the  general  ground  of
    refusal has been upheld.  What is envisaged  in  the  One-Stop  Warning
    which accompanied the refusal decision is  that  the  appellant  should
    leave the country; and that an application for entry clearance, in most
    categories, will be refused for a period of one year if, following  the
    breach, he has left the United Kingdom voluntarily at his own expense.

28. However, I do not consider that the  judge's  comment  at  the  end  of
    paragraph [21] vitiates his subsequent reasoning on the application  of
    Appendix FM, Rule 276ADE or the assessment  of  proportionality  in  an
    Article 8 claim outside  the  Rules.   The  judge  had  given  adequate
    reasons for dismissing the appeal under Article 8 grounds, and thus his
    finding on Article 8 is not vitiated by an error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
