
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29220/2014
     IA/29227/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On Friday 26 February 2016          |                                 |
|                                    |On 14 March 2016                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between
                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                               ms doreen mtutu
                            mr mufudzi will mtutu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Alexander, Counsel instructed by Barar &
Associates

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  good
reason to make an anonymity direction in these cases.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of  reference  I
    refer hereafter to the parties  as  they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge M P W Harris who in a  decision  promulgated  on  3
    September 2015 ("the Decision") allowed the Appellants' appeal  against
    a decision to remove them to Zimbabwe.

 2. Permission to appeal the Decision was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Frankish on 14 January 2016 on the single basis  that  the  Judge
    arguably misinterpreted the facts of this case  by  assuming  that  the
    Second Appellant was a child when by the date of  the  hearing  he  was
    aged over eighteen years.  That  is  said  to  arguably  undermine  the
    outcome of the Decision.  This was the sole ground  of  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State and is developed on the basis that  because  of  the
    error of fact the Judge has failed to properly consider  whether  there
    exists a family life between the Second Appellant who was by  the  date
    of the hearing an adult and his mother, the First Appellant.  The Judge
    also referred to Section 117B(6) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("section 117B(6)").  The Secretary of State says  that
    this could not apply either and the Judge's error therefore amounts  to
    a material error of law.

 3. In order to determine whether there is an error of law I do not need to
    dwell on the facts, save as to the Second Appellant's age.  He was born
    on 25 May 1997 and the appeal  hearing  took  place  on  23  July  2015
    although as Mr Alexander explained before me this morning that followed
    an adjournment of the  hearing  in  March  2015.   This  very  probably
    explains why the skeleton argument of the  Appellants'  Counsel  before
    the First-tier Tribunal dealt in some depth with the Second Appellant's
    best interests.  This may in turn explain to some extent why the  Judge
    was misled into following the course which he did.  It is common ground
    however that, when considering  Article  8,  the  Judge  was  bound  to
    consider the facts as they stood at the date of the hearing and  as  at
    the date of that hearing the Second Appellant was aged eighteen  years.
    There can be no doubt  therefore  that  the  Judge  has  erred  in  his
    understanding of the facts of the case.

 4. Section 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules reads as follows:-

         "(1) The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain
         on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the  date  of
         application, the applicant:

         .....

         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any  period  of  imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK"

 5. In relation to whether the Judge's error is material, I accept that  in
    finding that paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules could be met there is
    no error in relation to the first part because, as at the date  of  the
    application the Second Appellant had been in the UK for seven years and
    was aged under  eighteen  years.   The  Judge  also  therefore  rightly
    directed himself to the issue being whether it was reasonable to expect
    the Second Appellant to leave the UK and return to Zimbabwe.

 6. The Judge then went on to apply Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 which relates to the  best  interests  of  the
    child.  That was of course by that stage not  relevant  to  the  Second
    Appellant's case as he was in  fact  no  longer  a  child.   The  Judge
    expressly stated at [14] that, as a result of  the  Second  Appellant's
    best interests and the fact that the Second Appellant was aged  sixteen
    years (which he was not), he found that  the  Second  Appellant  should
    remain with his mother.  The Second  Appellant's  best  interests  were
    also  the  foundation  for  the  finding  in  relation  to  the  Second
    Appellant's private life that he should remain in the UK.

 7. The Judge went on to consider the First Appellant's criminal conviction
    and rightly recognised that this needed to be weighed  in  the  balance
    although not as he found against the Second Appellant's best  interests
    (because those were no longer relevant).

 8. The Judge then went on to have regard to Section 117B(6).  That has  no
    relevance to the case because it  is  common  ground  that  the  Second
    Appellant  is  now  an  adult.   Unlike  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv),  the
    relevant date for consideration of whether the Second  Appellant  is  a
    child under section  117B(6)  is  date  of  hearing  and  not  date  of
    application.

 9. The Judge concluded by allowing the First  Appellant's  appeal  on  the
    basis that the Second Appellant would have to accompany her to Zimbabwe
    if she were removed.  That would be contrary  to  his  best  interests.
    However, on the basis that the Second Appellant is now an  adult,  even
    if his appeal does still fall to be allowed  once  best  interests  are
    removed from the equation, it does  not  necessarily  follow  that  the
    First Appellant's appeal would also be allowed.  It  may  be  that  the
    Second Appellant  will be able to remain in the UK  without  the  First
    Appellant.  However, I make no finding to this  effect  because  it  is
    agreed before me and I accept that it is appropriate that these appeals
    are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

10. There are a number of factual issues which need  to  be  determined  in
    order for proportionality of the removal of both the First  and  Second
    Appellants to  be  properly  assessed.   These  include,  for  example,
    whether there is family life between the Second Appellant and the First
    Appellant which may still exist notwithstanding the Second  Appellant's
    majority.  As I also pointed out to Ms Everett and she accepts, if  the
    Second Appellant were now to make an application in his own  right,  it
    is likely that he would succeed under the Rules because of  the  impact
    of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v).  That is a factor which may also need to  be
    considered. As a result of the error of law in this  case,  there  have
    been no findings based on the Second Appellant's  private  life  absent
    consideration of his best interests or findings as to whether the First
    Appellant could return to Zimbabwe without  the  Second  Appellant  now
    that he is no longer a child.  In those  circumstances,  in  accordance
    with  Tribunal guidance, it is appropriate  for  these  appeals  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for findings  to  be  made  on  the
    correct factual basis.

11. In summary I am satisfied that the decision contains a  material  error
    of law and I set it aside.  I  remit  the  appeals  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for re-determination of the appeals  on  the  correct  factual
    basis that the Second Appellant is now aged over eighteen years and  is
    therefore an adult.


Notice of Decision
The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  on  3  September  2015
contains a material error of law.  I therefore set it aside.  I remit  these
appeals to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing before a different Judge.

Signed[pic]       Dated    4 March 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
