
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29347/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 December 2015                  |On 11 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                            ms Sylvestina Mensah
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Danbar Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is Sylvestina Mensah born on 26 March  1979.   She  is  a
    national of Ghana.  She is the mother of two children a  daughter  born
    25 January 2007  and  a  younger  daughter  born  9  March  2006.   The
    children's father is also a Ghanaian national but  the  appellant  told
    the First-tier Tribunal that he was not supporting her application  and
    wanted nothing to do with her or the children.

2.   The appellant appeals against a decision  of  First-tier  Judge  Porter
    promulgated on 1 May 2015 to dismiss an appeal against the decision  of
    the Secretary of State to refuse leave to remain in the UK on the basis
    of her family life as a parent.

3.   The appellant's immigration history is set out in paragraphs  7  to  12
    of the determination.  Briefly the appellant claims to have entered the
    United Kingdom via Heathrow Airport in  2004  without  an  entry  visa.
    Since  then  a  number  of  applications  have  been  made  seeking  to
    regularise her stay in the UK.  None of these have been successful  and
    it follows that she has never had any lawful right to remain in the UK.



4.   An application for leave to appeal against Judge Porter's decision  was
    refused by First-tier Judge Fisher.  A further application was made  to
    the Upper Tribunal with  further  grounds  of  appeal.   Permission  to
    appeal on all grounds was given by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Perkins.   In
    his reasons he said he considered it reasonably arguable that the First-
    tier Tribunal erred  by  not  making  clear  findings  about  the  best
    interests and rights of the appellant's oldest child  born  in  January
    2007 before determining her mother's appeal.

5.    The  applicable  law  is  as  follows.   Paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the
    Immigration Rules set out the requirements to be met  by  an  applicant
    for leave to remain on the grounds of private life.  In  respect  of  a
    child under the age of 18 the  requirement  is  that  they  have  lived
    continuously in the UK for at least seven years and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK.

6.   We  were  also  referred  to  the  terms  of  Section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  as  amended  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014.  It states:

         "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

Grounds and Submissions for Appellant

7.   Mr  Karim  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal.   He  referred  us  to
    paragraphs 28 onwards in the determination and submitted that  the  FtT
    Judge had failed to consider  properly  the  interests  of  the  eldest
    child.  In considering whether it was reasonable to expect the child to
    go with her mother the judge had taken as the starting point  the  fact
    that the mother had no right to stay in the UK.  That was  putting  the
    cart before the horse.  One had to focus on the interests of the  child
    independently of the parent.  Secondly he submitted that the FtT  Judge
    had erred in the application of the  principles  enunciated  in  Azimi-
    Moayed and Others (Decisions affecting children: onward appeals) [2013]
    UKUT 197 (IAC).  At paragraph 30 the FtT Judge had referred to the five
    principles but failed properly to apply them.  In particular  principle
    3 states that lengthy residence in the country other than the state  of
    origin can lead to development of social and educational ties  that  it
    would be inappropriate to disrupt in the absence of compelling  reasons
    to the contrary.  What amounts to lengthy residence is  not  clear  cut
    but past and present policies have identified seven years as a relevant
    period.  Mr Karim submitted that in respect of the  eldest  child  that
    could only mean the UK.  She had spent her entire life in  the  UK  and
    that had led to the development of  social,  cultural  and  educational
    ties.  In that  regard  the  FtT  Judge  had  failed  to  identify  the
    compelling reason for disrupting these ties.

8.   Thirdly he submitted that at paragraph 33 of the determination the  FtT
    Judge had said that he was not persuaded  that  the  appellant  or  her
    daughter had established a private life in the UK.  He had gone  on  to
    say in the same paragraph that no evidence had  been  produced  of  any
    private life having been established in respect  of  the  eldest  child
    apart from an assertion in the grounds of appeal  that  the  child  had
    made friends in  school  and  is  known  to  her  teachers.   Mr  Karim
    submitted that this was simply perverse.  The child was  8  years  old.
    At paragraph 16 of the determination the judge recorded the evidence of
    the appellant to the effect that both the children were now  at  school
    and that her eldest daughter was doing very well.

9.   Fourthly he referred us to the terms of Section  117B(6)  of  the  2002
    Act.  He said that this allowed the parent to piggyback on  the  rights
    of the child.  Again while the FtT Judge  had  mentioned  this  in  the
    determination its significance had not been properly appreciated.

Response

10.  A Rule 24 response had been submitted by the Secretary  of  State.   Mr
    Kandola submitted  that  there  was  no  error  of  law.   He  strongly
    disagreed with the submission that section 117B(6) allowed the  parents
    to piggyback on the children where the  decision  maker  had  to  apply
    276ADE.  Section 117B was about Article 8 and subsection (6) had to  be
    seen as part of an overall assessment of an Article 8  claim.   It  was
    wrong to look at the child in isolation.  The  child's  interests  were
    inextricably linked with the parents' and could not  be  isolated.   In
    this case the context was that a parent had no right to be  in  the  UK
    and was to return to Ghana.   With  regard  to  paragraph  30  and  the
    reference to the child not having a private life, there had been little
    evidence before the FtT of a private life in  the  UK.   There  was  no
    misdirection in applying the case of Azimi-Moayed.

Decision

11.  Rule 276ADE provides that for leave to be granted for a child under  18
    to remain in the UK on the grounds of private life two things  must  be
    established.  First the child must have resided continuously in the  UK
    for a period of  at  least  seven  years.   Secondly  it  must  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  The eldest  child  has
    been here for seven years and the issue, correctly  identified  by  the
    FtT Judge is whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
    UK.

12.  In Azimi-Moayed the  Upper  Tribunal  set  out  the  principles  to  be
    followed in determinations of appeals where children  are  affected  by
    appealed decisions.  The first of these principles is as follows -

         "(i) As a starting point it is in the best interests of children to
             be with both their parents  and  if  both  parents  are  being
             removed from  the  United  Kingdom  then  the  starting  point
             suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part  of
             their household unless there are reasons to the contrary."

    In EV (Philippines) and Others  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 the Court of Appeal made a similar point
    in considering the best interests of the children where parents have no
    right to remain in the UK.  The interests of the children are of course
    a primary consideration; ZH (Tanzania) (FC) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 4.   The
    court must also have regard  to  the  duty  regarding  the  welfare  of
    children in terms  of  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009.  At paragraph 58 Lewison LJ said this:

         "In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of
         the children must be made on the basis that the facts are  as  they
         are in the real world.  ... If neither  parent  has  the  right  to
         remain then that is the background against which the assessment  is
         conducted.  Thus the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to
         expect the child to follow the parent with no right  to  remain  to
         the country of origin?"

13.  At paragraph 30 the FtT Judge correctly identifies  the  principles  in
    Azimi-Moayed and correctly notes that the starting point is that if the
    parent is being removed from the United  Kingdom  then  so  should  the
    dependent children who form part of  the  household  unless  there  are
    reasons to the contrary.  We reject the submission by Mr Karim that the
    starting point must focus on the child independently of the position of
    the appellant.

14.  The FtT Judge has analysed the question of whether or not it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the  UK  in  paragraphs  28
    onwards.  He notes that she is part of a family unit that includes  her
    mother and younger sister.  There are educational facilities in  Ghana.
    The child speaks English, the official language of Ghana.   Accordingly
    she would not be  disadvantaged  by  any  language  difficulties.   The
    father has no involvement with the children so there is  no  caring  or
    involved parent in the United Kingdom.  Mr Karim did not point  to  any
    factor which might  have  been  ignored  or  wrongly  assessed  in  the
    evidence.  Accordingly we are satisfied that the FtT Judge was entitled
    to include that it would be reasonable to expect the  eldest  child  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

15.  So far as paragraph 33 is concerned it is we think  necessary  to  read
    it in the context in which it is set.  The first line reads as follows:
    "With regard to paragraph 276ADE, I am not persuaded on  the  basis  of
    the evidence presented that either the appellant or her eldest daughter
    has established a private life in the United Kingdom".  As a  statement
    of law, that is correct.  It addresses the test as to whether a private
    life has been established for the purposes of 276ADE.  She  has  failed
    to discharge that onus.  Of course in the wider  context  some  private
    life may well have been established  through  school  and  friends  but
    other than knowing that the child attended school and according to  the
    appellant was doing well there, there was no evidence of the extent  of
    the eldest child's private life in the UK outwith  her  family.   There
    was no prospect of an appeal  succeeding  on  private  or  family  life
    grounds and the judge was unarguably entitled to find that  there  were
    no persuasive reasons requiring a separate article 8 assessment outside
    the rules.

16.  Turning finally to Section 117B(6) that provision could only  apply  if
    it was found not to be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  The FtT Judge has found that it would be reasonable to
    expect the child to leave the UK and accordingly this provision  is  of
    no assistance to the appellant.

17.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and we dismiss  the  appeal.
    No anonymity direction was made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  no
    further application was made to the Tribunal.


                                                      LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                        Date: 8 January 2016

