
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers:  IA/29105/2014
                                                               ia/29107/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 17 March 2015                       |On 13 April 2015                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                            v g (First Appellant)
                          d g c (SECOND appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss Dulau, Counsel for Mondair Solicitors,
Peterborough
For the Respondent:    Miss Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Moldova, born on 14  March  1981  and  5
    October 2010 respectively.  The First Appellant is the  mother  of  the
    Second Appellant and I shall  refer  to  the  First  Appellant  as  the
    Appellant throughout.  They  appealed  against  the  decisions  of  the
    Respondent dated 26 June 2014 refusing their applications  as  (1)  the
    partner of and (2) the child of IC, who has indefinite leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom.  The decisions were  appealed  and  the  appeals
    were dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal R R  Hopkins,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 17 November 2014.

 2. Applications for permission to appeal were lodged  and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Shimmin on 12 January 2015.
     The permission states that it is  arguable  that  the  judge  did  not
    consider all the relevant factors and exceptional circumstances of  the
    case and that had he done so the decision  would  not  inevitably  have
    been the same.  The grounds refer  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    failing to exercise discretion and failing to adequately  consider  the
    exceptional circumstances in this case.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response from the Respondent dated 19 January  2015.
    This  states  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  directed  himself
    appropriately and the Respondent and the  judge  were  not  obliged  to
    consider exercising discretion  outside  the  Rules.   It  is  for  the
    Appellant's husband to decide whether to  return  to  Moldova  and  any
    separation will be as a result of his decision, if he decides  to  stay
    in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant's husband's status as a holder of
    ILR does not require him to stay in the United Kingdom.   The  Rule  24
    response goes on to state that the judge was not required to  speculate
    as to the possible outcome of an application for  entry  clearance  and
    if, as the grounds maintain, the separation  of  the  Second  Appellant
    from his father will cause him harm, the resolution of this  matter  is
    entirely in the hands of the sponsor who, if he chooses to, can  return
    to Moldova.  The response states that the interruption  to  the  family
    life of the parties is as a result of their own action  in  respect  of
    breaches of immigration control.  They state that the findings  of  the
    judge were open to him on the evidence before  him  and  there  are  no
    compelling circumstances demonstrated.  They state that the case  is  a
    mundane  example  of  family  life  created  and  maintained  when  the
    circumstances of the parties were precarious.

The Hearing

 4. Counsel for the appellant referred to the grounds of appeal, submitting
    that the judge did not consider all of the facts in this case.

 5. She submitted that the judge should have adopted the 2  stage  approach
    but did not do so.  I was referred to paragraphs 8-14  of  the  grounds
    which list the factors which the judge did not take into account,  such
    as the Appellant's character, conduct,  associations,  compliance  with
    the conditions of leave to remain and the length of time the  Appellant
    has spent in the United Kingdom.  She submitted  that  the  Appellant's
    husband, IC has been granted indefinite leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom.  She submitted that the second Appellant's claim has not  been
    dealt with properly by the judge.  There is no mention of Section 55 in
    the determination.

 6. Counsel submitted that there are exceptional circumstances, in that the
    second Appellant's father has been in the United Kingdom for 12�  years
    and now has indefinite leave to remain.  He is  in  stable  and  secure
    employment in the United Kingdom and he does not want to go to Moldova.
     I asked her why he does not want to go to Moldova.  She submitted that
    he has now put roots down in the United Kingdom and the United  Kingdom
    is his home.  He has been here since 2002; he arrived when  he  was  in
    his early twenties;  he has spent a large proportion of his life  here.



 7. She submitted that the judge did not deal properly with the  separation
    of father and son and  the  best  interests  of  the  son,  the  Second
    Appellant, have not been looked at properly.  She  submitted  that  the
    Second Appellant  was  born  5  days  before  his  father  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain and if the  Appellants  have  to  return  to
    Moldova there could be difficulties in the family  being  reunited.   I
    put to her that the judge found  that  the  Appellants  can  return  to
    Moldova and apply to join the sponsor in the United  Kingdom.   Counsel
    submitted that there are exceptional  circumstances  in  this  case  as
    there is a risk of refusal because of the Appellant's illegal entry  to
    the United Kingdom.  She submitted that the Appellants could  be  apart
    from the Appellant's husband and the second Appellant's father,  for  a
    long time and the applications might  not  be  successful.   I  put  to
    Counsel that it is not in the  judge's  remit  to  decide  whether  the
    Appellants' applications from abroad will be  successful.   I  referred
    her to Paragraph 38 of the determination in which the judge deals  with
    the best interests of the  child  and  refers  to  a  short  period  of
    separation.   I  pointed  out  that  the  judge  found  that  a  normal
    application from Moldova would take around 15 days but  might  take  60
    days maximum.  She submitted that the judge did not properly take  into
    account  all  the  features  in  this   claim   and   the   exceptional
    circumstances.   She  submitted  that  there  is  no  reason  for   the
    Appellants to return to Moldova to apply.  They are living in a  stable
    relationship in the United Kingdom.  She submitted that  if  the  judge
    had looked  properly  at  everything,  his  decision  would  have  been
    different.  She submitted that Article 8 outside the Rules should  have
    been considered and had that been done, it is likely  that  the  appeal
    would have been allowed.

 8. The Presenting Officer made her submissions, submitting that  there  is
    no material error of law in the determination.  She referred me to  the
    case of Oludoyi [2014] UKUT 539IAC.  She  submitted  that  the  judge's
    determination is well reasoned and sustainable.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that  the  Appellants'  sponsor  is  a
    failed asylum seeker.  He overstayed and then was granted ILR under the
    Legacy Scheme.  She submitted that  this  happened  5  days  after  the
    Second Appellant was born.

10. She submitted that the challenge to the Respondent's Refusal Letter and
    to the judge's decision is based purely on  exceptional  circumstances.
    The applications cannot succeed under the Immigration  Rules  including
    the Article 8 aspect of these Rules.  She submitted  that  nothing  has
    been put forward to show that there are  exceptional  circumstances  in
    this case.

11. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Appellant came to the  United
    Kingdom  illegally  and  did  not  claim  asylum.   She  remained  here
    illegally.  She is now stating that she escaped being trafficked but at
    no time did she apply for asylum.  She  submitted  that  the  Appellant
    stayed in the United Kingdom intentionally and illegally and started  a
    relationship with the sponsor, who at that time had no  status  in  the
    United Kingdom.  She submitted that the parties now expect to  stay  in
    the United Kingdom and build their family  life  here.   She  submitted
    that they cannot choose where they want to live.   She  submitted  that
    effective immigration control is necessary in the  United  Kingdom  and
    because of this the judge found that the appeal should be dismissed.

12. I was referred to the Refusal Letter.  The Presenting Officer submitted
    that the Refusal Letter acknowledges the relationship, acknowledges the
    birth of the Second Appellant and acknowledges that the sponsor had ILR
    in the United Kingdom at the date  of  the  decision  but  the  refusal
    letter still finds that there are no  exceptional  circumstances.   She
    submitted  that  Counsel  today  has  not  specified  any   exceptional
    circumstances.   She  submitted  that  exceptional  circumstances   are
    required if the terms of the Immigration Rules are to be outweighed.

13. I was referred to the grounds  of  application.   In  Paragraph  8  the
    grounds state that the Appellant's  character,  conduct,  associations,
    compliance with the conditions of her leave  to  remain  are  good  and
    should have been considered by the judge, however, at Paragraph 10  the
    grounds state that the exclusion  of  the  appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom may be found to be conducive to the public good because of  her
    conduct, making it undesirable to grant entry clearance.  She submitted
    that  this  is  contradictory.   The  Appellant's  is  either  of  good
    character or not.  She submitted that there is no indication  that  the
    judge did not consider all the relevant factors.

14. She submitted that what the Appellants are doing is trying to  get  the
    judge to make a  decision  by  ignoring  how  the  Appellant  conducted
    herself when she came to the United Kingdom.

15. The Presenting Officer submitted that at paragraph 6  of  the  grounds,
    the case of Ganesabalan  [2014]  EWHC  2712  Admin  16  July  2014,  is
    referred to, relating to discretion being exercised outside the  Rules.
    In this paragraph it is stated that the judge  failed  to  sufficiently
    consider the exceptional circumstances.  I was  referred  to  the  said
    case of Oludoyi, which deals with this issue and draws the  distinction
    between exceptional circumstances per se and exceptional  circumstances
    which lead to a grant of  leave  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   It
    refers to the policy on exceptional and  compelling  circumstances  and
    the Decision Maker being left to decide what amounts to exceptional and
    compelling circumstances.  She submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  decided  that  in  this  case  there  were  no  exceptional  and
    compelling circumstances.  She submitted that he was entitled to do  so
    based on what was before him.  She submitted that the judge  considered
    all the facts in this case.  At paragraph 20 of Oludoyi  it  is  stated
    that there is no need to look at  the  evidence  to  see  if  there  is
    anything which has  not  already  been  adequately  considered  in  the
    context of the Immigration Rules and which could lead to  a  successful
    Article 8  claim.   If  there  is  some  feature  which  has  not  been
    adequately considered under the Immigration Rules but which  cannot  in
    any way lead to the Article 8 claim succeeding, there is no need to  go
    any further.  She submitted that that is the case here.  She  submitted
    that everything has been considered cumulatively and this claim  cannot
    succeed under the Rules.  She submitted therefore that there is no good
    reason to consider the claim outside the Rules.

16. The Presenting Officer submitted that the First-tier  Judge's  decision
    should be maintained.

17. She submitted that in the determination at paragraph  5  it  was  found
    that the sponsor would not  be  at  risk  on  return  to  Moldova.   At
    Paragraph 7 his failed asylum claim is considered.  At Paragraph 8  the
    Appellant's entry into the United Kingdom in 2005 is  considered.   She
    did not apply for asylum or try to get status here.   At  Paragraph  13
    the judge states that indefinite leave to remain was granted to  IC  on
    11 October 2010 and at paragraph 19 the judge finds that there  are  no
    insurmountable obstacles to  the  family  all  going  back  to  Moldova
    together.  At Paragraph 30 the Appellant's evidence is  considered  and
    the fact that she has had a low mood because she misses  Moldova.   She
    has not seen her parents for 9 years and  at  Paragraph  33  the  judge
    considers the fact that the sponsor has said that he will not  go  back
    to Moldova.  The Presenting Officer submitted that that is his  choice.
    At paragraph 6 of the determination the judge considers family life and
    private life stating that the  sponsor  has  not  been  prevented  from
    returning to Moldova while accepting that he has said that he will  not
    return.

18. The Presenting Officer submitted that the sponsor  can  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom  and  support  the  Appellant's  application  for  entry
    clearance from Moldova.  At paragraph 38 the  judge  accepts  that  the
    second Appellant would be better staying  with  both  his  parents  but
    finds that a short period away from his father will not be  a  problem.
    She submitted that the judge was entitled to make that finding based on
    what was before him.  She referred to  the  case  of  Azimi-Moayed  and
    Others [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC), which is relevant  to  this  issue.   The
    Second Appellant is only 4 and this case states that 7 years from age 4
    is likely to be more significant to a child than the first 7  years  of
    life.  Young children are focused on their parents  rather  than  their
    peers and are adaptable.  She submitted that this Second  Appellant  is
    not at a crucial period in his development.

19. At paragraph 39 the judge  states  that  entry  clearance  may  not  be
    granted to the Appellants but there is nothing to indicate that  it  is
    likely to be refused.  Again it is stressed that there  is  nothing  to
    stop the sponsor  from  going  to  Moldova  with  the  Appellants.   At
    Paragraph 40 the judge notes that the Appellant has said  she  came  to
    the United  Kingdom  to  escape  from  a  boyfriend  who  was  a  human
    trafficker but she has never sought  any  protection  from  the  United
    Kingdom authorities and she has told her doctor that she would like  to
    go back to Moldova to see her parents and siblings.   At  Paragraph  41
    the judge deals with the Immigration Act 2014 and section 117B  of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  finding  that   the
    relationship between the sponsor and the  Appellant  was  formed  while
    they were  both  in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully  and  the  Second
    Appellant was born when both of them were here unlawfully.   The  judge
    then considers public interest and notes that the second  Appellant  is
    not a qualifying child as he has not lived in the United Kingdom for  7
    years.  The judge then goes on to deal  with  the  cases  of  Chikwamba
    [2008] UKHL 40 and Hayat [2012] EWCA  Civ  1054  and  at  Paragraph  43
    having referred to  these  cases  he  finds  that  the  appeals  cannot
    succeed.  He finds that the terms of the Immigration  Rules  cannot  be
    met and there is no need to consider the case outside the Rules.

20. The Presenting Officer submitted that all relevant  matters  have  been
    properly considered by the judge including an  interruption  of  family
    life.  The judge found that  because  of  public  interest  the  appeal
    should be dismissed.

21. The Presenting Officer submitted that there is no material error of law
    in the determination  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision
    should stand.

22. Counsel then submitted that paragraphs 8  and  10  of  the  grounds  of
    application are not contradictory,  they  are  dealing  with  different
    considerations relating to the  Appellant's  conduct  and  whether  she
    should be removed from the United Kingdom or be allowed to remain.  She
    has no criminal convictions but does have a poor immigration history.

23. Counsel submitted  that  the  judge  has  failed  to  consider  certain
    exceptional  circumstances.   I  asked  her  what   these   exceptional
    circumstances are.  She submitted that the judge has found it would  be
    reasonable for the sponsor to return to Moldova but although he was not
    granted asylum, he still fears return and it would be unreasonable  for
    him to go back when he has his status in the United Kingdom and his job
    and his private life here.  She submitted  that  there  is  always  the
    possibility that an application from Moldova by  the  Appellants  might
    not succeed and I put to her that the sponsor's earnings are sufficient
    and the judge has looked into how  long  an  application  from  Moldova
    would take  to  come  to  fruition.   Counsel  submitted  that  if  the
    application failed there could be a  long  separation.   She  submitted
    that if the sponsor went with them to Moldova he could lose his job, in
    which case they would not be able to return to the United Kingdom as he
    would not have sufficient earnings.

24. She submitted that the Second Appellant has been in the United  Kingdom
    for all of his life with both of his parents and there would be  a  bad
    impact on him if he has to go back to Moldova with his mother.   I  was
    again referred to the grounds of application and the best interests  of
    the child.  Counsel submitted that the judge has accepted that there is
    family life and there is a young child involved and the separation from
    his father would be an unreasonable  interference  to  his  life.   She
    submitted that the judge  did  not  take  all  the  circumstances  into
    account and had he done so he would have reached a different  decision.



25. I was asked to set aside the determination and allow the appeal.

The Determination

26. The grounds of application state that the judge has not considered  all
    the relevant factors in this case and had he done so his decision would
    have been different.  The  terms  of  the  permission  do  not  further
    clarify  this.   The  Presenting   Officer   has   gone   through   the
    determination and the judge has considered the relevant issues in  this
    appeal and come to a well thought out decision.  I asked  Counsel  what
    the exceptional factors are that the judge has not considered  and  she
    submitted that the best interests of the child have not been considered
    and she submitted that the separation of the child from his father even
    for a short period would be bad  for  him.   The  judge  has,  however,
    considered the best interests of the  child  at  paragraph  38  of  the
    determination.  He has also considered the period of separation,  which
    should be short.  He has properly considered the Appellant's ability to
    apply from Moldova to join the sponsor in the United Kingdom and he has
    assessed the immigration history of both the Appellant and the sponsor.
    After doing  that  he  considered  Section  117B  of  Part  5A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and "the  public  interest
    question."  He noted that  the  relationship  was  entered  into  while
    neither party had status in the United  Kingdom  and  that  the  Second
    Appellant was born  while  neither  party  had  status  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He noted that after the  sponsor's  asylum  claim  failed  he
    remained in the United Kingdom until  he  eventually  was  granted  ILR
    under the Legacy Scheme. Because of this he found that the sponsor  can
    go back to Moldova as he is not a refugee. He noted that the  appellant
    remained in the United Kingdom with  no  status  until  she  made  this
    application.

27. I find that the judge considered all the issues in this appeal and  was
    entitled to come to the decision he did, based on the facts before him.
     He finds there to be no compelling, exceptional circumstances  and  he
    has explained why he found that there  was  no  need  to  consider  the
    appeal under Article 8 outside the Rules.  Failing to do this is not an
    error of law.

The Decision

28. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination promulgated on 17 November 2014.

29. The First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  will  stand  and  the  appeal  is
    dismissed.

30. Anonymity has been directed.



Signed        Date 17 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
