

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/29081/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House              |           Decision & Reasons      |
|                                   |Promulgated                        |
|On: 10 November 2017               |           On: 28 November 2017    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                        MS Fanny Florence SIKE Essome
                       (anonymity directionS not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr Al Rashid of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer

                                                  DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of the Cameroon born on  1  December  1978.
      She appeals against the decision of the respondent dated 23 April 2014
      refusing to issue her with a derivative Residence Card under the  2006
      EEA regulations and in a decision of 7 August 2015 to refuse her leave
      to remain under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.


   2. First-tier Tribunal Judge CM Phillips in a decision dated 5  September
      2016 dismissed the appellant's appeal under the 2006  regulations  and
      under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.


   3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on 14
      September 2017 stating that it is arguable that they Judge  failed  to
      attach significant weight to the qualifying child's residence of  over
      seven years pursuant to the guidance in MA Pakistan  v  SS  HD  [2016]
      EWCA Civ 705 and also  arguably  to  take  into  account  the  correct
      approach to reasonableness under section 117B (6) of  the  Nationality
      Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  when  considering  a  child  who  is
      qualifying child as well as an EEA citizen.


   4. It was accepted that the appellant does not meet the  requirements  of
      the 2006 EEA regulations because she does not meet the  definition  of
      "family member" in the Directive or in the 2006 regulations  which  is
      restricted to spouses and  those  who  have  contracted  a  registered
      partnership on the basis of the legislation of the member  State.  The
      application  for  a  derivative  residence  card  was  considered  and
      properly refused under the child route in section 15A (3) of the  2006
      regulations  and  there  is  no  permission  to  appeal  against  that
      decision.


   5. Therefore, the only issue in the appeal was whether the appellant  has
      a genuine and subsisting relationship with her French national son and
      whether it would be reasonable to expect her French national son to go
      to Cameroon with the appellant.


   6. The undisputed evidence  before  the  third  Judge  was  is  that  the
      appellant has three children with three different  nationalities.  The
      first is a Cameroon and is almost 18. The second child lives in  South
      Africa but comes to London for two months every summer in terms of the
      consent order for contact  made  in  2008  that  excludes  contact  in
      Cameroon. The third was born in the United Kingdom on  14  March  2009
      and has a French national father and has been issued with  the  French
      passport. He has now been resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for  over
      seven years.


   7. The Judge stated that the consent order made in 2008 for contact  with
      the appellant's British national child who lives in South Africa  with
      his father was not before him. The Judge  found  stated  however  that
      this evidence is consistent with the fact that the appellant's British
      national son having visited  the  United  Kingdom  regularly.  At  the
      hearing the consent contact order was produced which made  clear  that
      the court has ordered that contact for the appellant's  British  child
      cannot be in Cameroon and must always be in the United Kingdom.


   8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that it would  be  reasonable  for
      the appellant's French national qualifying son  to  accompany  her  to
      Cameroon because that is the country where she comes from  and  it  is
      also where her daughter lives. That however is  not  the  whole  story
      because there are other factors which have not been taken into account
      by the Judge such as that the appellant's French national  son  is  an
      EEA national and should not be required to leave the United Kingdom.


   9. The Judge in his proportionality assessment gave great weight  to  the
      fact  that  the  appellant's  immigration  history  is  appalling  and
      precarious, which no doubt it is as the appellant came to this country
      as a visitor and after her visa expired on 29 May 2008 she never  left
      and remained here unlawfully.  The  Judge  found  that  little  weight
      should be placed on a person's family and private life whilst  in  the
      United Kingdom unlawfully and whilst the person's  immigration  status
      is precarious.


  10. Had  the  Judge  considered  the  case  of  R(on  the  application  MA
      (Pakistan) and  Others)  v  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
      Chamber) and Another [2016] EWCA Civ 705, the decision might have been
      different. It was held in that  case  that  when  assessing  the  best
      interests of the child, it was inappropriate to  treat  the  child  as
      having a precarious  status  merely  because  that  was  true  of  the
      parents. The observation that people arriving in the UK on a temporary
      basis could be expected to leave could not be true of  a  child.  They
      were not to be blamed for the fact that their parents  had  overstayed
      illegally, and the starting point was  that  their  status  should  be
      legitimised unless there was good reason not to do so.


  11. I am far from saying that the appellant will succeed  but  the  appeal
      needs to be considered again on the correct legal principles based  on
      the updated evidence.  I direct that the appeal  be  remitted  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal for findings of fact  to  be  made  at  a  renewed
      hearing. I direct that the appeal  be  placed  before  any  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge other than Judge CM Phillips.




Decision


The appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal


Signed by


A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs                                 S                                  Chana
   This 27th day of November 2017


