
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/29139/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 25 February 2015                  |On 26 February 2015                   |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                          Ms AKOSUA TAKYIWAH MANUH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Mahmud, Counsel (instructed by Jade Law
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    Introduction


    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers  on  22   December   2014   against   the
         determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Watters   who   had
         dismissed the Appellant's appeal under Appendix FM as a spouse of a
         British Citizen and on human rights (Article 8  ECHR  family  life)
         grounds against her removal in a decision and  reasons  promulgated
         on 11 November 2014. The appeal was determined on the papers as the
         Appellant had requested.


    2.     The Appellant is a national of Ghana, born on 9 September  1984.
         The Appellant had married her British Citizen spouse while  in  the
         United Kingdom lawfully on 11 March 2014.  She had  then  sought  a
         variation of leave to remain as a spouse. Judge Watters found  that
         Appendix FM was not met, in that specified evidence to support  the
         income requirement had not been produced: see [7] of the  decision.
         There were no compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised
         under the Immigration Rules and it was not  necessary  to  consider
         Article 8 ECHR.


    3.     Permission to appeal was granted because it was considered  that
         it was arguable that the judge had erred when considering  Appendix
         FM-SE, in particular section D (i.e., "evidential flexibility") and
         fairness.


    4.     Standard directions were made by the tribunal,  indicating  that
         the appeal would be reheard immediately if a material error of  law
         were found.  A rule 24 notice dated 14 January  2015  opposing  the
         appeal had been filed on the Respondent's behalf.


    Submissions - error of law


    5.     Mr Mahmud for the Appellant relied on the grounds of onwards  of
         appeal and the grant of permission to appeal.  The  judge  had  not
         taken into account all of the evidence before  him.   Part  of  the
         specified evidence had in fact been provided and the Appellant  had
         submitted that  the  evidential  flexibility  policy  required  the
         Secretary of State to enquire  about  what  was  missing.   It  was
         obvious that the documents whose veracity had not  been  challenged
         showed that the Appellant's sponsor worked  for  a  household  name
         company.  Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2 had not wholly overturned the
         Upper Tribunal's determination of the same name.  It  was  relevant
         in that the Secretary of State was not being  asked  to  engage  in
         speculative enquiries.  There was a discretion which had  not  been
         exercised.   The  only  issue  was  the  funds  available  for  the
         Appellant's maintenance.  The  decision  making  process  had  been
         unfairly conducted.


    6.     Mr Wilding for the Respondent relied on the rule 24 notice.   He
         submitted that the discretion in Appendix FM-SE, section D,  was  a
         narrow one.  The reality was  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
         provide a number of the specified items of proof of  her  sponsor's
         income: original payslips,  proof  from  the  employer  where  copy
         payslips only had been supplied and complete  bank  statements  for
         the required period.  As the appeal was not  in  the  Points  Based
         System, there was no bar on later provision of  evidence  but  even
         then the Appellant had still  not  provided  the  letter  from  the
         sponsor's employer verifying his income.  There was no  reason  for
         the Secretary of State to have made any enquiries of the  Appellant
         in view of those multiple failures, and so there would have been no
         point in the judge's making a "not  in  accordance  with  the  law"
         finding and returning the decision to the Secretary of  State.  The
         judge was correct in finding that Appendix FM-SE had not been  met.
         He reached a properly reasoned decision and there was no basis  for
         interfering with it.


    7.     Mr Mahmud addressed  the  tribunal  in  reply.   The  evidential
         flexibility policy was not as restrictive as Mr Wilding maintained.
         The Secretary of  State  could  have  provided  assistance  to  the
         Appellant.  There was also the Article 8 ECHR claim which the judge
         had failed to address adequately.


    8.     The tribunal indicated at the conclusion of submissions that  it
         found no material error of law and reserved its determination which
         now follows.


    No material error of law finding


    9.     The decision to opt for a "papers" only appeal to the First-tier
         Tribunal is frequently an unwise choice.  It is more difficult  for
         a judge to consider an appeal without any  assistance  from  either
         side.   The  Appellant  forfeits   the   opportunity   to   provide
         clarification and to develop submissions.  Nevertheless, it is only
         on the rarest of occasions that judges  ought  to  direct  an  oral
         hearing.  Even then, appellants cannot be forced to attend  such  a
         hearing.   There  was  nothing  about  the  present  appeal   which
         suggested that the judge should have directed an oral hearing.


    10.     The  judge's  findings  about  compliance  with  the  specified
         evidence laid down in Appendix FM-SE were plainly right.   Even  at
         the stage of the appeal hearing  (on  the  papers),  the  specified
         evidence remained incomplete, as Mr Wilding persuasively submitted.


    11.    The judge was entitled to find on the evidence before  him  that
         there   were   no   compelling,   compassionate   or    exceptional
         circumstances which might have required the Secretary of  State  to
         consider the exercise of discretion outside the  Immigration  Rules
         in the Appellant's favour.  On the contrary, it was obviously  open
         to the Appellant to submit a fresh and compliant  application,  and
         it was proportionate to the  legitimate  objective  of  immigration
         control to expect her to do so.


    12.    The one issue which the judge  did  not  address  in  terms  was
         whether, on the facts, the  version  of  the  familiar  "evidential
         flexibility" policy (found at section  D  of  Appendix  FM-SE)  was
         applicable.  This issue had been raised in clear terms at paragraph
         17 of the Notice of Appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  so
         should have been considered by the judge.


    13.    There is no express indication in the decision that  this  issue
         was considered by the judge.  Even if he considered that the  point
         took matters no further for  the  Appellant,  it  would  have  been
         useful to have said so.  Nevertheless, the tribunal  is  unable  to
         find that this omission amounted to a material error of  law.   The
         reason was given by Mr Wilding in  his  submissions.   The  missing
         document  (the  sponsor's  employer's  letter)  was  still  not  in
         existence as at the date of the consideration of  the  appeal.   It
         was not a document which the Respondent had any reason  to  believe
         existed, in contrast, for example, to missing page(s) from a series
         of documents such as payslips or bank statements.


    14.    The discretion available under section D of Appendix FM-SE as it
         stood as at  the  date  of  decision  has  to  be  exercised  in  a
         reasonable manner.  It did  not  create  a  positive  duty  on  the
         Respondent to ensure that all applications were fully and  properly
         documented before they were considered further.  It would have been
         open to the Respondent in her discretion to  have  asked  for  more
         information, but the multiple omissions which  existed  as  at  the
         date of the Appellant's application meant that there  was  no  such
         requirement.  The Respondent proceeded to deal with the application
         in accordance with the Immigration Rules and there  was  no  reason
         for the judge to have found that the Respondent had acted  unfairly
         towards the Appellant.


    15.    As to Mr Mahmud's other submission concerning Article 8 ECHR, it
         is sufficient to refer to Patel v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72.   Article  8
         ECHR creates no general power to dispense with the requirements  of
         the Immigration Rules.  The tribunal accordingly finds  that  there
         was no material error of law in the determination and there  is  no
         basis for interfering with the judge's decision.


    DECISION


    The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and stands unchanged






    Signed Dated 25 February 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
