
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29895/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 December 2016                  |On 18 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Oluwamisimi Priscilla Ogunseye
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M George, Jesuis Solicitors (20 October 2016).
     No appearance (15 December 2016).


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing an appeal by  the  appellant  against  the
    respondent's decision made on 21 August 2015 refusing her  a  residence
    card as a confirmation of a right to reside as the family member of  an
    EEA national exercising treaty rights. In this decision I will refer to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, the  applicant
    as the appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born  on  31  August  1990.   She
    entered the UK on 31 July 2011 with  a  student  visa  valid  until  15
    October 2014.  On 11 December 2013 she applied for a residence card  as
    a spouse but this application was withdrawn  on  3  June  2014.   On  7
    October 2014 she made the application the subject of this appeal.   She
    based her application on the fact that she had married her husband on 3
    October 2013. He is a citizen of Portugal and it was  claimed  that  he
    was exercising treaty rights in the UK as an employee of  Spark  Legend
    Limited ("Spark Legend").

3.   However, the respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had
    submitted sufficient evidence  to  demonstrate  that  her  husband  was
    exercising treaty rights in the UK.  Attempts had been made  to  verify
    his claimed employment but the respondent had been unable to do so.  It
    was also noted that Spark  Legend  was  dissolved  on  17  March  2015.
    Accordingly the appellant's application was refused on 21 August 2015.

4.   The appellant appealed against this decision  and  opted  to  have  the
    appeal decided on the papers.   The judge accepted that  there  was  no
    dispute that the appellant was married to an EEA national and that  the
    issue was whether he was exercising treaty rights as a  worker  in  the
    UK.  He set out his findings on this issue as follows:

         "17. I find that the appellant  has  shown  evidentially  that  her
             husband was working for Spark Legend Limited at  the  time  of
             the application.  The application date is 7 October  2014.   I
             say this given:

             (a)  the DueDil company information regarding Spark Legend Ltd
                  shows that  it  was  incorporated  on  23  July  2012  and
                  dissolved on 17 March 2015.  Therefore, I find  it  was  a
                  genuine  company  at   the   time   of   the   appellant's
                  application;

             (b)      the appellant has provided her husband's contract  of
                  employment with Spark Legend Ltd showing that  he  started
                  work on 25 October 2015; and

             (c)      that I find it probable that the appellant's  husband
                  was still employed by them at the time of the  application
                  given  the  wage  slips  provided.   I  find  that   these
                  documents  are  reliable  given  that  they  predate   the
                  dissolution of the company.  There is no evidence of inter-
                  agency checks within the file to support the  respondent's
                  assertion that his employment cannot be verified."

5.   The judge then said that, having found that  the  appellant  had  shown
    that her husband was a worker at the time of  her  application  and  as
    such a qualified person within the requirements of  reg.  6(1)  of  the
    Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006   ("the
    Regulations"), the appeal should be allowed.

The Grounds and Submissions

6.   The respondent's grounds argue that the  judge  had  failed  to  engage
    adequately with the contents of the decision letter  which  took  issue
    with the claim that the appellant's husband had been employed at  Spark
    Legend as no employment or self-employment records were found  for  him
    between April 2013 and April 2015, leading the  respondent  to  believe
    the documents provided were false.  Further, the  judge  had  erred  by
    finding that the fact that the appellant's spouse was exercising treaty
    rights at the date of application was sufficient to allow  the  appeal.
    The material date for considering the application  for  the  respondent
    was the date of decision and for  an  in-country  appeal  the  date  of
    hearing.  The grounds argue that there was no evidence whatsoever  that
    the appellant's spouse satisfied reg. 9 on either of these dates.

7.   At the hearing before me Ms Brocklesby Weller adopted the  grounds.  At
    the date of the respondent's decision the appellant could not have been
    working, so she argued, for Sparks  Legend  as  the  company  had  been
    dissolved in March 2015.  Further, the judge  had  failed  to  consider
    adequately or at all the respondent's assertion that the payslips  were
    false in the light of the lack of any reliable evidence to confirm  the
    employment of the appellant's husband.

8.   Mr George submitted that the judge  had  reached  a  decision  properly
    open to him on the evidence.  These were issues  of  fact  for  him  to
    decide.  He had been entitled to find that the appellant's husband  had
    been employed as claimed as at the date of application.

Consideration of Whether there is an Error of Law

9.   I am satisfied that the judge erred in law for the reasons set  out  in
    the respondent's grounds.  The respondent had  to  assess  whether  the
    appellant met the requirements of the Regulations as at the date of her
    decision.  If there is an in-country appeal, the First-tier Tribunal is
    entitled to take into account any evidence relating to the substance of
    the decision.

10.  It is therefore clear that  the  judge  erred  in  law  by  failing  to
    consider the issue of whether the appellant fell within the category of
    a worker either at the date of decision or  at  the  date  of  hearing.
    This error was material to the outcome of the appeal in  the  light  of
    the evidence that Spark Legend was dissolved on  17  March  2015,  some
    five months before  the  respondent's  decision.   I  also  accept  the
    submission  that  the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons   for
    discounting the evidence  in  the  respondent's  decision  letter  that
    attempts to verify the claimed employment had not produced any evidence
    that the respondent's husband was in fact working.

11.  I am therefore satisfied that the judge  erred  in  law  and  that  the
    decision should be set aside.  Mr George sought a rehearing before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal.   Ms  Brocklesby  Weller   indicated   that   the
    respondent would wish to adduce further  evidence  as  to  whether  the
    appellant's husband was still in the UK.  On  balance  I  am  satisfied
    that this is an appeal  which  should  properly  remain  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal for the decision to be re-made.

Re-making the Decision

12.  The appeal was duly  relisted  on  15  December  2016.   There  was  no
    appearance by or on behalf of the appellant.  On 1  December  2016  the
    appellant's solicitors wrote to notify the Tribunal that the  appellant
    no longer wished to continue with her immigration appeal and  that  she
    has withdrawn from the appeal due to circumstances beyond her  control.
    The representatives were notified by the Tribunal that  as  the  appeal
    had been brought by the respondent, it  would  need  to  proceed  to  a
    hearing.  There has been no appearance by or on behalf of the appellant
    and her representatives have indicated that they are no longer  acting.
    I am satisfied that the proper course is to proceed  to  determine  the
    appeal in the appellant's absence.

13.  The appellant applied for a residence card as confirmation of  a  right
    to reside as the family member of an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights.  At the hearing of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  a
    contract of employment showing that the appellant's husband had started
    work on 25 October 2013 and a number of wage slips  from  that  company
    were produced.  The respondent has now  produced  a  witness  statement
    from an officer of HM Revenue & Customs authorised to  make  disclosure
    under s.40 of the UK Borders Act 2007  following  a  request  from  the
    respondent  for  information  as  to  the  employment  record  of   the
    appellant's husband.  This records that  no  HMRC  self-assessment  tax
    record is held for the years 2013/14 to 2015/16  and  so  far  as  PAYE
    records are concerned, none are held for 2015/16.  There was no  record
    held of any current employer.  So far as  the  tax  years  2013/14  and
    2014/15 in respect of Spark Legend Limited are concerned, there  is  no
    evidence of any payment of salary by that company  to  the  appellant's
    husband.

14.  In the light of this evidence I am not  satisfied  that  the  documents
    submitted to the First-tier Tribunal are genuine, that the  appellant's
    husband was employed by Sparks Legend or  otherwise  falls  within  the
    provisions of reg 6 of the Regulations.  I am satisfied in the light of
    information held by the respondent and produced at the hearing that the
    appellant's husband is no longer in the UK.  Accordingly, the appellant
    has failed to show that her husband was exercising treaty rights at the
    date of decision or at the date of this hearing.



Decision

15.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and  the  decision  has  been  set
    aside.  I re-make the decision by  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the refusal of a residence card.  No  anonymity  direction  has
    been made.



Signed   H J E Latter  Date: 16 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

