
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29435/2014
                                                               IA/29442/2014
                                                               IA/29451/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th April 2015                            |On 30th April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                mrs Vasuki Pakeerathakumar (first appellant)
               mr kabilash Pakeerathakumar (second Appellant)
             master avihinash Pakeerathakumar (Third Appellant)
                          (ANONYMITY not retained)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Harris of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Savage

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants born on 17th September 1971, 3rd October  1996  and  5th
    April 2001 respectively are all  citizens  of  Sri  Lanka.   The  first
    Appellant is the mother of the second and third Appellants.

 2. The first Appellant had entered the United Kingdom on 19th October 2011
    with entry clearance as the spouse of a settled person i.e. her Sponsor
    husband valid from 4th October 2011 until 4th January 2014.   She  made
    application in respect of herself and her two  dependent  children  for
    indefinite leave to remain on 9th December 2013.  That application  was
    refused by the Respondent on 27th June 2014.

 3. The Appellants had appealed that decision and their appeal was heard by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Horvath  sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  14th
    November 2014.  The judge had dismissed the Appellants'  appeals  under
    both the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the  ECHR  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Application for permission to appeal was  made  and
    was granted on 9th February 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Simpson.
    It was said that it was arguable that this case came within A280(c) and
    the Judge ought to have adopted  the  five  stage  Razgar  approach  in
    determining this case.  Directions  were  issued  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should firstly consider whether or not an  error  of  law  had
    been made in this case and the matter came before me in accordance with
    those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellants

 4. Mr Harris referred me to A280(c)(ii) and  it  was  submitted  that  the
    judge should have considered the  matter  outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 5. In particular it was said that in looking at EX.1 under Appendix FM and
    the test of "insurmountable obstacles" the judge had not looked at  the
    question of reasonableness or proportionality in terms of the  position
    of the Sponsor husband when looking at the case as a whole.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 6. Miss Savage noted that the transitional provisions at  A280(c)  allowed
    the Appellants' application for ILR to be  considered  under  paragraph
    287A of the Immigration Rules but that if that application failed under
    the Immigration Rules as it did in this case it was submitted,  it  was
    then incumbent upon a judge to look at Article 8 within the context  of
    Appendix FM.  It was also submitted that the judge had properly  looked
    at the Sponsor's position when reading the decision as a whole and  the
    judge had applied the law in accordance with the most recent  authority
    of Singh [2015].  In resubmissions Mr Harris  submitted  by  way  of  a
    question as to whether it could be found within the decision  that  the
    judge had looked at the Sponsor's position as to why it was  reasonable
    for him to return to Sri Lanka to accompany his family.

 7. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    submissions and the evidence.  I now  provide  that  decision  with  my
    reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 8. In this case the Appellants applied for further leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom on 9th December 2013.  That application had been refused
    by the Respondent on 27th June 2014.  It was said that  the  Respondent
    was wrong in considering the application with reference to Appendix  FM
    of the Immigration Rules because  of  the  transitional  provisions  as
    outlined at A280(c)(ii).  The case of Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74 noted at
    paragraph 56 that when HC 194 first came into force on  9th  July  2012
    the Secretary of State was  not  entitled  to  take  into  account  the
    provisions of the new Rules when making decisions on private or  family
    life applications made prior to that date but not  yet  decided.   That
    was in accordance with the implementation  provisions  as  outlined  in
    Edgehill.  However in Singh the Supreme Court noted that  the  position
    was altered by HC 565 specifically by the introduction of new paragraph
    A277C with effect from 6th September 2012 and as  from  that  date  the
    Secretary of State was entitled to take into account the provisions  of
    Appendix FM and paragraphs 276ADE in deciding private  or  family  life
    applications even if they were made  prior  to  9th  July  2012.   This
    application for further leave to remain was made after  9th  July  2012
    but even if one looked at the original application for entry  clearance
    made in 2011 the position in Singh would appear to cover the point  and
    there was no error in the decision to examine family and  private  life
    under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.

 9. It was agreed evidence that the Appellant no longer sought to rely upon
    paragraph  287  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the  judge  correctly
    dismissed the appeal under that head.  He had then considered in detail
    the  current  jurisprudence  on  the  interaction   between   the   new
    Immigration Rules (Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE) and Article  8  of
    the ECHR.  He made specific reference and  quoted  extensively  from  a
    number of cases in that respect.  The judge had concluded at  paragraph
    28 that Gulshan and Shahzad were  binding  upon  him  in  terms  of  an
    examination of Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules.

10. However having made that point  at  paragraph  28  the  judge  then  at
    paragraph  29  had  made  an  assessment  as  to  whether  there   were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside  the  UK  at
    the present time.  He had set out a detailed analysis of the  facts  of
    this case and all the factors that were  relevant  in  considering  the
    question of continuance of family life outside the UK.   That  analysis
    included at paragraph 37 onwards, as the judge noted:

         "I propose to deal now with proportionality and Article 8(2) and my
         statutory obligations pursuant to Section 55  in  relation  to  the
         children's  best  interests.   I  bear  in  mind  Mr  O'Callaghan's
         submissions in regard to the children's best interests in  relation
         to Article 8 Section 55 and proportionality".

    Thereafter and again in not inconsiderable detail the judge had  looked
    with care at the family and private life particularly in respect of the
    children and had further looked at Section 117 of the 2002 Act and  had
    noted at paragraph 46 that he needed to carry out a balancing  exercise
    as required by Section 117A.  At paragraph 48 he had concluded that  he
    found the Respondent's decision to refuse leave to remain was a limited
    interference justified and proportionate.  He  found  at  paragraph  51
    that the Respondent's decision to refuse and her  exercising  effective
    immigration control within the proviso of Article 8(2)  was  justified,
    lawful and proportionate within the terms of this case.  That  detailed
    and careful analysis of all the facts was done by the judge within,  as
    he saw it, the provisions of the Immigration Rules.  At paragraph 53 he
    found there were no sufficiently compelling circumstances to justify  a
    grant of leave outside of the Immigration Rules.  He then continued  in
    that paragraph by stating:

         "There is no need for me to repeat my findings all  over  again  in
         regard to Article 8 outside of the Rules.  Suffice it for me to say
         that even if  I  were  to  do  so  and  even  if  I  were  to  take
         insurmountable circumstances out of the equation which I do I would
         still  have  come  to  the  same  decision   in   regard   to   the
         proportionality issue".

11. It is clear that the judge had with care and not  insignificant  detail
    looked at all the relevant factors relating to this family in assessing
    the question of whether removal  would  place  the  United  Kingdom  in
    breach of its  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   He  had
    conducted that exercise within, as he put  it,  the  framework  of  the
    Immigration Rules and had concluded that the case law  of  Gulshan  did
    not compel him to repeat that exercise outside of the Immigration Rules
    but also made it clear that had he so done he would have arrived at the
    conclusion that  a  removal  was  not  disproportionate.   The  judge's
    approach is not inconsistent with the authority of Singh  which  looked
    at earlier cases on this vexed issue including Gulshan.  It  is  clear,
    that what is important in this case, is that the  judge  had  carefully
    looked at all the relevant facts in relation to  these  Appellants  and
    had conducted a proportionality exercise based upon  all  the  relevant
    evidence and also taken account, as he was obliged to  do  so,  of  the
    requirements of Section 117 of the 2002  Act.   Having  conducted  that
    detailed analysis and having been alive to the prospect that even if he
    was conducting that exercise with no reference to the Immigration Rules
    he would  have  reached  the  same  conclusions  based  upon  the  same
    evidence, there was no material error of law made by the judge and  his
    approach was compatible with that which is said in Singh.

Notice of Decision

There was no error of law made by the judge in this case and  I  uphold  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
