
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29378/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 November 2016                           |On 13 December 2016           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                               delwar hussain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Musquit, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, with permission appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Baldwin) who, in a determination promulgated
    on 23rd June 2016 dismissed his appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made on 19th August 2015 to refuse to grant leave to
    remain on Article 8 grounds.

 2. There has been no application made or  any  grounds  provided  for  any
    anonymity direction.

 3. The Appellant's immigration history can be summarised as follows.   The
    Appellant is a  citizen  of  Bangladesh.  The  witness  statements  and
    history demonstrates that the parties had originally met in  Bangladesh
    in 2009 and that they had travelled together to France and stayed there
    until she returned to the United Kingdom.  The  Appellant  remained  in
    France and maintained a relationship between  himself  and  his  future
    wife between September 2011 and February 2012 by way of  telephone  and
    modern methods of communication.  The Appellant  then  entered  the  UK
    unlawfully in February 2012 and the following month  in  March  married
    they were in an Islamic marriage.

 4. On 1st October 2012 he made an application outside of the Rules and  in
    January 2013 was encountered working illegally in the UK and was served
    with an IS15A document.  In June 2013 he married his wife  in  a  civil
    ceremony.  As a result a further application was made  outside  of  the
    Rules but that application was voided.  The application that  had  been
    made on 1st October 2012 was then refused in a notice of decision dated
    13th August 2013 with no right of appeal.  It appears that  a  judicial
    review application was lodged which was later withdrawn in 2014 and  on
    13th July 2015 further representations were received and  the  decision
    made to refuse leave to remain was reconsidered.

 5. The basis of the application as set out  in  the  decision  letter  was
    based on the Appellant's private and family life with his wife, who  is
    a British citizen and in the light of her personal  circumstances  that
    she had a number of significant  care  needs  and  was  in  receipt  of
    disability benefit.

 6. In a decision made on 19th August 2015 the Secretary of  State  refused
    the application.  The Secretary of State first of  all  considered  the
    application under the "old Rules" under Article 8 having  accepted  the
    Appellant's degree of private life that had been established since 2012
    and also on the basis of family life in that it was accepted  that  the
    Appellant and his spouse had a genuine and subsisting relationship.  It
    was considered that there would be no insurmountable obstacles  or  any
    issues raised  to  preclude  his  wife  from  travelling  with  him  to
    Bangladesh where he had met her and  where  she  had  been  born.   The
    Secretary  of  State  took  into  account  the  precariousness  of  the
    relationship and when  it  was  formed  and  the  Appellant's  lack  of
    immigration status.

 7. The application was also considered under the Rules.  As to the partner
    route, again it  was  accepted  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship and therefore applied EX.1.   It  was  not  accepted  that
    there were any  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing
    outside of the UK noting that both the Appellant and his wife were from
    Bangladesh, both were born in  Sylheti,  that  she  was  aware  of  the
    language, life and culture and that there was treatment  available  for
    his wife's  condition  based  on  the  objective  material  before  the
    Secretary of State and that she had family relatives in  Bangladesh  as
    did the Appellant.  As to private  life  under  paragraph  276ADE,  the
    Appellant had entered in 2012 and therefore had not had  twenty  years'
    continuing residence nor could he  demonstrate  that  there  were  very
    significant obstacles based on the short period of residence, and  that
    he had spent the majority of life in Bangladesh where he  was  familiar
    with the language and  the  culture  and  had  close  family  relatives
    residing there.

 8. The decision letter also made  reference  to  whether  there  were  any
    circumstances to justify a grant of leave outside of the Rules.  Over a
    period  of  two  pages,  the  Secretary   of   State   considered   the
    circumstances of the Appellant's wife including  the  circumstances  of
    her  adult  children.   The  decision  letter  considered  the  medical
    evidence that had been presented in 2015 but that there  was  objective
    material to  demonstrate  that  such  medical  evidence  including  the
    medication required was available in Bangladesh and  thus  family  life
    could take place in Bangladesh with the Appellant.  The public interest
    factors were considered noting that the Appellant had entered illegally
    and had lived in the UK with no legal basis  to  remain  and  that  his
    spouse was aware of that lack of immigration status and that  he  would
    be liable to removal at any time.  The decision letter also  took  into
    account their circumstances and how they met and how they had travelled
    to France together and that there had been a period of  time  in  which
    their relationship had been maintained by telephone and that this could
    also take place if the Appellant were to return  to  Bangladesh.   Thus
    the application was refused.

 9. The Appellant exercised his right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Baldwin).   In  the
    determination promulgated on 23rd June 2016 the  judge  considered  the
    application both under Appendix FM EX.1  under  the  Rules  and  276ADE
    (private life) but found that the Appellant could not  meet  the  Rules
    and that there were no insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  being
    conducted in  Bangladesh.   It  had  also  considered  the  application
    outside of the Rules  and  expressly  took  into  account  the  medical
    circumstances of the Appellant's wife but when balancing  the  findings
    of fact made in the light of the public interest matters under  Section
    117, reached the conclusion that the Appellant's removal to  Bangladesh
    would not be disproportionate.

10. The Appellant sought permission to appeal and permission was granted on
    8th October 2016.

11. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  Mr Musquit appeared on
    behalf of the Appellant  and  Ms  Ahmad,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State.  I heard submissions from each of the parties which
    had been recorded in my Record of Proceedings and  I  shall  deal  with
    those submissions when setting out my conclusions on whether or not  an
    error of law has been made in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

12. In his submissions Mr Musquit on behalf of the  Appellant  stated  that
    Judge Page, when granting permission to appeal, had  misunderstood  the
    grounds and in particular the point  relating  to  the  detail  of  the
    medical evidence.  He therefore submitted that  whilst  the  judge  had
    granted permission on a point that was not raised, there were  properly
    arguable grounds set out  in  the  written  material.   They  were,  he
    submitted, that the judge had made inadequate findings on the issue  of
    "insurmountable obstacles" (Ground 1) and that in relation to Ground  2
    that the judge had failed to make findings when considering  Article  8
    outside of the Rules as to the reasonableness or  otherwise  of  family
    life taking place outside of the UK in Bangladesh.   For  the  sake  of
    completeness, he submitted that he did not rely on the written  grounds
    where it was asserted that the judge failed  to  consider  family  life
    with the adult children of the Appellant's spouse.

13. I shall therefore deal with the two grounds advanced on behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  Dealing with Ground 1, Mr Musquit submits  that  the  judge
    had not properly considered the Appellant's claim within the Rules  and
    in particular EX.1.  He submitted that the  judge's  findings  on  this
    aspect of the appeal were inadequate and that the judge had  failed  to
    consider the threshold required for insurmountable obstacles had to  be
    established.

14. He referred the Tribunal to the guidance and that the judge  failed  to
    consider that there was "very severe hardship" and  failed  to  analyse
    the issue of insurmountable obstacles and whether  accessing  treatment
    would be of a particular  hardship  in  the  context  of  the  cost  of
    treatment and the ability of the Appellant's wife to afford  treatment.
    He submitted that this was a factor that the judge had ignored.

15. By way of reply Ms Ahmad submitted that the judge  properly  considered
    the matters set out in the guidance as set  out  at  page  6  and  when
    considering the judge's reasoning at paragraphs 10 and 11 the judge was
    fully aware of the evidence relating to the Appellant's wife's  medical
    circumstances.  She submitted at paragraphs 21 to 23  the  judge  fully
    appreciated the issue and that he was entitled to find that there  were
    no insurmountable obstacles based on the failure of  the  Appellant  to
    produce no  evidence  that  medical  treatment  was  not  available  in
    Bangladesh.  The judge also found as a fact that the  Appellant's  wife
    had close family members in Bangladesh as did the Appellant himself and
    that she had continuing cultural ties to Bangladesh, a country that she
    had been born in, spoke the language of compared to  English  and  that
    she had returned to in recent years.  Thus the conclusion that he  made
    under the Rules relating to EX.1 were findings that were both  adequate
    and open to the judge on the evidence.

16. As the Rules set out EX.1 is not a standalone requirement but where  it
    applies  it  provides  an  exception   to   meeting   the   eligibility
    requirements.

17. EX.1(b) reads as follows:-

         "(b) The applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen, settled  in
             the UK or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
             protection, and there are insurmountable obstacles  to  family
             life with that partner continuing outside the UK."

    Paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM states that:-

         "EX.2    For the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1(b)  'insurmountable
                obstacles' means the  very  significant  difficulties  which
                would  be  faced  by  the  applicant  or  their  partner  in
                continuing their family life together  outside  the  UK  and
                which could not be overcome or  would  entail  very  serious
                hardship for the appellant or their partner."

18. Mr Musquit has referred the Tribunal to the guidance  in  which  it  is
    said that "insurmountable obstacles" can take two forms, namely a  very
    significant difficulty which would be literally impossible to  overcome
    so it would be impossible for family life with the applicant's  partner
    to continue overseas, for example, because they would not  be  able  to
    gain entry to the proposed  country  of  return  or  secondly,  a  very
    significant difficulty which would be faced by the applicant  or  their
    partner in continuing their family life together  outside  the  UK  and
    which could be overcome but would entail very serious hardship for  one
    or both of them.

19.  The guidance goes on to state  that  "when  assessing  an  application
    under   paragraph   EX.1(b)   and   determining   whether   there   are
    "insurmountable obstacles", the decision maker should  have  regard  to
    the individual circumstances of the applicant and their partner,  based
    on all the information that has been provided.  The guidance goes on to
    make reference to the assessment of whether there  are  "insurmountable
    obstacles" is a different and more stringent assessment than whether it
    will be "reasonable to expect" the applicant's  partner  to  join  them
    overseas.  Mr Musquit points to the guidance in which  it  is  said  "a
    material change in the quality of the life of the applicant  and  their
    partner in the country of return, such as  the  type  of  accommodation
    they would live in, or a reduction in their income, would  not  usually
    amount to an insurmountable obstacle.

20.   The  guidance  sets  out  factors  that  might  be  relevant  to  the
    consideration of whether an insurmountable obstacle exists but are  not
    limited to the following, ability to lawfully enter  and  stay  in  the
    country, cultural barriers, the impact of mental or physical disability
    and the security situation in the country of return.   In  the  section
    entitled the impact of mental and physical disability it states

         "Whether or not either party has a mental or physical disability, a
         move to another country may involve a period  of  hardship  as  the
         person adjusts to their new surroundings.  But a physical or mental
         disability could be such that in some circumstances it  could  lead
         to very serious hardship, for example due  to  lack  of  healthcare
         that amounted to an insurmountable obstacle."

    In his submissions, Mr Musquit had submitted that the  judge  had  made
    inadequate findings  under  the  Rules  in  relation  to  EX.1  and  in
    particular had failed  to  consider  whether  there  was  "very  severe
    hardship" on the particular facts of this case.

21. The judge's overall findings which deal with the assessment of  Article
    8 under the Rules and  also  outside  of  the  Rules  are  set  out  at
    paragraphs 15 to 23 of his decision.  There is no dispute raised in the
    grounds that the Appellant can meet the requirements of  the  Rules  in
    respect of his private life under paragraph 276ADE and in the light  of
    the short period of residence since his unlawful entry in 2012  and  in
    the light of his continuing family, cultural  and  language  links  and
    ties to Bangladesh.  The judge reached that conclusion at [23].

22. As to family life and Appendix FM and the issue relating to EX.1 as set
    out above, there is also no dispute between the parties that the couple
    were married and had cohabited for two years and that they  were  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship.  It was  also  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's wife had significant medical health needs which  the  judge
    made reference to at [8] and [10] where he  accurately  summarised  the
    letter dated 14th June 2016 for the council and also from the  evidence
    that  he  saw  and  heard  at  [11].   As  set  out  earlier   in   the
    determination, there is no suggestion that he did not consider all  the
    medical evidence that there was before the Tribunal and at  [21]  found
    that the Appellant's wife suffered from multiple medical conditions and
    that she had a need to take medication and required significant care.

23. Whilst it is submitted that  the  judge  gave  inadequate  reasons  for
    reaching the conclusions that there were no insurmountable obstacles to
    family life being enjoyed in Bangladesh, I do  not  consider  that  the
    ground is made out.  In the decision of Shizad (Sufficiency of reasons:
    set aside) [2013] UKUT, the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would
    not routinely set aside the decision of  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    where there is no misdirection in law, that  the  fact-finding  process
    can be ascertained and unless the conclusions drawn  from  the  primary
    data were not reasonably open to the judge on the evidence.

24. When applying that decision and reading the determination as a whole, I
    am satisfied that the judge gave adequate and  made  reasoned  findings
    that the Appellant and her partner had not demonstrated that there were
    "insurmountable obstacles" to family life being enjoyed in  Bangladesh.
    Notwithstanding the care needs set out in the documents, the judge made
    a number  of  relevant  findings  that  can  be  ascertained  from  his
    determination.  The Appellant's wife was  a  British  citizen  who  had
    lived in the UK for a significant period  of  her  life.   However  she
    still had a limited command of English but was able  to  speak  Sylheti
    (the language in Bangladesh) like her  husband,  the  judge  took  into
    account that the Appellant had met his wife in Bangladesh and that they
    had travelled to France together notwithstanding her medical  condition
    she had travelled back and forward to the UK and Bangladesh alone.  The
    judge also found that both the  Appellant  and  his  spouse  had  close
    family members living in  Bangladesh  who  would  be  able  to  provide
    support, help and assistance, the Appellant had his mother and  brother
    and the Appellant's spouse had four brothers.

25.  Furthermore and importantly, notwithstanding the medical health  needs
    described in the documents, and accepted by the judge,  he  found  that
    the Appellant had provided  no  objective  evidence  that  the  medical
    treatment she required, including the medication that she  was  taking,
    would not be available in Bangladesh.  The Secretary of State  had  set
    out in the  decision  letter  the  objective  country  materials  which
    demonstrated that the medication and treatment that she  was  receiving
    would be available in Bangladesh.  In addition the judge found that she
    would have the help and assistance of close  family  relatives  and  of
    course the Appellant, who would be with her  in  Bangladesh.   He  also
    found on the evidence that the Appellant's spouse would be returning to
    a country where "she was brought up and where the two of them have  six
    members of their immediate family" (see paragraph [23]).

26. Therefore the judge properly took into account the circumstances of the
    Appellant, and the personal circumstances of  the  Appellant's  spouse,
    which included her medical needs and their respective connections  with
    their country of relocation, that is Bangladesh, and also if there were
    any cultural barriers and the matters  referred  to  in  the  guidance.
    When those findings are read together the conclusion  reached  at  [23]
    that their circumstances do not present  "insurmountable  obstacles  to
    the two of them living in  Bangladesh"  are  adequate  and  sustainable
    reasons which were manifestly open to the judge on the evidence.

27. Mr Musquit submits that the judge erred in his approach to the issue of
    "very significant hardship" bearing in mind that he had made no finding
    on the cost of the medication or treatment that  the  Appellant's  wife
    would require.  He submitted that the judge had  only  made  a  finding
    that  the  medical  services  she  would  require  were  available   in
    Bangladesh.  However, as the judge  recorded  there  was  no  objective
    evidence of any kind advanced on behalf of the  Appellant  relating  to
    the unavailability of the medical treatment in Bangladesh or  even  the
    cost.  There was a total lack of evidence in that regard and it  cannot
    properly be said that it was wrong for the judge to  fail  to  consider
    the cost of medical treatment when no evidence was put  before  him  on
    this particular issue.  The burden is upon the Appellant  to  establish
    the factual basis of any case relied upon.

28. In any event, the judge did give some consideration to this issue  when
    considering the Appellant's conduct and his having worked unlawfully in
    the UK (see paragraphs [21] and [22]).  At [21] the  judge  found  that
    when in Bangladesh he had his own shop and  that  he  had  "offered  no
    satisfactory explanation as to why  he  could  not  once  again  secure
    retail or  other  work."   Thus  the  judge  found  that  there  was  a
    likelihood that he would be able to obtain work and  therefore  provide
    for his wife as he had done so in the UK.  Whilst Mr Musquit  submitted
    that this was "speculative" I do not agree.  It was a finding that  was
    open to the judge to make on the  evidence  based  on  the  Appellant's
    conduct both in Bangladesh and in the UK.  Furthermore, the judge found
    that there were close family members in Bangladesh  who  could  provide
    support and assistance.  Consequently I do not consider that  Ground  1
    is made out for those reasons.

29. Dealing with Ground 2, it is submitted that the judge failed to make  a
    finding on Article  8  outside  the  Rules  and  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable for family life to take place in Bangladesh nor  whether  it
    was reasonable for the Appellant's spouse to remain in the UK  and  for
    the Appellant to make an application for entry clearance to return.  Mr
    Musquit submits that the issue of reasonableness is a distinct one from
    that of "insurmountable obstacles" and as such,  the  judge  failed  to
    deal with this and it was a "material omission" in the determination.

30. Ms Ahmad referred to the decision of SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387  in
    which the Court of Appeal made it clear that the Immigration Rules  are
    the main point of assessment under Article 8 and it is only where  they
    do not sufficiently cover the particular circumstances relating  to  an
    individual applicant that one might turn to consider whether there  are
    any circumstances that would justify  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
    Rules.  In this case, the judge found that the Appellant did  not  meet
    the requirement of Immigration Rules relating to  private  life  276ADE
    and also under Appendix FM there  being  no  insurmountable  obstacles.
    What the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo) said was that it would  only  be
    in "compelling circumstances" that an infringement of Article 8 will be
    found if an Appellant did not otherwise meet the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

31. I  would  accept  that  a  case  might  be  made  out  for  "compelling
    circumstances" for a grant of leave under Article 8 outside  the  Rules
    even where there are no "insurmountable obstacles" to continuing family
    life overseas.  However it does not mean that the findings made  as  to
    "insurmountable obstacles" made earlier in the determination as a whole
    are not relevant to the issue of Article 8 outside of the Rules.  In my
    judgment it is a material factor to take into account as made plain  in
    the decision of Nagre at [41] and the  jurisprudence  of  the  European
    Court in Rodrigues da Silve and Hoogkamer v  the  Netherlands  at  [39]
    and Jeunneuse v the Netherlands at [107] and [117].

32. At paragraph 39 in the decision of  Rodrigues  da  Silve  the  European
    Court of Human Rights explained the approach as follows:-

         "The court reiterates that in the  context  of  both  positive  and
         negative obligations the state must strike a fair  balance  between
         the competing interests of the individual and the  community  as  a
         whole.  However, in both contexts the state enjoys a certain margin
         of appreciation.  Moreover, Article 8 does  not  entail  a  general
         obligation for a state to respect immigrant's choice of the country
         of  their  residence  and  to  authorise  family  reunion  in   its
         territory.  Nevertheless, in a case which concerns family  life  as
         well as immigration, the extent of the state's obligation to  admit
         to its territory relatives of  persons  residing  there  will  vary
         according to the particular circumstances of the  persons  involved
         and the general interest.  Factors to be taken into account in this
         context  are  the  extent  to  which  family  life  is  effectively
         ruptured, the extent of the ties in the contracting state,  whether
         there are insurmountable obstacles in the way of the family  living
         in the country of origin of one or more of them, whether there  are
         factors of immigration control  (e.g.  a  history  of  breaches  of
         immigration law) or considerations  of  public  order  weighing  in
         favour of exclusion.  Another important consideration will also  be
         whether family life was created at a time when the persons involved
         were aware that the immigration status of one of them was such that
         the persistence of that family life within  the  host  state  would
         from the outset be precarious.  The court has previously held  that
         where this is the case  it  is  likely  only  to  be  in  the  most
         exceptional circumstances that  the  removal  of  the  non-national
         family member will constitute a violation of Article 8."

33. Whilst the decision above refers to the requirement of "exceptionality"
    it is common ground that "compelling circumstances" would be required.

34.  Contrary  to  the  grounds  the  judge  did  consider  the  issue   of
    reasonableness in the context of Article 8 outside of the  Rules.   His
    overall findings as Ms Ahmad submits are found  at  [23]  in  which  he
    states:

         "The Appellant  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules"
         (relating to 276DE or EX.1 insurmountable obstacles) "...  and  the
         life that he has established unlawfully in the UK is  not  such  as
         would make it disproportionate or unreasonable for him or his  wife
         to expect him not to return to Bangladesh."

    The judge's earlier findings on the issue of  insurmountable  obstacles
    are required to be factored into the assessment  of  reasonableness  of
    Article 8 outside of the Rules for the reasons  that  I  have  set  out
    earlier.  There is no need for me to set out again the findings made by
    the judge as  to  the  issues  of  why  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles.  In summary, the judge made reference and  paid  regard  and
    weight to her personal circumstances including her language  abilities,
    her previous links to  Bangladesh,  her  continuing  family  ties,  the
    period of time that she had spent there, her  medical  conditions  were
    considered in the light that there was medical treatment and medication
    available for her and that she will be returning with her spouse.

35. In addition the  judge  considered  and  took  into  account  that  the
    Appellant's children were all adults (see [23]) and that there  was  no
    objective evidence to show that notwithstanding her medical needs, that
    she would not receive adequate treatment in Bangladesh.

36. In the alternative,  the  judge  also  made  findings  that  when  read
    together demonstrate that he found  that  it  was  reasonable  for  the
    Appellant to leave the UK and make an application for re-entry  by  way
    of entry clearance.  At paragraph 23 he concluded as follows:-

         "If she would rather remain in the UK  than  join  her  husband  in
         Bangladesh, that  is  her  prerogative,  and  she  can  support  an
         application by him for re-entry as a spouse if she wishes.  This is
         not a case where no useful purpose would  be  served  by  requiring
         this, not least because it would ensure  the  Appellant  secures  a
         sufficient command of English to  be  able  to  prove  a  level  of
         competence not demonstrated to date.  It is important that  British
         citizens and those from abroad understand that immigration laws are
         not there to be flouted and that those who choose to  be  party  to
         unlawful acts cannot expect to be given priority over those who  go
         through the proper channels.   The  Appellant  does  not  meet  the
         requirements  of  the  Rules  and  the  life  he  has   established
         unlawfully in the UK is not such as would make it  disproportionate
         or unreasonable for him or his wife to expect him now to return  to
         Bangladesh.  Absent more persuasive and/or detailed  evidence  from
         the Appellant's children than is included  in  their  short  letter
         written over three years ago, I find that there  is  no  reason  to
         believe that between them and those responsible by statute for  her
         care that the Appellant's wife's needs will not be  addressed  just
         that they had been before he came to the UK and would have been had
         he never come here in the first place."

37. The findings to support that conclusion are  set  out  earlier  in  the
    determination, namely that she had four adult children in  the  UK  but
    none had given evidence save for an  out  of  date  letter  as  to  the
    willingness and ability to provide help with her needs.  He found  that
    she had one adult son living with her and  two  living  close  by  (see
    [21]).  Further the judge found at [23] that there  was  no  reason  to
    believe that  between  the  adult  children  and  the  state  that  the
    Appellant's needs could not be addressed without the Appellant  in  the
    UK as had been before he entered in 2012.  The  medical  conditions  of
    the  Appellant  were  not  recent  but  appear  to   be   longstanding.
    Furthermore,  the  judge  at  [21]  had  found  that  contrary  to  the
    Appellant's account that he had provided 24/7 care, he had in fact been
    working.

38. The judge also was required to apply the public interest  consideration
    set out at Section 117.  In this respect the judge  took  into  account
    the Appellant's immigration history that he had entered unlawfully  and
    had been caught working  unlawfully  [20].   He  found  also  that  the
    marriage was entered into in the knowledge that his life in the UK  was
    precarious and that if the  marriage  was  continued  to  "the  fullest
    extent he might  well  have  to  return  to  make  an  entry  clearance
    application or she would have to move back to Bangladesh"  (see  [20]).
    At [23] the judge took into account that he had a very limited  command
    of English, the parties knew his presence in the UK was precarious  and
    that "they did not ensure it was limited to mere unlawful presence, the
    Appellant taking work and NH services to which  he  was  not  entitled"
    (see [23]).

39. Consequently, contrary to the grounds the judge did consider whether it
    was reasonable for family life to take place outside of the UK and with
    either the  Appellant  returning  to  make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance or for the Appellant and his spouse  to  move  to  Bangladesh
    together.  This had been the case on the facts  that  the  parties  had
    been living apart  between  2011  and  February  2012  where  they  had
    maintained a relationship using the modern methods of communication.

40. Thus having weighed up  all  the  competing  interests  (including  the
    Section 117 factors that were relevant) the judge  reached  an  overall
    balance that removal would not be  disproportionate.   Whilst  I  would
    agree that it would have been preferable for the judge to have set  out
    his determination in a more structured way, the determination  must  be
    read as a whole and the primary findings of fact that were made by  the
    judge dealing with the  issue  of  insurmountable  obstacles,  and  the
    Appellant's immigration history, and  the  Appellant's  wife's  medical
    circumstances were findings that were open  to  him  on  the  evidence.
    Whilst every judge might not have reached that conclusion, on the facts
    as he found them to be, and in the light of the  grounds  advanced,  it
    has not been demonstrated that the judge made any error of law  in  his
    determination to justify the setting aside of the decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law on a point of law and the appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed
                                Date:10/12/2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
