
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29166/2012
                                                               IA/29167/2012
                                                               IA/29168/2012
                                                               IA/29169/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19 June 2013                                 |On 27 June 2013            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                          mr Khushtar Mohamed Akay
                            mrs Bibi Afeezah Akay
                                   miss An
                                   miss Al
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S. Gokhoul, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Ouseley, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are all citizens of Mauritius.   The  first  and  second
    appellants are husband and wife and the third and fourth appellants are
    the children of the first and second appellants.  The  third  appellant
    was born in 1999 and the fourth appellant was born in 2005.

 2. The first appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  in  June  2006  as  a
    visitor and was subsequently given leave to remain as a  student.   The
    second appellant entered the United Kingdom in November 2006, with  the
    third and fourth appellants, as visitors  and  they  were  subsequently
    granted leave to remain as  the  dependants  of  the  first  appellant.
    Leave to remain  was  last  conferred,  in  relation  to  each  of  the
    appellants, so as to expire on 19 December 2011.  On 15  December  2011
    each of the appellants applied for leave to remain outside  the  Rules.
    These applications were refused by way of decisions made on 20 November
    2012.  Each of the appellants then appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.



 3. The appellants' appeals  were  heard  together  on  8  March  2013  and
    dismissed on all grounds in a combined  determination  prepared  on  25
    March 2013.  The appellants thereafter sought permission to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal on the following grounds:

      i) The First-tier Tribunal erred in law  in  applying  an  excessively
         high threshold to its consideration of whether Article 8  ECHR  was
         engaged;

     ii) The First-tier Tribunal erred in failing (a) to consider  the  best
         interests of the third and fourth appellants and (b) to treat those
         interests as a primary consideration;

    iii)  The  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  concluding  that  the  minor
         appellants would be able to  adapt  to  a  change  in  environment;
         failing  to  consider  the  independent  report  provided  by   the
         appellant's counsellor when coming to such finding.

 4. By way of a decision dated 13 May 2013 Designated Judge Garratt granted
    the appellants permission to appeal in the following terms:

         "2.  The appellants apply to appeal against  the  determination  of
             Judge of the First-tier Tribunal B A Morris sent out 26  March
             2013 in which she dismissed the  appeals  on  immigration  and
             human rights grounds against the decisions of  the  respondent
             to refuse leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
             Migrant for the first named appellant and  for  the  remaining
             appellants as dependants of that person.  The respondent  also
             issued directions to remove the appellants under Section 47 of
             the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

         3.   The grounds take issue with the judge's  Article  8  decision.
             Whilst it is not arguable that the judge wrongly  applied  the
             five stage test set out  in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27,  it  is
             arguable that the judge failed to make the best  interests  of
             the minor appellants a primary consideration as required by ZH
             (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4  and  other  recent  case  law
             relating to the interests of children.  Further, although  not
             referred to in the grounds, it  is  arguable  that  the  judge
             should  have  considered  whether  or  not  the   respondent's
             decision  to  issue  simultaneous  removal  directions   under
             Section 47 was in accordance with the law."

 5. Thus the appeal came before me.

 6. At the hearing Mr Gokhoul maintained the  point  first  raised  in  the
    grant of permission, i.e. that the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing
    to consider whether the decision to remove the appellants  pursuant  to
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006  was
    lawful.  I observe that this was not a matter raised by the  appellants
    in their grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  and  neither
    was it a matter raised in the  application  for  permission  to  appeal
    brought against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  There appears
    to be  good  reason  for  this.  After  careful  consideration  of  the
    immigration decisions  under  appeal,  it  is  clear  to  me  that  the
    Secretary of State did not  make  a  decision  to  remove  any  of  the
    appellants pursuant to Section 47 of the 2006 Act. Although the heading
    on the immigration decisions states as follows: "refusal to vary  leave
    to enter or remain and decision to remove  /  variation  of  leave  and
    decision to remove", the body  of  the  immigration  decisions  do  not
    thereafter refer to a decision to  remove  the  appellants.  Under  the
    heading "removal directions" the following is stated:

         "If you choose not to appeal this decision, or you appeal  and  the
         appeal is unsuccessful, you must leave the United Kingdom  as  soon
         as possible when your leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom  expires.   If  you  do  not  leave  the   United   Kingdom
         voluntarily, you will be removed to Mauritius."

 7. It is plain to me therefore that the First-tier Tribunal did not err in
    failing to consider whether the decisions made under Section 47 of  the
    2006 Act to remove the appellants were lawful, this being because there
    were no such decisions made by the Secretary of State.  In  any  event,
    Mr Ouseley indicated that insofar as any Section 47 decisions had  been
    made  by  the  Secretary  of   State   he   formally   withdrew   them.
    Consequently, even if decisions to remove the  appellants  pursuant  to
    Section 47 of the 2006 Act were made by the  Secretary  of  State,  any
    error of the First-tier Tribunal in failing  to  consider  such  matter
    would now be immaterial.

 8. I now turn to the substance of this appeal, that being the challenge to
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the  appellants'  appeals
    against the decisions of the Secretary of State to refuse to vary their
    leave.

 9. At paragraph 14 of its decision the tribunal  record  that  Mr  Gokhoul
    conceded that the appellants could not meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

10. The tribunal consider the application of Article  8  ECHR  outside  the
    Rules, concluding that each of the appellants has a private life in the
    United Kingdom, that removing them would be an interference  with  that
    private life of sufficient severity so as to engage Article 8, that the
    decisions are in  accordance  with  the  law  and  that  requiring  the
    appellants to return to Mauritius would be proportionate to  the  wider
    public  interest  of  maintaining  an  effective  immigration   policy.
    Consequently the First-tier Tribunal dismissed each of the  appellants'
    appeals on this ground.

11. At the hearing Mr Gokhoul abandoned the grounds that  were  pleaded  in
    the  appellants  notice  of  appeal  save  in  one  respect,  it  being
    maintained that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  by  failing  to
    consider and/or place adequate weight on a letter from the South London
    and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, and its attached questionnaire, when
    considering the best interests of the third appellant.

12. Mr Gokhoul further sought to pursue an entirely new  challenge  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination; submitting that it  had  erred  in
    its  consideration  of  the  issue  of  proportionality  by   attaching
    insufficient weight to  the  minor  appellants'  circumstances  in  the
    United Kingdom.  In support of his submission, Mr Gokhoul directed  the
    Tribunal's attention to paragraph 34 of the Supreme Court's decision in
    ZH (Tanzania).  He further directed attention to the recent decision of
    the Presidential Tribunal in Azimi-Moayed [2013]  UKUT  197  (IAC),  in
    which the Tribunal set out a summary of the  current  learning  on  the
    issue of the best interests of the child.

13. In response Mr Ouseley indicated surprise at the appellants' change  of
    position, noting that it had originally been asserted that the Tribunal
    had failed to consider the best interests of the children but that this
    ground had been conceded and in its place the weight attached to  those
    interests by the First-tier Tribunal was under challenge.

14. He submitted that the First-tier Tribunal's determination was  detailed
    and careful and that it had not ignored any of the evidence in relation
    to the best interests of the child.  He further asserted that the First-
    tier Tribunal had come to conclusions that  were  open  to  it  on  the
    available evidence and that the grounds now raised essentially amounted
    to a perversity challenge, which could not be made out.

15. In reply Mr Gokhoul again made reference  to  the  decision  in  Azimi-
    Moayed observing that the Tribunal noted therein that lengthy residence
    of a child in a country other than the state of origin  could  lead  to
    the development of social, cultural and educational ties that it  would
    be inappropriate to disrupt, in the absence of  compelling  reasons  to
    the contrary.  He observed that at paragraph 13(iii) of its decision in
    Azimi Moayed the Tribunal referred to seven years as being  a  relevant
    period to be seen as 'lengthy residence'; a seven year period from  the
    age of 4 being seen to be more significant to a child than a period  of
    seven years from birth.  He recalled that the children in  the  instant
    case had been in the United Kingdom  for  six  and  a  half  years  and
    submitted that consequently significant weight ought to be attached  to
    their private lives here.

16. I initially turn to  consider  the  grounds  as  they  were  originally
    pleaded in the appellants' notice of appeal.  As to  the  first  ground
    this plainly is not made  out.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that
    Article 8 ECHR was engaged on the facts  of  the  instant  appeal  and,
    consequently, any error of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  applying  an
    excessively high threshold to its assessment of such engagement  cannot
    possibly be material to its determination. In any event,  it  is  plain
    that the tribunal did not apply an 'excessively  high  threshold',  but
    properly  directed  itself  to,  and  applied,  the  applicable   legal
    principles.

17. As to the second of  the  pleaded  grounds  i.e.  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to consider the best interests of the minor appellants,
    Mr Gokhoul now concedes that such  interests  were  considered,  and  I
    agree that this is so.   At  paragraph  16  of  its  determination  the
    Tribunal specifically refer to the interests of each  of  the  children
    and thereafter carefully recount factors relevant to its  consideration
    of those interests; including the length of time the  minor  appellants
    have been in the  United  Kingdom,  their  circumstances  here  and  in
    Mauritius, their ages, the fact that the third appellant has undertaken
    counselling in the United Kingdom, their cultural  background  and  the
    prospect of their education being disrupted if they were to be required
    to return to Mauritius.

18. Mr Gokhoul maintained reliance on the third of  written  grounds,  i.e.
    that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  failing  to  consider   the
    independent  report  provided  by  the  third  appellant's  counsellor.
    Despite maintaining reliance on this ground Mr  Gokhoul  properly  drew
    the Tribunal's attention to a careful analysis of such document by  the
    First-tier Tribunal at  paragraph  16  of  its  determination.   Indeed
    paragraph  16  contains  virtually  a  verbatim   recitation   of   the
    counsellor's evidence.  This evidence is again referred to in paragraph
    27 of the determination, at a  point  in  the  determination  when  the
    tribunal is giving specific  consideration  to  the  minor  appellants'
    circumstances. The weight to be attached to this evidence was a  matter
    for the First-tier Tribunal and its treatment of the evidence cannot be
    said to be perverse. It is plain from what I  say  above  that  I  find
    there to be no merit in this ground.

19. Despite Mr Ouseley's expression of surprise at the appellants' sift  of
    position at the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, he did not object to
    me considering the submission that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred
    failing to attach sufficient weight to the circumstances of  the  minor
    appellants.  I now turn to such consideration.

20. In my conclusion when its determination is looked at as a whole, it  is
    plain  that  the   First-tier   Tribunal   carefully   considered   the
    circumstances of the minor appellants prior to concluding that  it  was
    in their interests to continue to be cared for by their  parents,  with
    whom they would be returning to Mauritius. Having done so it  was  open
    to the tribunal to find that there was nothing in the minor appellants'
    circumstances to lead it to conclude that it would not be proportionate
    to remove the family unit as a whole.

21. The tribunal carefully went through the evidence it had  before  it  in
    relation to the  third  appellant's  need  for  counselling  [16],  and
    observed that during cross-examination the second appellant  had  given
    evidence that this counselling had finished in May 2012, but that there
    had been an open invitation to telephone the counsellor  should  it  be
    thought to be necessary.  The tribunal were  also  well  aware  of  the
    length of time that the appellants had remained in the United  Kingdom,
    including the minor  appellants,  and  also  bore  in  mind  the  minor
    appellants' education, ages and their cultural background  [16  &  27].
    It was open to the tribunal to conclude that the minor appellants could
    adapt to a change of environment in Mauritius with the help and support
    of their parents [27], and it was also entitled to conclude that it was
    proportionate to require the family  unit  as  a  whole  to  return  to
    Mauritius [28].

22. The decision of the tribunal  in  Azimi-Moayed  does  not  establish  a
    bright line to the effect that it will never be in the  best  interests
    of a child to be removed from the United Kingdom  if   he/she  she  has
    lived here for more than 7 years, neither does it support the  contrary
    conclusion. The decision does no  more  than  remind  its  reader  that
    lengthy residence in the United Kingdom as a child is  a  relevant  and
    significant consideration when determining where the best interests  of
    a child lies. It is, however, important to treat each case on  its  own
    facts. In my conclusion, there is nothing irrational about  the  weight
    the First-tier Tribunal attached to the minor appellants' circumstances
    in the United Kingdom, despite the fact that they had  lived  here  for
    just over six years  as  of  the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination.

23. For all the reasons  I  give  above  I  conclude  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination does not contain an error on a  point  of  law
    such that it ought to be set aside, and its determination is to  remain
    standing.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's determination does  not  contain  an  error  on  a
point of law such that it ought to be set aside.  The First-tier  Tribunal's
determination is to remain standing.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 24 June 2013


