
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29099/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd February 2016                         |On 17th March 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                             MR MUHAMMAD ASHFAQ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, Muhammad Ashfaq, is a  citizen  of  Pakistan  born  10th
    April 1969.  He entered the UK in February 2011 with a Tier 4 (General)
    Student visa valid until 10th May 2014.

 2. On 9th May 2014 the Appellant made application  for  further  leave  to
    remain.  That application was refused by the  Respondent  on  2nd  July
    2014, together with the issue of removal directions to Pakistan.

 3. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application because she  was  of
    the view that he could not fulfil the Immigration Rules as he could not
    produce  a  valid  CAS,  nor  could  he  fulfil  the  English  language
    requirement of the Rules because he had failed  to  pass  the  relevant
    English language test.

 4. The Appellant appealed the Respondent's decision and  his  appeal  came
    before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Lloyd-Smith) which in a  decision
    promulgated on 12th September 2014, dismissed the appeal.

 5. The appeal before the FtT had been dealt with by way of a paper hearing
    at the Appellant's request.  However written  submissions  were  before
    the FtT and part of those submissions claimed that the appeal should be
    allowed on the basis of the  Appellant's Article  8  ECHR  rights.   He
    suffers from diabetes.

 6. In reaching its decision the FtT said the following at [11]:

         "No submissions were made on the basis of a human rights claim  and
         there was no evidence adduced to indicate that refusal of leave  to
         remain would be disproportionate and against the legitimate aim  of
         immigration control".

 7. The Appellant therefore sought permission to appeal the FtT's decision.
    In granting permission DJ Lewis said the following:

         "The judge wrote at paragraph 11 that no submissions were  made  on
         the basis of a human rights claim.  This did not take into  account
         the extensive arguments on Article 8 of the 1950 Convention set out
         in the Appellant's Grounds of Appeal prepared  by  his  solicitors.
         The omission to consider Article 8, albeit in the  context  of  the
         Immigration Rules and in the light of  Gulshan  [2013]  UKUT  00640
         (IAC) and R (on the application of) Nagre v SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  720
         (Admin), was an arguable error of law".

    Thus the matter comes before me for consideration of whether the  FtT's
    decision contains an error of law, requiring it to  be  set  aside  and
    remade.

The UT Hearing

 8. Before me Mr  Diwnycz  appeared  for  the  Respondent.   The  Appellant
    attended and represented himself.  Mr Diwnycz submitted properly, in my
    view, that he could not defend the FtT's decision.  Plainly  the  judge
    had erred in his failure to take into account, not only the Appellant's
    Grounds of Appeal, but also the evidence contained in  the  submissions
    made by his representatives.  This  resulted  in  the  Appellant  being
    deprived of a fair hearing. Mr Diwnycz submitted that  the  appropriate
    course in this appeal would be to remit the matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing in which all the evidence was  considered.
    No findings of fact should remain. The Appellant was content  to  agree
    to this course.

 9. I find I am in agreement with  Mr  Diwnycz's  submissions.   The  FtT's
    failure to consider the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights amounts to an
    irregularity in the proceedings and is one which is capable of making a
    material  difference  to  the  outcome  of  the   appeal.    In   these
    circumstances it is appropriate that the matter  be  remitted  to  that
    Tribunal to re-make the decision.

10. The original hearing before the FtT was by  way  of  a  paper  hearing.
    However the Appellant may wish to attend the rehearing before  the  FtT
    and since he lives in Leicester, it is appropriate that the  matter  be
    remitted to the Birmingham Hearing Centre.

Notice of Decision

The making of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  a
material error of law, as set out above.  I set aside the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeal.  The matter will be  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Lloyd-Smith) for a  full  rehearing  with
fresh findings of fact being made.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
















