
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30755/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                                |Determination Promulgated  |
|on 16th June 2014                               |on 20th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               BAKHSHISH SINGH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr M Shoaib, of Shoaib Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Presenting Officer

No anonymity order requested or made


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. By notice and letter dated 3rd July 2013  the  respondent  refused  the
    appellant's  application  for  a  derivative   residence   card   under
    Regulations  15A(4A),  15A(7)  and  18A  of   the   Immigration   (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.  The crucial point was that the appellant was  unable
    to show in terms of Regulation 15A(4A)(c) that  "the  relevant  British
    citizen [his wife, or 'sponsor'] would be unable to reside in the UK or
    in another EEA state if [the appellant] were required to leave".

 2. That central point was addressed in the grounds of appeal  to  the  FtT
    (prepared by previous agents) which include the  proposition  that  the
    appellant's wife depends upon the appellant 24 hours a day, seven  days
    per week and without his presence she  would  be  unable  to  care  for
    herself; but, as noted below,  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that
    contention.

 3.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mozolowski  dismissed   the   appeal   by
    determination promulgated on 6th January 2014.   At  paragraph  15  the
    judge held that the appellant was not  the  direct  relative  or  legal
    guardian of the sponsor in terms of the Regulations, a point which  had
    not been put in  dispute  by  the  respondent.   However,  for  various
    reasons the judge also held that the evidence did  not  show  that  she
    would be unable to reside in the UK if he were required to leave.

 4. These are the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal:

         The judge was wrong to conclude that  the  appellant  was  not  the
         relative or legal guardian and  therefore  not  the  carer  of  the
         sponsor.

         The relationship was clear that the couple was lawfully married and
         bear the responsibility of his wife who has serious mental illness.
          For the above reasons the appellant has become  full-time  primary
         carer.

         The judge is also wrong to conclude that 'there is no indication of
         sponsor planning to act on those thoughts (suicidal ideation)'.

         It is clear from medical evidence that 'there  would  be  risk  she
         might act on her suicidal  thoughts  and  risk  would  need  to  be
         carefully monitored'.

         The judge has ignored or tried to play down  the  risk  factor  and
         medical evidence that was based on facts of the case.

 5. I find the grounds unhelpful as to identifying any reason why it  might
    be said that the judge went wrong on whether the appellant's wife would
    be unable to reside in the UK if he were required to leave, or why  the
    answer to that question might not be decisive of the case.

 6. Further to the  grounds,  Mr  Shoaib  said  that  a  spouse  should  be
    considered as a direct relative.  He made no  reference  to  authority.
    He said that the second issue was whether the appellant was the primary
    carer of  a  British  citizen,  as  to  which  there  was  overwhelming
    evidence, including numerous medical reports.  The determination should
    therefore be set aside and reversed.

 7. Mr  Mullen  in  response  said  that  the  Regulation  specified  three
    criteria, all of which had to be met.  The Respondent did  not  dispute
    that criteria (a) - primary carer - and (b) - relevant British  citizen
    residing in the UK - were both met.  However, the  evidence  fell  well
    short of disclosing (c) that the appellant's wife would  be  unable  to
    reside in the UK without him.  The case was therefore  bound  to  fail.
    The appellant's wife, although she has serious medical difficulties, is
    capable of making her own decisions and of living autonomously with the
    support available to her as a UK citizen, without the presence  of  the
    appellant.

 8. Mr Shoaib in reply said that when the sponsor  visited  India  she  was
    accompanied by  and  cared  for  by  her  sister-in-law.   The  medical
    evidence showed that she relied significantly on her husband  and  that
    his departure would have an adverse impact upon her.  His understanding
    of Zambrano and of the Regulations was that the appellant could succeed
    by showing the sponsor's dependence. (The Regulations now  give  effect
    to Zambrano, to which no reference was made beyond mentioning the  name
    of the case.)  Mr Shoaib understood that this is not a case  of  an  EU
    citizen having to leave the EU.

 9. I asked Mr Shoaib if he was able to refer to  any  authority  that  the
    case could succeed by showing a  detrimental  effect  on  the  sponsor,
    short of inability to reside in the UK as specified in the  Regulation.
    Mr Shoaib said:

         "The case should be decided on the balance of  probability  because
         of the degree  of  attachment,  the  ties  and  commitment  of  the
         appellant, it is in the interests of the public for  the  appellant
         to remain in the UK and play an active role  in  the  life  of  the
         sponsor who suffers from a  very  serious  medical  condition,  the
         highest condition of its type".

10. I reserved my determination.

11. The submissions did not direct me to any  definition  or  authority  on
    whether a spouse falls within the category of a direct  relative.   The
    decision under appeal assumes that a spouse does.  The judge  may  have
    gone wrong on the point.  However, it is not material to the outcome.

12. Mr Shoaib was unable to point to  any  authority  suggesting  that  the
    decisive  question  was  anything  other  than  whether  in  terms   of
    Regulation 15A(4A)(c) the appellant's wife would be unable to reside in
    the UK if he were required to leave.

13. No error of fact or law has been shown in the judge's  conclusion  that
    such inability has not been shown.  The appellant's wife may be  better
    cared for in significant respects by having the Appellant here, but his
    absence does not result in her inability to  reside  in  the  UK.   The
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.




                           [pic]


                           17 June 2014
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
