
 [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30165/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 May 2017                                 |On 23 May 2017                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                              Mr amarpal singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Butler, promulgated on 10th August 2016, following a hearing at Sheldon
    Court on 14th July 2016.  In the determination, the judge  allowed  the
    appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent  Secretary  of  State
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, who was born on 20th April
    1978.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  13th
    August 2015, refusing his application for leave to remain in the UK  on
    the basis of his family and private life.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is  that  he  is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his British partner.  At the time of his application,
    his partner was pregnant expecting his child, but the child had not yet
    been born, although there was a child of that relationship now.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant,  based  upon  his  witness
    statement of 5th March 2016, that he now had a child who could  not  go
    to India where the climate was too hot and  he  was  in  any  event,  a
    British citizen.  His British citizen partner could not leave  the  UK,
    because she had a full-time job, and she would return to  work  on  1st
    August 2016 after maternity leave.   The  son  suffered  from  meconium
    ingestion at birth, which led him to be kept  in  the  hospital  longer
    than usual.  The Appellant's Counsel, Mr Muquit made submissions  that,
    he would have to accept that the  Appellant  had  overstayed  when  his
    working holidaymaker visa expired in 2008, but he  had  kept  in  touch
    with the Home Office, through his various applications to remain  here,
    and he now had a British citizen child, and  his  wife  owned  her  own
    home, which was subject to a mortgage, with the  wife  being  the  main
    breadwinner, such that the Appellant could not  return  to  India  with
    her.  Their future plans were that the Appellant would look after their
    newly born child when the partner returns back to work.  If he  had  to
    return to India himself his partner would have to give up  her  job  to
    stay at home.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge set out the proper standard of proof, that the fact that  the
    child was a British citizen child, and that the decision reached had to
    comply with Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act,  where  public  interest
    considerations had to be taken into account.  The  judge  then  decided
    that the appeal would be allowed on human rights grounds.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to properly heed
    the decision in MA (Pakistan) EWCA Civ 705.  The  ratio  of  that  case
    appears at paragraph 45, and what it states is that  the  wider  public
    interest should be taken into  account,  particularly  the  immigration
    history  of  the  Appellant,  as  that  will  go  to  the  balance   of
    considerations.

 7. On 21st November 2016, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 4th  May  2017,  Mrs  Aboni,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, relied upon the Grounds of
    Appeal.  She made the following submissions.  First, the  judge  failed
    to give adequate reasons for finding that it would be unreasonable  for
    the Appellant to return for a short period to India in order to make an
    application for a spouse's visa to enter in a lawful  manner.   Second,
    Section 117B  was  not  correctly  applied.   Third,  the  case  of  MA
    (Pakistan) EWCA Civ 705 was misconstrued.  This is  because  the  judge
    simply jumped to the "best interests" consideration in relation to  the
    child,  without  properly  weighing  in  the  balance  the  Appellant's
    appalling immigration history.  This was plain from paragraph 19 of the
    determination where  the  judge  simply  concludes  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable for the Appellant to return to  India  to  make  a  proper
    application in a lawful manner.

 9. For his part, Mr Muquit made the  following  submissions.   First,  the
    judge was clear that none  of  the  Appellant's  submissions  had  been
    challenged by the Respondent.   Second,  that  Mr  Muquit  himself  had
    represented in that case and he had placed his skeleton argument before
    the judge, leading him to in terms say that he had considered "all  the
    circumstances" of the case.  Third, the  judge  did  not  overlook  the
    Appellant's immigration history, because Mr Muquit had "confirmed  that
    the Appellant overstayed when his visa expired in 2008 ..."  (paragraph
    9).  Fifth, the Secretary of State had not taken into account the birth
    of the child, because at that time of the decision the  child  had  not
    been born, but the judge had before  him  now  evidence  of  the  child
    having been born, and was naturally going to take  this  into  account.
    Finally, the Respondent Secretary  of  State  could  have  faulted  the
    Appellant at the "suitability" stage by concluding that  the  Appellant
    had overstayed by over 28 days,  and  that  would  have  prevented  the
    Appellant's  consideration  under  the  paragraph  276ADE   provisions.
    However, the Respondent Secretary of State did not take this view.  The
    Appellant was deemed to have got through the "suitability"  provisions.
    Given that this narrative was fixed before the judge below, this  Upper
    Tribunal could only offset  that  decision  if  it  can  be  reasonably
    concluded that the judge failed to take into  account  the  Appellant's
    immigration history in deciding where the balance of considerations lay
    in relation to the wider public interest.

No Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did

11. First, the judge directed himself appropriately.  This  is  clear  from
    paragraph 14, where the judge  recognises  that  the  "public  interest
    considerations in Section 117B" is  taken  into  account.   He  further
    directed himself, not only  in  relation  to  the  Appellant  having  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child,
    but also that "it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave
    the United Kingdom" (paragraph 14).

12. Second, the judge then had regard to the case of MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705, observing that this was a stand alone subSection.  It was
    subject to the caveat that it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    child to leave the United Kingdom (see paragraph 15).

13. Third, the judge noted that  the  Appellant's  child  being  a  British
    citizen was "not a trump card" (paragraph 16).  The child's  particular
    position was then considered on the basis that the child  was  entitled
    to be brought up by both parents.

14. Finally, it was  in  the  concluding  paragraph  that  the  judge  then
    explained  why  the  Appellant's  situation  fell  in  favour  of   the
    Appellant.  Here the judge notes that "none of the submissions made  on
    behalf of the Appellant have been challenged in  this  appeal.   Having
    considered all the circumstances in the round, I find that it would  be
    unreasonable to require this British child to be brought up  in  India"
    (paragraph 19).

15. As to why the judge would have concluded  in  this  manner,  the  facts
    relating to this conclusion are set out at paragraph 9, where the judge
    observes that the Appellant's wife is the main  breadwinner,  and  that
    she has a home of her own on a mortgage, which she would have  to  give
    up if she were to go to India with the  Appellant.   If  the  Appellant
    himself were to return to India, then she would have to remain at  home
    to look after the child.  These facts, as the judge found, had not been
    challenged in the appeal.

16. On the evidence before the judge, this was a  conclusion  that  he  was
    perfectly entitled to come to.  The  decision  cannot  be  said  to  be
    perverse in any way.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd May 2017


