
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30317/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th September 2015               |On 23rd November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                                     SS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for convenience we shall henceforth refer to the parties as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and is 37 years old. He and  his
    former estranged partner, (whom we shall refer to as "Ms L"),  are  the
    parents of Master DJ, born on 30 April 2009.  DJ is five years old  and
    lives with his mother, Ms L. Both Ms L and DJ hold Polish  nationality.
    Ms L has another child, named M, from a prior relationship. M was  born
    on 9 April 2004 and resides with Ms L and DJ.

 3. The Appellant entered the UK on 13 March 2007 with a visit  visa  valid
    for 6 months. On 28 April  2009,  the  Appellant  applied  for  an  EEA
    Residence Card as the family member of Ms L.  Two  days  later,  on  30
    April 2009, DJ was born. On 4 August 2010,  the  Appellant  was  issued
    with a residence card confirming his right to reside as a family member
    of Ms L which was valid  until  4  August  2015.  In  April  2011,  the
    Appellant and Ms L were married. In  May  2012,  Ms  L  petitioned  for
    divorce and in November 2012, the decree absolute was granted.

 4. On 13 May 2013, the Appellant applied for further leave to remain under
    paragraph 248B of the  Immigration  Rules  (as  amended)  as  a  person
    exercising access rights to a child. On 17 June 2013,  his  application
    was refused. On 12 September 2013, a judicial review of  that  decision
    was lodged. On 15 November 2013, the judicial review claim was  settled
    by consent as a result of the Respondent  agreeing  to  reconsider  her
    decision.  Following  reconsideration  however,  the  application   was
    refused on 7 July 2014. An appeal was  lodged  on  22  July  2014  that
    resulted in the current appeal.

 5. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Troup who
    in a decision promulgated on 17 February 2015 allowed the appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR. Judge Troup  did
    not consider paragraph 248B of the Immigration Rules as that ground was
    abandoned. However the  appeal  was  advanced  under  Appendix  FM  and
    Article 8. The Respondent submitted that the Appellant did not meet the
    relationship requirements with DJ under E-LTRPT 2.2(c) because  DJ  was
    neither British nor settled. As Ms L  had  not  submitted  a  residence
    card, her evidence of working was limited. Her payslips  and  P60  were
    limited to the years 2009 and 2010, and she had produced a 2013/14  Tax
    Return. Although the evidence of Ms L's employment  is  incomplete,  on
    balance Judge Troup found that she has  been  resident  and  exercising
    Treaty rights for at least 7 years and had acquired a  permanent  right
    of residence under Regulation 15 of the Immigration (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006, which itself implied that DJ as her  child  had
    also acquired a permanent right of residence  and  therefore  meets  E-
    LTRPT 2.2. Judge Troup also found that the Appellant  met  E-LTRPT  2.3
    and 2.4 as Ms L was settled here and as access rights to DJ were agreed
    by Ms L and were regularly exercised. Judge Troup also found  that  the
    financial requirements prescribed by E-LTRPT 4.1 and 4.2  were  met  as
    the Appellant can satisfactorily maintain and accommodate himself and E-
    LTRPT 5.1 was met as the Appellant had produced evidence of passing  an
    English language test. Judge Troup went on to consider  Article  8  and
    section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  ("the
    2002 Act") and allowed the appeal under Article 8.

 6. The Respondent appealed against the decision of  Judge  Troup  and  was
    granted permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird  on  all
    grounds.  The  grounds  upon  which  permission  was  granted  may   be
    summarised as follows:

      i) The judge erred in failing to give adequate reasons for a  material
         finding in relation to Ms L's employment despite her evidence being
         incomplete;

     ii) The judge erred in making a material  misdirection  in  law  as  he
         found that Ms L had acquired a permanent right of residence despite
         her failing to produce evidence to show  that  she  was  exercising
         treaty rights for a continuous period of five years.

 7. The Appellant was unrepresented before us and had not produced a  'Rule
    24' Reply. In order to  give  the  Appellant  as  much  opportunity  to
    comment on all he wished to, we heard submissions  from  Ms  Pettersen,
    followed by a reply from the Appellant, followed by  a  reply  from  Ms
    Pettersen and then queried if the Appellant  had  anything  further  to
    add. He did not. However, given that the Appellant was not represented,
    we considered that Ms L might have been able to assist us with what was
    said at the hearing before the First-tier judge, and we heard from  her
    briefly on this issue.

    Law

 8. We set out here, the relevant parts of E-LTRPT as far  as  relevant  to
    this appeal:

         Section E-LTRPT: Eligibility for  limited  leave  to  remain  as  a
         parent

         E-LTRPT.1.1. To qualify for limited leave to remain as a parent all
         of the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRPT.2.2. to 5.2. must be met.

         Relationship requirements

         E-LTRPT.2.2. The child of the applicant must be-

             (a)  under the age of 18 years at the date of application,  or
             where the child has turned 18 years of age since the applicant
             was first granted entry clearance or  leave  to  remain  as  a
             parent  under  this  Appendix,  must  not   have   formed   an
             independent family unit or be leading an independent life;

             (b)  living in the UK; and

             (c)  a British Citizen or settled in the UK; or

             (d)  has lived in the UK continuously for at least the 7 years
             immediately preceding the date of  application  and  paragraph
             EX.1. applies.

         E-LTRPT.2.3. Either-

             (a)  the applicant must have sole parental responsibility  for
             the child or the child normally lives with the  applicant  and
             not their other parent (who is a British Citizen or settled in
             the UK); or

             (b)  the parent or carer with whom the  child  normally  lives
             must be-

                  (i)  a British Citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;

                  (ii) not the partner of the applicant (which here includes
                  a person who has been in a relationship with the applicant
                  for less than two years prior to the date of application);
                  and

                  (iii)    the applicant must not be eligible to  apply  for
                  leave to remain as a partner under this Appendix.

         E-LTRPT.2.4.

             (a)  The applicant must provide evidence that they have either-



                  (i)  sole parental responsibility for the child,  or  that
                  the child normally lives with them; or

                  (ii) direct access (in person) to  the  child,  as  agreed
                  with the parent or carer  with  whom  the  child  normally
                  lives or as ordered by a court in the UK; and

             (b)  The applicant must provide evidence that they are taking,
             and intend to continue to take, an active role in the  child's
             upbringing.

         Immigration status requirement

         E-LTRPT.3.1. The applicant must not be in the UK-

             (a)  as a visitor; or

             (b)  with valid leave granted for a  period  of  6  months  or
             less, unless that leave was granted  pending  the  outcome  of
             family court or divorce proceedings;

         E-LTRPT.3.2. The applicant must not be in the UK-

             (a)  on temporary admission or temporary release,  unless  the
             applicant has been so for a continuous period of more  than  6
             months at the date of application and paragraph EX.1.applies;

             or

             (b)  in breach of immigration laws (disregarding any period of
             overstaying for a period of 28 days or less), unless paragraph
             EX.1. applies.

         Financial requirements

         E-LTRPT.4.1. The applicant must provide evidence that they will  be
         able to adequately maintain  and  accommodate  themselves  and  any
         dependants in the UK  without  recourse  to  public  funds,  unless
         paragraph EX.1. applies.

         E-LTRPT.4.2. The applicant must provide evidence that there will be
         adequate accommodation in the UK, without recourse to public funds,
         for the family, including other family members who are not included
         in the application but who live in the same  household,  which  the
         family own or occupy exclusively, unless paragraph  EX.1.  applies:
         accommodation will not be regarded as adequate if-

             (a)  it is, or will be, overcrowded; or

             (b)  it contravenes public health regulations.




         English language requirement

         E-LTRPT.5.1. If the applicant has not  met  the  requirement  in  a
         previous  application  for  leave  as  a  parent  or  partner,  the
         applicant must provide specified evidence that they-

             (a)  are a national of a  majority  English  speaking  country
             listed in paragraph GEN.1.6.;

             (b)  have passed an English  language  test  in  speaking  and
             listening at a minimum of level  A1  of  the  Common  European
             Framework of Reference for Languages with a provider  approved
             by the Secretary of State;

             (c)  have an academic qualification recognised by UK NARIC  to
             be equivalent to the standard  of  a  Bachelor's  or  Master's
             degree or PhD in the UK, which was taught in English; or

             (d)  are exempt from the English  language  requirement  under
             paragraph E-LTRPT.5.2.; unless paragraph EX.1. applies.

         E-LTRPT.5.2. The applicant is  exempt  from  the  English  language
         requirement if at the date of application-

             (a)  the applicant is aged 65 or over;

             (b)  the  applicant  has  a  disability  (physical  or  mental
             condition) which  prevents  the  applicant  from  meeting  the
             requirement; or

             (c)  there are exceptional  circumstances  which  prevent  the
             applicant from being able to meet the requirement.

 9. We also set out the terms of section 117A, B and D of the 2002 Act:

         117A Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the
             Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
             117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the
         question of whether an interference with a person's right to
         respect for private and family life is justified under Article
         8(2).




         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the person is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom.

             ...

         117D Interpretation of this Part

         (1)  In this Part-

             "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention on
             Human Rights;

             "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18
             and who-

                  (a)  is a British citizen, or

                  (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous
                  period of seven years or more;

             "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

                  (a)  is a British citizen, or

                  (b)  who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the
                  meaning of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A)
                  of that Act).

    Our assessment

10. Having perused the grounds of appeal and read  the  decision  of  Judge
    Troup, it is clear that the success of the appeal below hinged upon the
    finding that Ms L was a qualified person for 7 years and  had  acquired
    the entitlement to permanent residence and by consequence, so  had  DJ.
    The Respondent's grounds allege that the judge noted there were gaps of
    several years in Ms L's evidence and yet found that she was working  as
    claimed. However his findings did not give sufficient reasons as to why
    the fact of employment was accepted.

11. Turning to that key finding, the following is stated by the judge:

         "Although the evidence of her employment is incomplete, I find from
         her evidence that it is more probable than not that [Ms L] has been
         resident and exercising Treaty rights in the UK for at least  seven
         years and has thus acquired a permanent right  of  residence  under
         Regulation 15 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006".

12. The Respondent  submits  that  in  the  bundle  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, there was no  evidence  of  employment  whilst  Ms  L's  bank
    statements simply showed receipts of child tax credits and working  tax
    credits but no evidence to corroborate self-employment. Given that Ms L
    was an EEA national, she was entitled to enter the UK according to  her
    free movement rights. However, this did not automatically  qualify  her
    to be a settled person, which she  could  only  achieve  once  she  had
    acquired the right to  permanent  residence.  Therefore,  Ms  Pettersen
    submitted that as an EEA national must meet those requirements, an  EEA
    national is not automatically a person without  restrictions  on  their
    stay.

13. In our assessment, the answer to whether an EEA national is  a  settled
    person may be gleaned from paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules,  which
    states as follows:

         "settled in the United Kingdom" means that the person concerned:

             (a)  is free from any restriction on the period for which he
             may remain save that a person entitled to an exemption under
             Section 8 of the Immigration Act 1971 (otherwise than as a
             member of the home forces) is not to be regarded as settled in
             the United Kingdom except in so far as Section 8(5A) so
             provides; and

             (b)  is either:

                  (i)  ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom without
                  having entered or remained in breach of the immigration
                  laws; or

                  (ii) despite having entered or remained in breach of the
                  immigration laws, has subsequently entered lawfully or has
                  been granted leave to remain and is ordinarily resident.

14. Therefore, it can be seen from the above that EEA nationals, such as Ms
    L and DJ, are not free from any restriction on  the  period  for  which
    they may remain as the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006  permit  an
    initial  right  of  entry  and  residence   but   not   more,   without
    demonstrating that the EEA national is qualified as a worker  or  self-
    employed person, for example.

15. The difficulty the Appellant faces is that the evidence put before  the
    Tribunal of Ms L's employment was incomplete for several crucial  years
    resulting in a significant gap in her work history. This omission is of
    materiality given that which Ms L would need to establish that she  has
    exercised treaty rights for a continuous period of five years, in  this
    instance, by demonstrating her employment for a  five  year  period  in
    order to  establish  an  entitlement  to  permanent  residence.  It  is
    necessary for Ms  L  to  establish  that  she  has  an  entitlement  to
    permanent residence because such status would demonstrate that  she  is
    "settled" under paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules. This status would
    then apply in turn to her dependent child, DJ, and as a consequence the
    Appellant would be able to show that DJ is a relevant  child  under  E-
    LTRPT 2.2(c).

16. It is not apparent to us from reading the decision, whether  the  judge
    heard any oral evidence that indicated that Ms L was in employment  for
    the relevant period. The judge records at paragraph 18 of his  decision
    that Ms L is a self-employed cleaner working for 16 hours each week  in
    private houses and that she works on  Tuesdays,  Wednesdays,  Saturdays
    and Sundays and that she is in receipt of Working  Tax  Credits,  Child
    Tax Credits, and Housing and  Child  Benefit.  However,  none  of  that
    establishes Ms L's employment to cement the  gaps  in  the  documentary
    evidence.

17. We asked of the Appellant, what  evidence  was  put  before  the  judge
    either via documentation or orally of Ms L's work during those gaps  in
    the employment history. The Appellant stated  that  he  did  not  know.
    Without objection from Ms Pettersen, we asked Ms L  what  evidence  she
    had given at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. Ms L  told  us
    that she had attended the hearing to fight for the  rights  of  DJ  and
    that it was not DJ's fault that his father is from Pakistan. She stated
    that if the Appellant were to leave  the  UK,  DJ  would  not  see  him
    because DJ will not go to Pakistan and the Appellant will not  be  able
    to return here. She told us that DJ has asthma and that she had letters
    from the school to show the Appellant is helping her with him. She said
    that she was working previously and is working now but beyond that  she
    could not remember what she said at the hearing below.

18. The Appellant's oral evidence as recorded in Judge  Troup's  manuscript
    record of proceedings was to the effect that Ms L is a cleaner  working
    16 hours each week. The Appellant's witness statement revealed  nothing
    further in relation to Ms L's previous work.

19. It appears that neither of the Appellant's previous representatives was
    aware of the evidence it might be necessary to adduce before the First-
    tier Tribunal or at least, had not focussed their minds upon  acquiring
    that evidence in preparation for the hearing.

20. Consequently, given the above evidence before the judge, we  find  that
    the First-tier judge's analysis of whether  Ms  L  was  working  for  a
    continuous period of five years and thereby acquired entitlement  to  a
    permanent right of residence is materially  erroneous.  In  any  event,
    based upon the evidence we have seen, there does not appear to  be  any
    evidence to support the judge's conclusions on this matter and they are
    unsustainable.

21. In conclusion, the judge gave insufficient reasons for concluding  that
    the evidence established that Ms L had acquired a  permanent  right  of
    residence by reason of the length of her  employment.  Accordingly,  we
    are satisfied that the First-tier judge erred in law in his conclusions
    in that respect. That error of law is such as to require  the  decision
    to be set aside. We therefore proceed to re-make the decision

22. In re-making the decision under the Immigration Rules, on the  evidence
    before us the Appellant is unable to establish that he can meet E-LTRPT
    2.2 in particular. This is because  he  cannot  establish  that  DJ  is
    "settled" within the meaning given to that term by paragraph 6  of  the
    Immigration Rules. This is because Ms L has not put forward evidence to
    establish that she was a qualified person for a continuous period of  5
    years that would establish  her  entitlement  to  permanent  residence,
    which could then be attributed to DJ in turn.

23. Furthermore, E-LTRPT 2.2 is not met because DJ has not lived in the  UK
    continuously for at least 7 years. Consequently, the appeal  must  fail
    under the Immigration Rules.

24. We do not consider that there are grounds for considering  this  matter
    outwith the Immigration Rules under Article 8 ECHR. However, if we  are
    wrong, we go on to consider  the  proportionality  of  the  Appellant's
    removal against the interference with his family life.

25. The questions that we must ask were laid bare in the matter of  Razgar,
    R v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2004]  UKHL  2,  which
    read as follows:

         (1)  Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
         authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for
         his private or (as the case may be) family life?

         (2)  If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
         gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?

         (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
         in the  interests  of  national  security,  public  safety  or  the
         economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder
         or crime, for the protection  of  health  or  morals,  or  for  the
         protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
         public end sought to be achieved?

26. We accept questions 1 and 2 of the Razgar test should  be  answered  in
    the Appellant's favour, in relation to his private and family life. The
    practical effect of the refusal decision is to require him to return to
    Pakistan which will lead to disruption to his private and family life.

27. We accept that questions 3 and 4 of the Razgar test should be  answered
    in the Secretary of State's favour, and we  also  accept  that  in  the
    normal  course  of  events   the   proposed   interference   would   be
    proportionate, having regard to the public interest considerations  set
    out in Section 117B of the 2002 Act as amended by the  Immigration  Act
    2014 according to the failure to meet the Immigration Rules.

28. We consider it obvious that it is  in  DJ's  best  interests  that  the
    Appellant remain in the UK and that he continue to enjoy the  affection
    and care that the Appellant provides as a  father.  The  Appellant  has
    regular contact with DJ  although  he  does  not  live  with  him.  The
    Appellant is also responsible for providing DJ with  clothes  and  toys
    although DJ is not financially dependent upon the  Appellant  as  Ms  L
    made clear in her evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Had  that
    been otherwise, there may have been consequences pursuant to the  ratio
    in Zambrano [2011] EUECJ C-34/09 that we would  need  to  be  concerned
    with such as the deprivation of the  enjoyment  of  DJ's  rights  as  a
    European citizen and whether the removal of  his  parent  would  affect
    those rights. However, as it is  not  the  case,  we  do  not  need  to
    consider that matter. Having established that the Appellant's  presence
    is in DJ's best interests, we go  on  to  consider  any  countervailing
    factors.

29. It is in the Appellant's favour that he meets the other requirements of
    E-LTRPT aside from paragraph 2.2, including the requirement that he  is
    able to maintain and accommodate himself adequately without recourse to
    public  funds.  We  acknowledge  that  the   Appellant   is   therefore
    financially independent with reference to section 117B(3) and  we  also
    acknowledge that the Appellant is able to speak  English,  although  in
    the light of AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) he cannot obtain
    any positive benefit from those facts.

30. In any event, against this is weighed the public interest  pursuant  to
    section 117B(1). Furthermore, it is  also  true  that  section  117B(5)
    applies as the Appellant has established his private  life  whilst  his
    status in the UK  was precarious  which means that little weight can be
    given to his private life.

31. Further in relation to the question  of  proportionality,  taking  into
    account all the factors, such as the closeness  of  the  Appellant  and
    DJ's relationship and their mutual affection and  the  separation  that
    may follow, and given the evidence of Ms L as to the importance of  the
    Appellant in her day to day life, alongside the public interest and the
    fact that the Appellant is unable  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules, there is nothing that tips the balance in the Appellant's favour
    on the evidence before us. Consequently, we find that removal would  be
    proportionate.

32. For the above reasons, we re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

    Decision

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.

34. We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  re-make  the
    decision, dismissing the appeal under the Immigration Rules  and  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

    Anonymity

35. In order to preserve the anonymity of the children referred to in  this
    decision, we continue  the  anonymity  order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008, this determination identifies  the  children  and
    those associated with them by initials only.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini   19/11/15
