
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/30506/2014
                                                             & IA/30503/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  6th March 2015                            |On 10th March 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     MRS SHANTHI SUNETHRA WICKRAMAGE (1)
                    MASTER TANYA DASINTHA WICKRAMAGE (2)
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms A Seghra, Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State but I will refer  to  the
       parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The first appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  born  on  8th  January
       1952. The second appellant is her son, and a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka
       born on 7th February 1996. They arrived in the  UK  on  9th  December
       2005: the first appellant had a work permit and permission  to  enter
       in this capacity and the second  appellant  was  her  dependent.  The
       appellants' permission to remain expired on 18th November 2010.  They
       then overstayed and applied on 5th March 2013 for leave to remain  in
       accordance with Article 8 ECHR. They were refused without a right  of
       appeal on 13th May 2013. Their  solicitors  then  conducted  judicial
       review proceedings to challenge the lack of a refusal with a right of
       appeal. As a  result  the  Secretary  of  State  made  an  appealable
       decision refusing the appellants applications on 15th July  2014.  On
       29th July 2014 the appellants appealed.  Their  appeals  against  the
       decision were  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Phull  in  a
       determination promulgated on the 3rd December 2014.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       Frances on 21st January 2015 on the basis that it was  arguable  that
       the First-tier judge Phull had erred in law in determining the appeal
       on the basis that the second appellant was a child when  in  fact  he
       had been over the age of 18 years at the time of decision.

    4. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions

    5. Mr Kandola relied upon the grounds  of  appeal  in  relation  to  the
       determination of the appeal made by the second appellant.  He  argued
       that the second appellant had been  18  years  old  at  the  date  of
       hearing. Judge Phull had not specified the sub-section  of  paragraph
       276ADE of the Immigration Rules he relied upon however it  was  clear
       that he had wrongly relied upon paragraph 276ADE (iv) in allowing the
       second appellant's appeal on the mistaken basis that he was a  child.
       He had seemingly thought the appellant could succeed under  paragraph
       276ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules when he could not due to his age
       and had therefore looked at issues of the reasonableness of expecting
       the second appellant to leave the UK. The only paragraph under  which
       the second appellant could potentially succeed in his appeal  was  in
       fact paragraph 276ADE (vi) of the Immigration Rules  which  meant  he
       had to show that he had not ties to Sri  Lanka.  Although  there  was
       reference to ties at paragraph 25 of the determination this term  had
       not been given its correct legal meaning in accordance with  Ogundimu
       (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60.

    6. Mr Kandola argued that the determination  of  the  first  appellant's
       appeal erred in law because  it  relied  upon  the  second  appellant
       succeeding under the Immigration Rules when he could not, as outlined
       above. He did not seek to rely upon the further original  grounds  of
       appeal in this respect.

    7. Ms Seghra relied upon her skeleton argument. She  argued  that  Judge
       Phull had determined the appeal correctly under paragraph 276ADE (iv)
       of  the  Immigration  Rules.  Paragraph  276ADE  states  that:   "The
       requirements to be met by an applicant for leave  to  remain  on  the
       grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of application
       the applicant:" and then at subsection (iv) "is under the age  of  18
       years and has lived continuously in the  UK  for  at  least  7  years
       (discounting  any  period  of  imprisonment)  and  it  would  not  be
       reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK;"

    8. The second appellant had applied on 5th March 2013  when  he  was  17
       years old, and had been in the UK for over seven years at that  time.
       Paragraph 276ADE (iv) was therefore  the  correct  paragraph  of  the
       Immigration Rules, and indeed this was  the  approach  taken  by  the
       Secretary of State in her refusal letter, see page  4  of  7  at  the
       third paragraph where the refusal accepts the appellant was under the
       age of 18 at the time of application and had been in the UK for seven
       years. What the Secretary of State had contended in her  refusal  was
       that the second appellant could reasonably be expected to  leave  the
       UK and thus fell to be refused.

    9. The determination of Judge Phull therefore deals correctly  with  the
       issue as to whether the second appellant could reasonably be expected
       to leave the UK as this was the aspect of the paragraph  276ADE  (iv)
       of the Immigration Rules in dispute. No errors of law in relation  to
       the determination of this issue  are  alleged  in  the  Secretary  of
       State's grounds.

   10.  Mr  Kandola  had  conceded  that  there  were  only  errors  in  the
       determination of the first appellant's appeal if there were errors in
       the determination of the second appellant's appeal. As there were  no
       errors in the determination of  the  second  appellant's  appeal  the
       determination of Judge Phull should stand.

   11. At the end of the hearing Mr Kandola said that he accepted  that  the
       Secretary of State could not succeed in the appeal.  I  informed  the
       parties that  I  found  that  there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the
       determination of Judge Phull but that  I  would  put  my  reasons  in
       writing.

Conclusions

   12. Judge Phull determined this appeal correctly in accordance  with  the
       version of the Immigration Rules at paragraph 276ADE  extant  at  the
       time of decision. These Rules stated that the requirements had to  be
       fulfilled at the time of application. The second appellant applied on
       5th March 2013 when he  was  17  years  old.  Judge  Phull  therefore
       determined the appeal by assessing whether the appellant could fulfil
       paragraph 276ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules which dealt with those
       under the age of 18 years. It was conceded by the respondent  in  the
       reasons for refusal letter dated 15th July 2014  that  the  appellant
       was under 18 years of age at the date of application and had been  in
       the UK for seven years at that time. Judge Phull addressed the  issue
       disputed by the Secretary of State, whether it would be reasonable to
       expect the second appellant to leave the UK, in his determination  at
       paragraphs 22 - 26. I find that he has determined the appeal  of  the
       second appellant without any legal error. Following submissions  this
       was also the view of the representative for the Secretary of State.

Decision

   13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of
       an error on a point of law.

   14. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  appeals  is
       upheld.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

6th March 2015

