
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/30917/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 8th July 2016                           |On 19th July 2016          |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          SAVITABEN KANUBHAI PATEL
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Absent

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard,  promulgated  on  20  November
2015 which allowed the Appellant's appeal on Article 8 ECHR Grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 8 December 1934 and is a national of India.

4. On 19 May 2014 the Appellant applied for variation of leave to remain  on
article 8 ECHR grounds. On 16 July 2014 the Secretary of State  refused  the
Appellant's application.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Howard ("the Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 29 April 2016  Judge  Cruthers  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

      The grounds on which the respondent  seeks  permission  to  appeal  of
      arguable. In particular, it seems to me that:


      The judge may not have made sufficient findings in relation to "family
      life" (see paragraph 9 of R(Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982, 27 July 2005


      The judge may not have sufficiently factored in the  "public  interest
      matters" specified in part  5A  of  the  nationality  immigration  and
      asylum act 2002.


      The "Compelling circumstances test" from SS (Congo)  and  others  2015
      EWCA Civ 387, 23 April 2015 may not have been sufficiently addressed.


      And it is not clear to me that the judge factored in  the  appellant's
      own evidence that when she came  to  the  UK  as  a  visitor  she  had
      intended respondent returned to  her  country  of  nationality,  India
      (even though she was already living alone in India by that stage) -the
      judge's paragraph 27(1)

The Hearing

7. The Appellant did not attend the appeal nor was she  represented  at  the
appeal. Enquiries were made with the appellant's solicitors, who  said  that
they knew about today's diet, but would not  attend  as  they  were  without
instructions. I am satisfied that due notice of the appeal was  served  upon
the Appellant at the address that was given. I am therefore  satisfied  that
having been served notice of the hearing and  not  attended  it  is  in  the
interests of justice to proceed with the hearing in the Appellant's  absence
as I am entitled to do by virtue of paragraph 38 of The  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

8. For the respondent Mr Walker simply moved the grounds of appeal.

Analysis

9. The first  ground  of  appeal  is  a  challenge  to  the  proportionality
assessment carried out by the Judge. The respondent argues  that  the  Judge
failed to give proper consideration to section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act,  and
gave inadequate weight to  the  public  interest  in  effective  immigration
control.

10. The second ground of appeal is a challenge to the Judge's  finding  that
family life within the meaning of article 8  exists  between  the  appellant
and her adult daughter. The third ground of appeal is  a  challenge  to  the
adequacy of the proportionality balancing exercise carried out by the  Judge
when considering this case both within the immigration  rules  and  out-with
the immigration rules.

11. There is considerable force in each of the grounds of appeal. The  Judge
appears to commence his findings of fact at [15] of  the  decision,  but  in
reality only [17] and  [18]  of  the  decision  (containing  28  paragraphs)
contain any findings of fact.  At [19] of  the  decision,  the  Judge  finds
that the appellant cannot meet the requirements of  the  immigration  rules.
Within [27] of the decision the Judge sets out the terms of section 117B  of
the 2002 Act, but then immediately states that the  public  interest  relied
on by the respondent is that

      .... To remove this appellant is economic

12. That statement by the Judge ignores  entirely  section  117B(1)  of  the
2002 Act, which creates the presumption that the  maintenance  of  effective
immigration control is in the public interest.

13. It is in the closing paragraph of [27] of the decision  that  the  Judge
deals with family life, but he does not adequately  set  out  why  he  finds
that article 8 ECHR family life is engaged.

14. In Dasgupta (error of law - proportionality - correct  approach)  [2016]
UKUT 28 (a dependent relative case) the  First-tier  Tribunal  finding  that
there was family life as between an 85-year-old and  his  daughter  and  two
grandchildren of 17 and 16 was upheld.   The  Appellant  in  that  case  had
visited his daughter's family in England  almost  annually  since  2007  for
periods of between three and five months and had developed  a  strong  close
relationship with his grandchildren. The Upper Tribunal  in  Dasgupta  found
that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal that there was  a  family  life
was one open to the Tribunal (although the Upper Tribunal noted that  family
life had not been in  dispute  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  did  not  find  in
Dasgupta that an alternative  finding  would  not  have  been  open  to  the
Tribunal). In Dasgupta  the Tribunal  held  that  the  question  of  whether
there is family life in a child/grandchild context  requires  a  finding  of
something over and above  normal  emotional  ties  and  will  invariably  be
intensely fact sensitive.

15. In Gupta, JR Petition from UT [2015] CSOH 9 the Indian claimant  entered
on a visitor's visa, stayed with her son and  his  children  and  sought  to
remain  on  the  basis  of  medical  difficulties.  It  was  held  that   in
immigration cases there was no presumption that a person had a family  life,
even with immediate family members: Kugathas [2003] INLR  170  applied.  The
First-tier Tribunal considered there was an absence  of  evidence  that  the
Claimant required  help  with  personal  care;  that  she  did  not  require
financial support; that she had lived in India whilst her son lived  in  the
UK for several years from 2006; that there was an absence of  evidence  that
she had enjoyed a family life with her daughter  in  law  and  the  children
between 2006 and 2010; and that she had  lived  alone  in  India  after  her
daughter in law moved to the UK in 2010.  The  appeal  was  dismissed  -  in
effect upholding the First-tier decision that there was no family life.


16. It was also held in Gupta, JR Petition from UT  [2015]  CSOH  9  that  a
host state's positive obligation to respect family life in terms of  Article
8 of the ECHR did not generally extend to reuniting  families  separated  by
voluntary relocation (paras 18 - 19).

17. The decision contains a  misdirection  of  law  because  the  Judge  has
approached section 117B of the 2002 Act incorrectly,  and  so  infected  the
overall proportionality balancing exercise. The Judge's finding that  family
life exists between adult relatives is not supported  by  adequate  findings
of fact. Those are not just errors of law; they are material errors of  law.
I must therefore set the decision aside.

 18. The Judge's decision  cannot  stand  and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
entirety. All matters must be determined of new. I consider whether  or  not
there is sufficient material before me to enable me  to  substitute  my  own
decision. Because of the paucity of findings of fact  in  the  decision  and
because of the nature of the  fact-finding  exercise  required  by  Dasgupta
(error of law - proportionality - correct approach) [2016] UKUT 28,  I  find
that I  cannot  substitute  my  own  decision.  This  case  requires  to  be
determined of new.

REMITTAL TO FT

19. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:


    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

20. I find that this case should be  remitted  because  of  the  nature  and
extent of the judicial fact finding which will be necessary to make  a  just
decision in this case. In this case none of the  findings  of  fact  are  to
stand.

21. I remit the matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Hatton
Cross, before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Howard.

Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

23. I set aside the decision. The appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                                                              Date 18
July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


