
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30506/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 December 2016                          |On 16 December 2016           |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             IFTIKHAR AHMAD KHAN
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by M & K Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
        (Appellant) against Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Ferguson's
        promulgated decision of 11 August 2016  allowing  the  Respondent's
        appeal, to a limited extent, against the Appellant's refusal, dated
        26 August 2015, to grant him Further Leave to  Remain  (FLR)  as  a
        Tier 4 (General) Student.


   Background


     2. The Respondent is a national of Pakistan, date  of  birth  8  April
        1983. He entered the United Kingdom in 2005 as a  student  and  was
        subsequently granted further periods of LTR as a student and  as  a
        Tier 4 (General) Student. On 14 April 2014 the Respondent  made  an
        application for leave to remain in the UK as  a  Tier  4  (General)
        Student. In support of this application the Respondent  provided  a
        TOEIC certificate obtained from Educational Testing  Service  (ETS)
        and relating to a test undertaken at the Universal Training  Centre
        in Watford on 10 December 2013. ETS had a record  of  his  speaking
        test. The Reasons For Refusal Letter explained  that,  using  voice
        recognition software,  ETS  undertook  a  check  of  his  test  and
        confirmed to the Appellant that there was 'significant evidence' to
        conclude that the Respondent's certificate  had  been  fraudulently
        obtained by the use of a proxy test taker. ETS declared his test to
        be invalid. The  Appellant  was  consequently  satisfied  that  the
        English language certificate had been fraudulently obtained and the
        application was refused under paragraph 322  (1A)  the  immigration
        rules.


     3. The application was additionally refused  on  the  basis  that  the
        Respondent did not have a  valid  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for
        Studies (CAS) assigned to him by Cranford College. This was because
        the college was not on the Tier 4 sponsor register when checked  on
        26 August 2015. The Respondent could not therefore  be  awarded  30
        points under Appendix A of the immigration rules.


The First-tier Tribunal decision

     4. The judge heard  oral  evidence  from  the  Respondent  without  an
        interpreter. The judge noted that the Respondent, since arriving in
        the UK, had not successfully completed a  single  course  of  study
        because the various colleges which had accepted him  as  a  student
        was subsequently closed down or lost the licences.  The  Respondent
        had provided two TOEIC  certificates  and  emphasise  that  he  had
        attained low scores from the test taken on 10 December 2013. He had
        scored 140 speaking and 160 writing. He then re-sat the test on  14
        January 2014 achieving 180 in speaking  and  190  in  writing.  The
        judge  heard  evidence  to  the  effect  that  the  applicant   was
        financially supported in the UK by his brother and father and  that
        he had taken the TOEIC exam on 3 occasions (4th of  December  2013,
        then 10 December 2013, then 14 January 2014). When asked why he had
        taken the exam in Watford rather than nearer to his home  in  Luton
        the Respondent said he had been informed by friends that there  was
        a course at the Watford centre which was a Home Office test  centre
        and it was his choice were to sit the test.


     5. In submissions  the  Presenting  Officer  indicated  that,  if  the
        invalid CAS had been the sole point of refusal then the  Respondent
        would have been given 60 days to in role in  another  college.  The
        evidence in the Home Office bundle  confirmed  the  "invalid"  test
        score and referred to the witness statement from Rebecca Collings.


     6. In his conclusions the judge noted that, in 10 years of studying in
        the UK, the Respondent had only ever  been  awarded  a  diploma  in
        English language. The judge found that the Respondent probably  had
        no interest in  pursuing  genuine  studies  and  would  applied  to
        whichever college would enrol him for  whichever  course  he  could
        find [12]. The Respondent was a very mature students when he  first
        arrived in the UK and had nothing to show for his studies beyond  a
        language diploma at a level below that which he would already  have
        possessed given that he was granted entry to study  for  a  Masters
        Degree  in  Law.  The  judge  stated  [13]  that  the  inexplicable
        conclusion was that the Respondent was not interested  in  studying
        but was using student visas as a means of remaining in the  UK  for
        other reasons, with economic reasons the most likely.  The  variety
        of different courses in respect of which the Respondent had applied
        did not indicate that he had "chosen fields" of study but  that  it
        had made no difference  what  he  applied  to  study:  each  course
        allowed him the chance to fulfil his  real  aim  of  continuing  to
        reside in the UK.


     7. At [15] the judge stated,


             The fact that Mr Khan is not a genuine student does  not  mean
             that he did  not  genuinely  take  the  test.  The  screenshot
             showing that Mr Khan's test result  was  considered  "invalid"
             means that the burden of proof shifts to Mr Khan to show  that
             he did not employ a proxy tester. The evidence he provides  to
             establish this include several  other  English  language  test
             certificates issued to him. Some are from  City  &  Guilds  in
             2014 and there was no suggestion that those were  obtained  by
             deception. Another is from ETS issued on 14 January 2014.  ETS
             does not suggest that this is invalid. The one test which does
             not meet the required standard of English speaking is the  one
             taken on 10 December 2013, allegedly by a proxy, paid to  take
             the test on his behalf. The test records that the  ability  of
             the person taking  the  test  showed  "unclear  pronunciation,
             mistakes in grammar, a limited range of vocabulary." It is not
             established that Mr Khan would pay another person with English
             language ability at this level to take this test for him  when
             other  test  certificates  demonstrate  a  greater  level   of
             ability.


     8. Then at [16] the judge states, "when balanced against the  evidence
        set out by  the  [Appellant],  including  not  only  the  'generic'
        statements but also the fact that he sat the test  in  Watford  not
        Luton,  and  the  lack  of  first-hand  understanding  of  all  the
        questions put to him  in  English  at  the  hearing,  Mr  Khan  has
        established that it is more likely than not that the test  was  not
        taken by a proxy."


     9. The judge concluded therefore that the Respondent should have  been
        offered an additional 60  days  to  obtain  a  valid  CAS  from  an
        approved college. The decision was not in accordance with  the  law
        and the appeal was allowed to this limited extent.


The grounds of appeal and the grant of permission

    10. The grounds contends  that  the  judge  made  a  factual  error  in
        assessing the Respondents ETS marks. It was claimed that his  score
        for speaking was a hundred and 180/200 and 450/500  for  listening.
        These were said to be high marks for speaking which the  Respondent
        was said, for no apparent reason to have been unable to demonstrate
        at the hearing. It was submitted that the judge made a  mistake  of
        fact as to what level of English the Respondent had  achieved  with
        ETS, and the judge had failed to properly  factor  in  his  adverse
        credibility finding relating to the genuineness of the  Respondents
        studies when assessing whether a proxy tester had been used.


    11. In granting permission to appeal the first-tier Tribunal  concluded
        that it was arguably difficult for the judge to equate his findings
        that the Respondent  sat  the  test  with  his  findings  that  the
        Respondent was not a genuine student and had not understood all the
        questions that had been put him at the hearing.


Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

    12. At 'error of law' hearing I asked Mr Walker to identify  the  basis
        of the marks allegedly achieved by the Respondent in his  ETS  test
        dated 10 December 2013. Mr Walker  could  only  point  to  the  ETS
        certificate dated 14 January 2014.  In  this  test  the  Respondent
        achieved 180 out of 200 in his speaking test and 190 out of 200 for
        his writing test. Mr Walker confirmed that the  invalid  ETS  test,
        dated 10 December 2013, showed the Respondent achieved  a  speaking
        score of 140 out of 200 and a writing score of 160 out of  200.  Mr
        Walker acknowledged that the  grounds  of  appeal  made  inaccurate
        reference to the invalidated ETS test. Mr Walker  made  no  further
        submissions in support of the Respondent's appeal.


    13. Having briefly heard from Ms Iqbal, who had provided a useful  rule
        24 response and skeleton argument and  who  pointed  out  that  the
        reference at [16] to the proficiency of the Respondents English  at
        the hearing was in fact based on a submission made by the resenting
        officer, I indicated that the secretary of state's appeal would  be
        dismissed.


Discussion

    14. The judge did not find the Respondent to be a genuine student. This
        was perhaps unsurprising given  the  Respondent's  educational  and
        immigration  history.  The  Respondent   has   not   achieved   any
        significant educational success in the UK despite  having  remained
        here for some 10  years.  The  judge  was  of  the  view  that  the
        Respondent would avail himself of any course that would enable  him
        to remain in the UK. The judge was demonstrably and  acutely  aware
        of this conclusion when  he  assessed  whether  the  Appellant  had
        discharged the burden of proving that deception had  been  used  by
        reason of the Respondent's  reliance  on  the  ETS  test  dated  10
        December 2013. As a matter of logic it  is  quite  possible  for  a
        person who is not a genuine student to have nevertheless  genuinely
        undertaken an ETS test without utilising a proxy tester.


    15. The quality of  the  evidence  relied  on  by  the  Respondent  was
        thoroughly assessed by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  SM  and  Qadir  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden
        of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229  (IAC).  The  President  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal found that the evidence relied  on  by  the  Secretary  of
        State was just  sufficient  to  discharge  the  initial  evidential
        burden, thereby shifting the evidential burden to the Appellant  to
        raise an  innocent  explanation.  The  judge  in  this  case  fully
        appreciated that dynamic and  was  satisfied  that  the  evidential
        burden had shifted. The judge thereafter carefully  considered  the
        Respondent's explanation.


    16. The judge first noted that the scores achieved by  the  Respondent,
        in respect of the invalidated test taken on 10 December 2013,  were
        low. The Respondent achieved 140 out of 200 for  speaking  and  160
        out of 200 for listening. The assertions to  the  contrary  in  the
        grounds of appeal are simply inaccurate. It appears that the author
        of the grounds relied on the ETS test  taken  on  14  January  2014
        rather than the invalidated test taken on  10  December  2013.  The
        December 2013 results were sufficiently low that the Respondent was
        required to retake the ETS test on 14 January 2014. He got  a  much
        higher score on this occasion. There has been no suggestion that  a
        proxy tester was used in respect of this test, a point made by  the
        judge. The judge additionally  pointed  to  other  English-language
        tests undertaken  by  the  Respondent.  The  judge  was  rationally
        entitled to conclude that it  would  be  extremely  unusual  for  a
        person to pay another to undertake a test that would result in  low
        scores. This point was acknowledged by Mr Walker at the hearing. It
        simply made no sense that a proxy tester would be used to obtain  a
        low test result. Given the serious  deficiencies  in  the  evidence
        relied on by the Respondent I am in no doubt that  the  judge  took
        into account all relevant considerations  and  reached  a  decision
        that was reasonably open to him on the evidence before him.


    17. The judge was entitled to find that the refusal under paragraph 322
        (1A) had not been made out.  It  was  accepted  by  the  presenting
        officer at the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  that,  but  for  the
        refusal under paragraph 322 (1A), the  Appellant  would  have  been
        issued with a "60 day" notice to enable him to enrolled in  another
        college. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.






Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal did not make any error of law. The decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal stands. The Secretary of State's  decision  was  not  in
accordance with the law because Mr Khan should have been offered a "60  day"
notice.

I make no anonymity order.


[pic]                               15 December 2016
Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


