
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30491/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th January 2017                          |On 25th January 2017          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                         ayodeji olugbenga akinmoju
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Tampuri, Legal Representative, Tamsons Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant,  a  citizen  of  Nigeria,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 27th August
    2015 refusing his application for leave to remain  in  the  UK  as  the
    spouse of a person present and settled here.  First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Majid dismissed the appeal and the Appellant appeals with permission to
    this Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant's application for leave to  remain  was  refused  on  the
    basis  that  the  Respondent  did  not  accept  that  the   Appellant's
    relationship with the Sponsor is genuine and  subsisting  or  that  the
    Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  live  together  and  intend  to   do   so
    permanently. The application  was  therefore  refused  under  paragraph
    287(a)(ii) and (iii) of the Immigration Rules.  The First-tier Tribunal
    Judge heard evidence from the Appellant and the Sponsor.  At  paragraph
    17 of the decision the judge concluded, "... I do accept  Mr  Tampuri's
    submission that the marriage was 'subsisting and genuine'  particularly
    when the wife was making a statement for it and she  had  come  to  the
    Tribunal to support her partner's case".

 3. However at paragraph 18 the judge said;

         "The  Appellant's  oral  evidence  was  that  the  Respondent   was
         'incorrect' in asserting that the marriage had  lasted  for  years.
         This evidence has to be compared with the assertion of  the  author
         of the Refusal Letter that the Appellant  did  not  'categorically'
         corroborate his wife's assertion that she did not know the  address
         at which they suggested  they  were  living  together.   (The  word
         'categorically' gives a particular emphasis which should be noted).
          This comparison unfortunately makes it  difficult  to  prefer  the
         Appellant's evidence as compared with the  Respondent's  reasoning;
         making the refusal reasonable."

    The judge went on at paragraph 19 to say:

         "... This Appellant cannot benefit from  the  Rules  because,  even
         though the marriage is 'subsisting and genuine' he cannot ask me to
         ignore the express wording of the Refusal Letter whereby the author
         of the letter was not sure of the credibility of the Appellant."

    The judge went on  to  conclude  at  paragraph  20  that  he  was  "not
    persuaded that the Appellant comes within the relevant immigration law,
    as amended".

 4. The Appellant challenges that decision on the basis that the judge made
    a material misdirection in that, having accepted that the Appellant  is
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife, he went  on  to
    conclude that the Appellant cannot benefit from the  Immigration  Rules
    without giving clear and logical reasoning for that conclusion.

 5. The Rule 24 response states that the Respondent  does  not  oppose  the
    Appellant's application  for  permission  to  appeal  and  invites  the
    Tribunal to remit the matter to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  determine
    the appeal at a fresh hearing.  The Respondent states that it is  quite
    clear  the  reasoning  was  inadequate  as  was  "the  frankly  curious
    suggestion the Judge considered himself unable to go behind the reasons
    for refusal".

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Kotas relied on the Rule 24 notice  and  Mr
    Tampuri submitted that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  should
    be set aside and the appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Error of law

 7. In this appeal the judge was required to make a decision as to  whether
    the Appellant met the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.  Although
    the judge made an assessment on the basis of the oral evidence that the
    marriage was genuine and subsisting he did not  give  any  reasons  for
    reaching that conclusion. It is unclear  from  the  decision  what  the
    judge's reasoning or thinking was.

 8. Further, and more significantly, the judge appears  to  have  preferred
    the reasoning of the Respondent in the reasons for  refusal  letter  to
    his own assessment of the oral evidence  thereby  misunderstanding  his
    role in relation to  the  appeal.   If  the  judge  believed  that  the
    Appellant could in fact meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules
    in dispute, then the judge should have allowed the appeal.

 9.  In  these  circumstances  I  find  that  the  judge  made  a  material
    misdirection and that the decision should be set aside.

10.  The  parties  were  in  agreement  with  my  view   that,   in   these
    circumstances, the nature and extent of the judicial fact finding which
    is necessary in order for the  decision  to  be  remade  is  such  that
    (having regard to the overriding objective  in  Rule  2  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008) it is appropriate to remit the  case  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and I set it aside.  I remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    so that the appeal may be heard afresh.

12. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award

Signed                              Date: 25 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
