
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber    Appeal Number: IA/30193/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 18 September 2015                |On: 21 September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   BETWEEN

                           AN IMMIGRATION OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              MR RAJIB DEV NATH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Sayem, legal representative, Uzma Law Ltd


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision, promulgated on 6 March
         2015, of First-tier Tribunal Judge Monro (hereinafter referred to
         as the FTTJ).

 Background

      2. The respondent to this appeal was last granted leave to  remain  in
         the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) migrant  until  30  August
         2015. He returned to the  United  Kingdom  on  22  July  2014,  was
         refused entry on that date and his leave to remain cancelled.  That
         earlier decision was supplemented by a decision dated  20  December
         2014, which took  place  following  a  second  interview  with  the
         respondent.  The  reason  for  the  latter  decision  is  that   an
         immigration officer considered that the respondent had obtained his
         previous grant of leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4
         migrant by deception. Reference was made to a test taken at Synergy
         Business College on 17 July 2012.

      3. At the hearing before  the  FTTJ,  the  respondent  gave  evidence,
         maintaining that he sat the test in person  and  that  he  had  not
         needed to use a proxy. With regard  to  his  initial  inability  to
         recall the name of the test centre and the date of  the  test,  the
         respondent explained that he was tired when  interviewed  following
         18 hours  of  travel.  The  FTTJ  concluded  that  the  spreadsheet
         provided did not indicate the basis on which the respondent's  test
         result was invalidated;  that  there  was  no  direct  evidence  to
         support an allegation of dishonesty and  that  he  had  provided  a
         credible response to the said allegations.

      4. The grounds of application submit that  the  FTTJ  failed  to  give
         adequate reasons for findings on  a  material  matter,  namely  her
         finding that there was "no direct evidence" to support a finding of
         deception. Reference was made to the  witness  statements  of  Home
         Office employees and an email from ETS Taskforce dated 10 September
         2014. It was argued that in order to be recognised as invalid, "the
         case" has to have been analysed by a  computer  programme  and  two
         "independent" voice analysts.  It was further argued that  had  the
         FTTJ "properly" taken the evidence  into  account,  she  would  had
         found that the burden of proof had been discharged.   It  was  also
         said that  the  FTTJ  inadequately  explained  why  no  weight  was
         attached to the appellant's initial failure to provide the date and
         venue of his English language test.

      5. FTTJ PJM Hollingworth granted permission on  the  following  basis;
         "An arguable error of law has arisen in relation to the  degree  of
         weight to be attached to the evidence  adduced  by  the  (appellant
         before me) appertaining to the concept of invalidity. "

      6. Those representing the respondent lodged a Rule 24 response,  which
         was received on 6 July 2015. Essentially, it was argued that  there
         was no error of law; that matters of weight were for the individual
         judge and in the absence of perversity, cannot be set aside. It was
         said that the FTTJ had carried out a  comprehensive  assessment  of
         the evidence and had  provided  valid  reasons  for  rejecting  the
         Secretary of State's evidence.

      7. At the hearing before me, Mr Clarke relied on the  application  for
         permission to appeal, describing the grounds as  comprehensive.  He
         conceded that he was relying on hearsay evidence but stressed  that
         there was  an  item  of  evidence  from  ETS,  in  the  form  of  a
         spreadsheet, which stated that the TOEIC certificate  was  invalid.
         He submitted that the hearsay evidence ought to carry  some  weight
         and it corroborated the  evidence  directly  from  ETS.  Mr  Clarke
         argued  that  there  was  a  robust   procedure   in   invalidating
         certificates consisting of computer analysis  and  two  independent
         voice analysts and only if all three were in agreement was  a  test
         considered to be invalid.

      8. Mr Clarke identified  mistakes  of  fact  at  [16]  of  the  FTTJ's
         decision in that she was wrong to state  that  the  respondent  was
         interviewed 4 years after taking the test and that he had  attained
         2 degrees prior to taking the tests. The MSc was from a  university
         in Bangladesh and there was no NARIC  certification  regarding  the
         course being taught in English.  Indeed,  if  the  course  were  so
         taught, the respondent would  not  need  a  TOEIC  certificate.  Mr
         Clarke added that the appellant had not completed his  ACCA  course
         and  his  leave  to  remain  was  curtailed  for  reasons  of  non-
         attendance. He conceded that the  respondent  had  a  post-graduate
         diploma in business management but stressed that is was  wrong  for
         the FTTJ to say that he would not need a proxy. Mr  Clarke  was  of
         the view that the 20 per cent error rate referred to by the FTTJ at
         [14] indicated that 80% of the tests were correctly categorised  as
         invalid. He argued that the FTTJ's assessment was flawed. Mr Clarke
         could not help me as to why ETS had decided that  the  respondent's
         test was invalid, given Mr Millington's evidence that  tests  could
         be invalidated owing to irregularities at the test  centre  and  he
         argued that this was a matter for the respondent to bring  up  with
         ETS.

      9. In reply, Mr Sayem argued  that  the  grant  of  leave  was  solely
         regarding  the  degree  of  weight  attached  to  the  Home  Office
         evidence. The FTTJ had provided sufficient reasons,  in  particular
         at [16] in support of her  decision  to  place  no  weight  on  the
         respondent's inability to recall the details  of  the  test  centre
         venue at his first port interview.  He placed reliance on  headnote
         (1) of Shizad (sufficiency  of  reasons:  set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT
         00085. Furthermore, Mr Sayem referred me to the evidence before the
         FTTJ, which included the  respondent's  first  degree  in  physics,
         which was taught in both  English  and  Bengali  and  his  Master's
         degree, which was taught solely in English. He  asked  me  to  note
         that the appellant attained an MBA from a United Kingdom university
         approximately a year after the TOEIC  test.  He  also  referred  to
         aspects of the evidence before the Upper Tribunal in R (oao Gazi) v
         SSHD (ETS - judicial review) IJR UKUT 00327 (IAC), with  particular
         reference to the report of Dr Harrison.  Mr  Sayem  submitted  that
         even an error rate of one per cent did not indicate that  deception
         was proved in this case  on  the  balance  of  probabilities.  With
         regard to the FTTJ's error as to the lapse of time between the test
         and  his  port  interview,  Mr  Sayem  relied  upon  the  stressful
         situation the respondent was in, as  stated  by  the  FTTJ  in  her
         decision. He also asked me to note that the Home  Office  witnesses
         were not available for cross-examination at the hearing before  the
         FTTJ.

     10. Mr Clarke only added that there was no reason to suggest that Peter
         Millington and Rebecca Collings, as professionals were not truthful
         in their witness statements.

     11. At [19] of the decision and reasons the FTTJ says, "The  respondent
         relies on information provided to her by  ETS  to  prove  that  the
         appellant did not sit the test  himself  but  there  is  no  direct
         evidence to support this allegation apart  from  the  spreadsheet."
         While this is a strongly worded finding, I take this to  mean  that
         the FTTJ found that the evidence from the Secretary  of  State,  in
         the form of the generic statements, did not directly relate to  the
         respondent's particular test  results.  It  is  apparent  from  the
         aforementioned quote from the decision that the FTTJ recognised  in
         her decision that there was evidence, in the form of a spreadsheet,
         which related to the respondent. But  that  was  all  the  evidence
         before her, which related to the respondent's test  results.  There
         was no evidence as to why it was concluded  that  the  respondent's
         name was on the list of invalid tests.

     12. I have taken into consideration what Mr Clarke said  about  the  20
         per  cent  margin  of  error,  however  I  have  also  taken   into
         consideration the findings in Gazi regarding the limitations of the
         generic evidence and the methods used to conclude  that  applicants
         have used a proxy test taker.

     13. I find that the FTTJ  assessed  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
         respondent's evidence and that she clearly attached weight  to  the
         inclusion of the respondent's name on a spreadsheet. Between [5-11]
         the FTTJ assesses all the evidence before her and at  [12-19]  sets
         out her conclusions. She preferred the evidence of the  respondent,
         which included his oral evidence, the fact that he had been  taught
         in English at a high level in  Bangladesh  and  the  fact  that  he
         achieved an MBA following the disputed test  results.  Furthermore,
         the FTTJ considered the point made by the  Immigration  Officer  in
         the explanatory statement, that is that the respondent  was  unable
         to remember the date and venue of the test at his first  interview.
         At [1] the FTTJ correctly sets out the chronology, however at  [16]
         she erroneously states that there had been a period of  four  years
         rather  than  two  between  the  test  and  the   port   interview.
         Notwithstanding this error, I consider the reasons provided by  the
         FTTJ for placing no weight on the respondent's  ability  to  recall
         the said details, namely that a long time had elapsed,  that  there
         was no reason for him to instantly recall the details and  that  he
         had just had a long and tiring journey,  stand  regardless  of  the
         error.  I find that the FTTJ was entitled to reach the  conclusions
         she did.

     14. While the findings of the FTTJ were concise, the losing  party  was
         left in no doubt as to why it had lost. Ultimately, the  burden  of
         proving deception rests with the appellant  in  these  proceedings.
         Owing to the lack of evidence  of  the  respondent  having  used  a
         proxy, the FTTJ concluded that the burden had not been  discharged.
         It is a matter for the FTTJ what weight she decides  to  attach  to
         the evidence before her, absent  perversity,  which  has  not  been
         argued in this case.  I find that the appellant's arguments in this
         case amount to little more than a disagreement with the FTTJ's view
         of the generic evidence and her ultimate conclusion in this case.

     15. The FTTJ did not make an anonymity direction and I can see no basis
         for making one now.

    Conclusions

      1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making
         of an error on a point of law.

      2) I uphold the decision of the FTTJ.




    Signed:      Date: 19 September 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


    -----------------------


5



