
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/30378/2014
                                                               IA/30392/2014
                                                               IA/30399/2014
                                                               IA/30401/2014
                                                               IA/30404/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 5 November 2015                   |On 30 November 2015                   |


                                   Before

                                Lord TURNBULL
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                 (1) Ms F A
                                 (2) Mr I A
                                (3) Mr O F A
                               (4) Miss F I A
                               (5) Miss F O A
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Hawkin, Counsel (instructed by Raffles Haig
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellants appealed to the Upper  Tribunal  with  permission
         granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Knowles QC on 4 August 2015 against
         the decision and reasons of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Turquet  who
         had dismissed the Appellants' appeals against  the  refusal  on  15
         July 2014 of their applications for leave  to  remain  outside  the
         Immigration Rules on Article 8  ECHR  grounds.   The  decision  and
         reasons was promulgated on 13 March 2015.

    2.     The Appellants are nationals of Nigeria, wife, husband and three
         children, respectively born in Nigeria on 11 April 1982,  19  March
         1977 and 10 September 2003 and in the United Kingdom on 8 September
         2007 and 1 October 2012.  The First, Second  and  Third  Appellants
         entered the United Kingdom as visitors on  1  December  2006,  with
         leave until 26 April 2007.   They  overstayed.   There  followed  a
         series of applications and litigation which is described in [1]  of
         Judge Turquet's determination.  On 15 July 2014  the  Secretary  of
         State refused the applications and made  removal  directions  which
         are the subject of the present appeal.

    3.     The judge found that the Appellants were unable to  satisfy  the
         requirements of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration
         Rules and further found that there were no compelling circumstances
         requiring an Article 8  ECHR  assessment  outside  the  Immigration
         Rules.  The judge  nevertheless  considered  the  claim  on  Razgar
         [2004] UKHL 27 principles in conjunction with  sections  117A-D  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The judge  found
         in summary that the Appellants had not lost their ties to  Nigeria,
         that the minor Appellants' best interests were to return to Nigeria
         with their parents where their education could continue  and  hence
         that the removal of all of the Appellants was proportionate.

    4.     Permission to appeal was refused by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Andrew on 1 June 2015 but  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Knowles QC on the renewed application because she  considered  that
         arguments  raised  on  the  Appellants'  behalf  deserved   further
         consideration.  These were that the judge  should  have  considered
         finding that the Secretary of State's decisions were  unlawful  for
         failure to consider the best interests of the three  children,  had
         misapplied paragraph 276ADE(iv) with reference to Ogundimu (Article
         8 - new Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT  60  (IAC),  had  insufficiently
         considered the evidence and had failed to take account  of  section
         117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

    5.     Standard directions were made by the tribunal,  indicating  that
         the appeal would  be  reheard  immediately  in  the  event  that  a
         material error of law was found.

    6.     The Respondent filed a rule 24 notice in the form  of  a  letter
         dated 19 August 2015 indicating that the onwards appeal was opposed
         because the judge had directed herself appropriately.

    Submissions

    7.     Mr Hawkin for the Appellants relied on the  renewed  grounds  on
         which permission to appeal had been granted by the Upper  Tribunal.
         He submitted that the judge should have sent the decisions back  to
         the  Secretary  of  State  because  there  had   been   no   proper
         consideration of the best interests of the children, such as  their
         ties in the United Kingdom and their own wishes.  That was contrary
         to JO and Others (section 55 duty) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00517 (IAC).
          There had been no consideration of the evidence of the  two  older
         children's assistant head teacher.   The  judge  had  not  followed
         Ogundimu (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC)  when
         considering ties to  Nigeria  under  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of  the
         Immigration  Rules.   The  judge's   consideration   of   paragraph
         276ADE(iv) was also flawed.  The judge had failed to recognise that
         both the Third Appellant and  Fourth  Appellant  had  been  in  the
         United Kingdom in excess of 7 years.  The judge's consideration  of
         section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 was
         as flawed as that of the Secretary of State, for  similar  reasons.
         The judge's consideration of Article 8 ECHR was undermined for  the
         same reasons as well as by her treatment of  section  117B  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  which  was  cursory.
         The substance of the determination was poor and its material errors
         of law warranted the setting aside and remaking of the decision.

    8.     Ms Willocks-Briscoe for the Respondent relied  on  the  rule  24
         notice.  She submitted that there was  no  error  of  law  and  the
         determination should stand.  The determination had  to  read  as  a
         whole.  The position of the parents was the correct starting  point
         and the judge had given a properly reasoned decision which was open
         to her.  The onwards appeal should be dismissed.

    9.     In reply, Mr Hawkin submitted that the judge should  have  given
         greater weight to the presence of two of the children for  7  years
         or more.  The judge  had  not  considered  the  objective  evidence
         concerning education in Nigeria,  including  the  use  of  corporal
         punishment. There were also language issues.  The determination was
         wholly inadequate.

    10.    The tribunal indicated at the conclusion of submissions that  it
         found that there was no material error  of  law  and  reserved  its
         determination, which now follows.

    No error of law finding

    11.    In the tribunal's view the grant of  permission  to  appeal  can
         best be described as generous. Mr Hawkin's repetitious and somewhat
         circular submissions were based on a misreading of  a  careful  and
         full determination, which had dealt satisfactorily  with  all  live
         issues, following the correct application of the relevant law.

    12.    The judge dealt with the submissions based on JO (above) at  [3]
         of her decision, and gave sustainable reasons for finding that  the
         Secretary of State had dealt with the best interests of  the  child
         Appellants.  In reaching that finding the judge had shown that  she
         was fully aware of the case advanced on behalf of the Appellants as
         well as the supporting evidence.  Sending  decisions  back  to  the
         Secretary of State should, of course, be done  with  circumspection
         and normally AJ (India) [2011] EWCA Civ 1191 should be followed.

    13.    The judge found that the children lived  in  a  household  where
         Yoruba was spoken and that the  children  would  in  any  event  be
         educated  in  English  in  Nigeria.   The  judge  found  that   the
         children's parents would readily  re-integrate  in  Nigeria,  where
         they had close relatives (including a mother and a brother) as well
         as friends and extended family, and where they  would  be  able  to
         find work.  It is trite law that the judge did  not  have  to  deal
         with every single  item  of  evidence  and  her  reference  to  the
         evidence provided by the children's teachers in the United  Kingdom
         was adequate.

    14.    The judge recognised the importance of the  children's  position
         and gave it close attention, having cited and  correctly  explained
         key cases such as  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting
         children;  onward  appeals)   [2013]   UKUT00197   (IAC)   and   EV
         (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  The judge weighed the  relevant
         factors (see, e.g., [33] of  her  decision)  and  gave  sustainable
         reasons for finding that the  children's  best  interests  were  to
         return or go to Nigeria  with  their  parents.   In  reaching  that
         finding the judge accepted that  the  education  available  in  the
         United Kingdom might be of a higher  standard.   That  was  not  in
         serious dispute.  Nor was the love, devotion and competence of  the
         children's parents.  There was no need for the judge to conduct  an
         examination of educational practice in Nigeria.  The judge was well
         aware that the children did not want to  leave  their  schools  and
         their friends in the United Kingdom and that the children's parents
         bore responsibility for what had happened.

    15.    The judge followed the substance of Ogundimu (above).  There was
         ample evidence of strong ties to Nigeria  as  already  noted.   Her
         findings  were  secure.   Section  117B(6)  of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  was  anticipated  by  paragraph
         276ADE(iv) of the Immigration Rules.  The judge had addressed  that
         in sufficient detail: see AM  (S  117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260
         (IAC).  There was no need for a duplicated review, when  the  judge
         had covered the same ground at least once  previously  and  had  in
         effect cross-checked her conclusions.

    16.    Indeed, given the facts of the appeals, it is not  easy  to  see
         how any judge  properly  directing  himself  or  herself  as  Judge
         Turquet certainly did could have reached a different decision.  The
         tribunal accordingly finds that there was no material error of  law
         in the decision and reasons and there is no basis  for  interfering
         with the judge's decision.

    DECISION

    The Appellants' onwards appeals are dismissed

    The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and stands unchanged




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
