
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30582/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 June 2016                       |On 30 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          GUILHERME CASTRO DA ROCHA
                            [no anonymity order]
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The claimant is a Brazilian citizen who was successful before the First-
    tier Tribunal in his appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision
    to refuse to grant him a permanent right of residence as the spouse  of
    an Italian citizen (and hence an EEA citizen), pursuant  to  Regulation
    15(1)(b) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
    (as amended).

 2. This appeal was heard by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Archer on  2  June
    2016.  It comes before me for an error of law  decision  following  the
    transfer order I have made today. The claimant did not attend the Upper
    Tribunal hearing in June, and I proceed to decide the appeal without  a
    further oral hearing.   I have had regard to Judge Archer's  record  of
    proceedings which records the  submissions  made  by  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Mr Whitwell, at the hearing.

Regulation 15(1)(b)

 3. Regulation 15(1)(b) is as follows:

         "15.-    (1)  The following persons  shall  acquire  the  right  to
             reside in the United Kingdom permanently-...

                  (b)  a family member of an EEA national who is not himself
                  an EEA national but who has resided in the United  Kingdom
                  with the EEA national in accordance with these Regulations
                  for a continuous period of five years; ..."

First-tier Tribunal decision

 4. It is for the claimant to show that his spouse has  been  so  residing.
    The evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  incomplete,  but  at
    paragraph 16 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that

         "...The [claimant] has provided evidence that  his  wife  has  been
         exercising rights as a worker within the United Kingdom  throughout
         most of the last 5 years save  for  temporary  absences.   Absences
         from work due to pregnancy or the birth of a child  are  recognised
         under the Regulations' (emphasis added).

    On that basis, the First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal.

Secretary of State's appeal

 5. The Secretary of State appealed with permission to the  Upper  Tribunal
    on the  basis  that  there  was  a  gap  in  the  documentary  evidence
    concerning the period from June-November 2012, and that it had not been
    open to the Judge to allow the appeal, as the appellant had not shown 5
    continuous years exercise of Treaty rights by the wife.

 6. The Secretary of State contended, and at the  2  June  2016,  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mr Whitwell  submitted,  that  there  was  no
    evidential basis for the First-tier Tribunal Judge's finding  that  the
    claimant's EEA spouse had been exercising Treaty rights in  the  United
    Kingdom for the required period of 5  years,  such  that  he  would  be
    entitled to indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as
    claimed.

Discussion

 7. I am not satisfied, having regard to the evidence before  Judge  Archer
    and now before me, including the record of proceedings, that the First-
    tier  Tribunal's  decision  was  a  lawful  one.   The  provisions   of
    Regulation 15(1)(b) are precise:   the  claimant  must  show  that  his
    spouse  has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  'in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations' for an uninterrupted period of 5  years.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did not find that  to  be  the  case,  merely  that  the
    claimant's wife had been in the United Kingdom in accordance  with  the
    Regulations for 'most of' that 5-year period.

 8. Accordingly, even on the First-tier Tribunal's findings, the  Secretary
    of State's challenge to the First-tier Tribunal decision  must  succeed
    and the claimant's appeal falls to be dismissed.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside  the  decision  and  re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
dismissing it.


|Date: 29 September 2016              |Signed: Judith AJC Gleeson           |
|                                     |Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson         |


