
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/30578/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9th September 2016              |                                   |
|Prepared 12th September 2016       |On 14th September 2016             |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                       MR Md Jahedur Rahman Chowdhury
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. A.  Hossain, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                             NOTICE OF DECISION
The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 31 October  1969.  He
      appeals against a decision of Judge of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Beg
      sitting at Taylor House on 5th of January 2016 in which she  dismissed
      the Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 28th
      of August 2015. That decision was to refuse  to  vary  the  Appellants
      leave to remain in the United Kingdom and to  remove  him  by  way  of
      directions under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality
      act 2006. The Appellant had first arrived in the United Kingdom  as  a
      student migrant on 23rd of January 2008. He was  subsequently  granted
      further leave to remain as a Tier 4  (general)  student  migrant  from
      20th of August 2009 until 30th August 2010. Further  leave  to  remain
      was granted in the same capacity until 30th of April  2012.  This  was
      further extended until 28th of February 2015. The Appellants leave  to
      remain as a Tier 4 (general) student migrant was curtailed on 27th  of
      June 2014 so that his leave to remain expired on 31 August  2014.  The
      Appellant gave notice of appeal on 10th of September 2015.

The Explanation for refusal

   2. On 28th of March 2013 the Appellant had applied for leave to remain as
      a Tier 4 (general) student, an application that  was  granted  by  the
      Respondent. To support the application the Appellant had  submitted  a
      TOEIC certificate from the Education Testing Service (ETS) to both the
      Respondent and to his sponsor in the latter case for  the  sponsor  to
      provide the Appellant with a confirmation of acceptance for studies (C
      AS). The Respondent now stated that using voice verification  software
      ETS was able to detect when one individual undertook multiple  English
      language tests. A check had been made of the Appellants test  and  ETS
      had confirmed to the Respondent that there was significant evidence to
      conclude that the Appellant's certificate was fraudulently obtained by
      the use of a proxy test taker. ETS declared the Appellants test to  be
      invalid due to the presence of this proxy test who had sat the test in
      the Appellant's place and the Appellant's scores were cancelled.




   3. As the Respondent was satisfied on the basis of the  information  from
      ETS that the English language certificate  was  fraudulently  obtained
      the Respondent  refused  the  Appellant's  current  application  under
      paragraph 322  (2)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  As  the  Appellant's
      application had been refused under one  of  the  general  grounds  for
      refusal the Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant could meet
      the requirements of paragraph 245ZX (a) of the Rules. Any  application
      under Article 8 would have to be made separately on a specified form.

The Appeal

   4. The Appellant denied that a proxy taker had obtained  his  certificate
      for him or that he had used deception in any attempt  to  gain  leave.
      The  Respondent's  allegation  was  made  without  any  supporting  or
      documentary evidence. To prove deception the Respondent would have  to
      show intentional dishonesty which she  could  not  do.  In  any  event
      discretion was not properly exercise by the Respondent in  his  favour
      and he also relied upon Article 8  (respect  for  private  and  family
      life) of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  specifically  in
      relation to private life.

The Hearing at First Instance

   5. The Appellant did not attend the hearing claiming that he  was  unwell
      with an eye infection and loose bowel movements.  The  application  to
      adjourn made by letter before the hearing  date  was  refused  on  the
      basis that insufficient medical evidence had been provided to  justify
      the adjournment. When the case was called on for hearing the Appellant
      did not attend but he was legally represented  by  his  solicitor  who
      also appeared before  me.  The  appeal  at  first  instance  therefore
      proceeded by way of submissions.




   6. The Judge had  before  her  witness  statements  of  two  Home  Office
      officials Peter  Millington  and  Rebecca  Collings.  The  Appellant's
      solicitor argued that  these  statements  were  generic  and  did  not
      specifically relate to this Appellant. Mr. Millington had acknowledged
      in his statement that  the  technology  used  was  imperfect  and  the
      Appellant's solicitor questioned how the conclusion had  been  arrived
      at that fraud was used. There was  no  further  evidence  of  how  the
      Appellant's test result was invalidated. The Appellant  had  not  been
      asked to retake the test. Nevertheless the  Appellant  did  eventually
      take a test and passed it before submitting his  current  application.
      On the balance of probabilities the Appellant had established  he  was
      able to pass the standard at the B2 level.




   7. The Respondent in reply made two points. The first was  that  all  the
      tests were subjected to voice analysis and then  analysed  by  humans.
      Only then was a test recorded as invalid. 88% of the cases which  were
      analysed were found to be fraudulent. The second point  was  that  the
      Appellant's failure to attend the appeal hearing and  subject  himself
      to cross-examination had  damaged  his  credibility.  The  Appellant's
      solicitor maintained that the system was fallible  and  the  Appellant
      was unwell.



The Determination




   8. Quoting from the statement of Mr. Millington at paragraphs 45  and  46
      the Judge noted that the ETS investigation came about was a result  of
      a television programme broadcast in February 2014. At paragraph 26  of
      her witness statement Ms Collings stated that in late March  2014  ETS
      informed  the  Respondent  that  it  had   been   able   to   identify
      impersonation and proxy test taking using voice recognition  software.
      A significant data matching process was commenced to take the  results
      from ETS and match them to individuals.




   9. The Judge acknowledged that these statements had  been  criticised  as
      being generic  but  she  found  that  they  provided  highly  relevant
      background information about  ETS  and  the  process  used  to  verify
      whether a particular applicant had in fact taken the English  language
      test or whether someone else (a proxy) had taken the test for him.  At
      paragraph 13 of her determination  the  Judge  noted  that  there  was
      specific evidence which related to the Appellant.  There  was  a  MIDA
      matched data document which related to him. The ETS source data showed
      that the test taken in the name of the Appellant was rendered invalid.
      The Respondent  had  discharged  the  burden  of  proof  upon  her  by
      submitting specific documents showing the English language test  taken
      by the Appellant  and  the  subsequent  results.  On  the  balance  of
      probabilities she found that the Appellant had submitted a  fraudulent
      English language test in a previous application for leave  to  remain.
      The Appellant had not attended the hearing of the appeal and  provided
      no  additional  evidence  to  rebut  the  allegations  of  fraud.  The
      Respondent's decision was in accordance with the law. At paragraph  16
      the Judge considered the Appellant's application under Article  8  but
      found no compelling  circumstances  such  that  the  Appellant's  case
      should be considered outside of the Immigration Rules.

The Onward Appeal

  10. The Appellant argued against this decision submitting  that  in  cases
      such as this there needed to be cogent evidence  and  generic  witness
      statements would not suffice. He cited  the  case  of  Gazi  in  which
      criticism was made of Mr Millington's evidence  particularly  that  he
      could lay claim to no relevant credentials or expertise in  the  field
      of voice recognition. If the Appellant had identified himself  through
      his  passport  before  taking  the  test  that  would   suggest   that
      photographic identity evidence was available  making  the  presumption
      that the Appellant used a proxy test taker even less likely. The Judge
      had not  set  out  to  what  extent  she  had  taken  the  Appellant's
      subsequent English language test into account nor had she answered the
      question why a person who was clearly competent  in  English  such  as
      this  Appellant  would  cheat  as  alleged.  Further  the  Judge   had
      materially erred in failing to conduct an Article 8 assessment outside
      of the rules.




  11. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Judge of the First tier Tribunal  Fisher  on  5th  of  July  2016.  In
      granting permission to appeal he wrote that it was arguable  that  the
      Judge had erred in finding that the Respondent's generic  evidence  in
      this ETS  case  was  sufficient  to  discharge  the  burden  of  proof
      following the decision of the President of the Upper  Tribunal  in  SM
      and Qadir [2016] UKUT 229 ("Qadir"). The  grounds  had  also  asserted
      that the Judge had erred in refusing an adjournment but  Judge  Fisher
      found that the First-tier was justified in  refusing  the  adjournment
      request given the nature of the medical  evidence  (or  lack  of  it).
      Further the Appellant could not succeed under Article 8 following  the
      decision in Patel [2013] UK SC 72. Permission to appeal was granted on
      one basis only that  is  the  issue  of  the  generic  nature  of  the
      Respondent's evidence.




  12. The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter dated 15th
      of August 2016. This argued that the  Judge  was  entitled  to  attach
      significant weight to the evidence provided by the Respondent and  had
      given adequate reasons for her findings.

The Hearing Before Me

  13. At the outset of the hearing an issue  was  raised  as  to  whether  I
      should further adjourn  this  appeal  given  that  permission  to  the
      Respondent to appeal to the Court of Appeal  had  been  given  by  the
      Upper Tribunal in the  case  of  Qadir.  Before  deciding  whether  to
      adjourn the  case  I  considered  the  provisions  of  the  overriding
      objective and the authority of Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 418 that  the  test
      of whether to adjourn was one of fairness. My duty was  to  apply  the
      law as at the date of the hearing and I saw no need  to  adjourn  this
      matter pending the outcome of the Respondent's onward  appeal  to  the
      Court of Appeal particularly given that the Court of Appeal itself had
      recently considered the issue of alleged proxy test taking in the case
      of Shehzad [2016] EWCA Civ 615 to which I refer in more detail  below.
      I therefore indicated that the appeal would proceed which it did.




  14. For the Appellant it was argued that cases such  as  this  had  to  be
      given anxious  scrutiny.  The  statements  of  Mr  Millington  and  Ms
      Collings should not have been taken into  consideration  or  at  least
      considered  more  cautiously.  Even  though  it  was  said  that   the
      information had come from ETS there was  no  statement  of  truth  and
      there was no way that a link between the Appellant and this data could
      be proved. This evidence had been criticised by the Upper Tribunal  in
      Qadir. Some of the evidence might be questionable rather than invalid.
      Whole test centre scores  had  been  invalidated.  In  any  event  the
      Appellant had subsequently passed a language test. Why  would  someone
      use a proxy test taker in 2012 if by 2014 he could pass the test well?




  15. In reply the presenting officer relied on the rule  24  response  (see
      above). The Judge had considered the evidence.  There  was  sufficient
      evidence to get over the evidential burden. The authority of Qadir did
      not make it impossible to dismiss an appeal. The evidence  before  the
      Judge was sufficient to discharge the burden upon the Respondent. What
      should ordinarily have happened next was for the Judge  to  go  on  to
      consider the Appellant's evidence in response but  she  could  not  do
      that because there was no  evidence  because  the  Appellant  had  not
      attended. The Appellant had to  take  the  consequences  of  his  non-
      attendance. The Appellant had denied taking the test by  a  proxy  but
      the Respondent had specific evidence that he had. It  was  a  question
      for the Judge whether she accepted the  Appellant's  evidence  in  his
      absence. There were many reasons  why  someone  competent  in  English
      could ask a proxy to take the test for him. For example it might be  a
      busy businessman with other things to do than attend a test centre. It
      did not follow that because someone could speak English they would not
      use a proxy test taker. In this particular case due to the absence  of
      the  Appellant  there  was  no  evidence  to  rebut  the  Respondent's
      evidence.




  16. Finally in response the Appellant's solicitor argued that there was no
      link between the Respondent's evidence  and  the  Appellant.  For  the
      burden to shift from the Respondent on to the Appellant there  had  to
      be evidence and that was not satisfied in this case.

Findings

  17. The Appellant in this case makes much of his argument that there is no
      direct evidence to link him to the allegation of a proxy  test  taker.
      He criticizes the evidence of the two Home Office officials for  being
      generic in nature.  Whilst  it  is  correct  that  those  two  witness
      statements do spend some  time  setting  out  the  background  to  the
      problem with English language tests and the methods  used  by  ETS  to
      check whether those tests can be validated or not, it is not the  case
      that there is a complete  absence  of  specific  evidence  about  this
      particular Appellant. That evidence is contained in the so-called look
      up tool referred to as the  ETS  SELT  source  data.  This  shows  the
      Appellant's name and that his test was invalid.  The  Judge  had  that
      evidence  before  her  and  specifically  referred  to   it   in   her
      determination.




  18. In the recent Court of Appeal decision of Shehzad the court  indicated
      that they agreed with the Upper Tribunal conclusions in Qadir that the
      evidence put forward by the Respondent  in  language  test  cases  was
      sufficient to shift the evidential burden from the  Respondent  on  to
      the Appellant at the initial stage (see paragraph 21 of  Shehzad).  It
      was for the Appellant to provide an innocent explanation as to how the
      Respondent's evidence had shown an invalid test. It was not  the  case
      that the evidence put forward by the Home  Office  could  be  rejected
      such that the Appellant in effect had no case  to  answer.  There  was
      still an obligation on the Appellant once the Respondent had submitted
      her evidence to show an innocent explanation.




  19. In this case the absence of the Appellant  made  that  task  extremely
      difficult. In the case of Qadir the Appellants gave evidence as to the
      great  lengths  they  had  gone  to  challenge  the  evidence  of  the
      Respondent that they had used a proxy test taker.  The  only  evidence
      put forward by the Appellant in this case was that 2 years  after  the
      alleged invalid test he had taken a genuine  test  and  passed  it  at
      level B2. That was a factor to be taken into account but that was  not
      of itself decisive. There were still gaps in the Appellant's case  for
      which his presence at the hearing was required. For example  he  might
      have chosen to give his evidence at the hearing in English without the
      need for  an  interpreter.  He  might  also  have  given  evidence  of
      enquiries he had made of the relevant college as to his competence  in
      English. He had raised in his onward grounds of  appeal  the  argument
      that he needed to show photographic ID on the  day  of  the  test.  He
      could have made further enquiries about that in order to produce  such
      evidence to the Judge at the hearing. However none of this was done.



  20. Shehzad  makes  clear  that  the  consideration  of  the  Respondent's
      evidence and the shifting of the evidential burden are at a very early
      stage in the  consideration  of  ETS  appeals.  The  Court  of  Appeal
      anticipated that in cases which are contested there  will  be  further
      evidence to come proffered by an Appellant giving his  explanation  of
      matters. However in this case matters did not reach that  far  because
      the Appellant for no good reason failed to  attend  his  hearing.  The
      Judge  was  faced  with  specific  evidence  which  showed  that  this
      Appellant had  an  invalid  test  and  next  to  no  evidence  on  the
      Appellant's side of the scales to show why that test result could  not
      be relied upon. As the Respondent indicated in submissions there might
      be many reasons why an individual with a competent  level  in  English
      might not wish to take a test. It was not for the Judge  to  speculate
      on what that  might  be  but  to  consider  the  evidence  before  the
      tribunal. This the Judge did at first instance and she  arrived  at  a
      sustainable conclusion in the light  of  the  jurisprudence  that  the
      burden shifted onto the Appellant. He had  been  unable  to  discharge
      that burden with any innocent explanation. The Judge did  not  err  in
      dismissing the appeal. Accordingly I find that there was no  error  of
      law in the decision of the First-tier and I dismiss the appeal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier tribunal did not involve the making of an
error of law and I dismiss the appeal against that decision.

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.



                                       Dated this 13th day of September 2016

..............................................................

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft





To the Respondent

Fee Award

As the appeal is been dismissed there can be no fee award.



                                       Dated this 13th day of September 2016

..............................................................

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft









