
[pic]
IAC-HX-MH/11-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30818/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 July 2015                               |On 11 August 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                chow wee tein
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Armstrong of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Malaysia, born on 18 December 1981.   She
    appealed against the respondent's  decision  dated  4  August  2014  to
    refuse her leave to enter.  The decision reads as follows:

         "You were given notice of leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as
         a Tier  4  (General)  Student.   You  were  given  entry  clearance
         UKBRPRC1454202 which had  effect  as  leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom on 8 February  2013  until  29  September  2016  but  I  am
         satisfied that false  representations  were  employed  or  material
         facts were not disclosed for the purpose of obtaining the leave, or
         there has been such a change of circumstances in  your  case  since
         the leave was granted that it should  be  cancelled.   I  therefore
         cancel your continuing leave.  If your leave was  conferred  by  an
         entry clearance, this will also have the effect of cancelling  your
         entry clearance.

         In support of your application for leave to remain you completed  a
         TOEIC  Secure  English  Language  Test   on   18   September   2012
         administered by Premier Language  Training  Centre.   This  testing
         centre has been found  to  have  awarded  fraudulent  certificates.
         Therefore your certificate is deemed invalid by  the  Home  Office.
         As you have submitted your results as part of your application  for
         leave to remain, I am satisfied that your leave to remain has  been
         obtained by false representation.

         You have not sought entry clearance under any  other  provision  of
         the Immigration Rules.  I therefore refuse you leave to  enter  the
         United Kingdom/I therefore cancel your continuing leave.   If  your
         leave was conferred by an entry clearance, this will also have  the
         effect of cancelling your entry  clearance.   The  cancellation  of
         your leave will be treated for the purposes of the Immigration  Act
         1971 and the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  as  a
         refusal of leave to enter at a time when you were in possession  of
         a current entry clearance."

 2. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal  was  dismissed
    by Judge J Bartlett (the judge) in a decision promulgated on 9  January
    2015.  The judge found that whilst fraud was not made out in  terms  of
    paragraph 321A(2), the appellant  could  not  succeed  under  paragraph
    321A(1) a mandatory ground of refusal, because she did not hold a valid
    English language certificate by the  time  she  re-entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 4 August 2014 and that was a change of  circumstances  under
    paragraph 321A(1).  Further, the appellant did not satisfy Rule  276ADE
    or Appendix FM in terms of Article 8.  The judge went  on  to  consider
    the appellant's circumstances with regard  to  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules but found that the respondent's decision was proportionate having
    taken into account the case law and s.117A and B.

 3. The grounds claimed the judge failed to apply  the  threshold  test  in
    paragraph 321A in terms of an assessment of whether the alleged  change
    in  the   appellant's   circumstances   was   sufficient   to   justify
    cancellation.  Further, in the event that that ground was not made out,
    the respondent would have been permitted to cancel leave on  the  basis
    of a change of circumstances, when the underlying substantive basis for
    that change of circumstances had not been  made  out.   That  would  be
    conspicuously unfair and an abuse of power.  Further,  that  the  judge
    incorrectly weighed the interference in terms of Article 8.

 4. Judge Colyer granted permission to appeal on 11 May 2015.  He found  it
    was arguable that the judge erred in failing  to  apply  the  paragraph
    321A threshold and in failing  to  consider  the  allegation  that  the
    respondent's decision was an abuse of power.  He found all  grounds  to
    be arguable.

Respondent's Rule 24 Response

 5. The respondent claimed inter  alia  that  the  judge  directed  herself
    appropriately.  It was a question of  fact  that  the  appellant's  ETS
    certificate was cancelled by ETS.  Whilst the  respondent  acknowledged
    the judge found no fraud on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  for  the
    purposes of the Secretary of State's cancellation at port  pursuant  to
    paragraph 321A, the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to undo ETS's decision
    to cancel the certificate  nor  was  it  relevant  on  what  basis  ETS
    cancelled the certificate.  It remained a fact that the  appellant  did
    not have a valid certificate as had been required  under  the  original
    grant of leave.  It was for the appellant to  seek  a  remedy  for  the
    invalidation elsewhere.

 6. At the  time  of  the  original  grant  of  leave,  the  appellant  was
    considered to have a valid certificate by the Secretary  of  State,  as
    ETS had not notified the Secretary of State that  the  certificate  was
    invalid.  Upon notice being given, the Secretary  of  State  considered
    the certificate as invalid and cancelled leave at port.

 7. The Secretary of State merely applied the law according  to  the  facts
    presented to her.  If the appellant had any complaint  it  was  against
    ETS who invalidated the certificate.

 8. The appellant's complaint at [11] of the grounds  of  appeal  that  the
    only basis for cancelling the certificate was fraud and therefore  "...
    the FTIJ could not in those circumstances proceed on the basis that  it
    might be something else ..." was said to  be  wholly  erroneous  as  it
    failed to recognise that the judge  had  no  jurisdiction  to  consider
    ETS's invalidation.   The  only  jurisdiction  the  judge  had  was  to
    consider whether the respondent's accusation of fraud was  established.



 9. The appellant's complaint that there was no substantive basis  for  the
    interference in her private life failed to recognise it was a fact that
    she did not have a valid certificate.

10.  The  appellant's  complaint  that  there  had  been   no   change   of
    circumstances as the  test  was  invalid  at  the  outset,  was  wholly
    erroneous as it failed to recognise that the  Secretary  of  State  was
    unaware that the certificate was invalid at the outset.

Submissions on Error of Law

11. Mr Armstrong said that paragraph 321A is expressed in  mandatory  terms
    but in relation to 321A(1) there was a threshold.   The  Rule  required
    "... has been such a change in the circumstances ..." that leave should
    be cancelled.  It was therefore clear but  also  confirmed  in  various
    case law that there needs to be an assessment of  whether  the  alleged
    change of circumstances was sufficient to justify cancellation.

12. That was why the submission  had  been  put  to  the  judge  which  she
    recorded at [22(iii)] of her  decision,  that  the  alleged  change  of
    circumstances had to be material. In the view of Mr Armstrong, it could
    not be material where the allegation was about fraud and fraud had  not
    been made out.

13. The judge dealt with the issue of fraud at [29]-[33] of  her  decision.
    At [30] and [31] she said that there might be reasons why a certificate
    could be cancelled outside the circumstances of  fraud.   At  [33]  she
    said that "...... the certificate was an important part of the granting
    of the Tier 4 visa for the appellant  and  it  cannot  be  said  to  be
    insignificant."

14. Mr Armstrong submitted that the judge's  reasoning  at  [30]  and  [31]
    betrayed a misdirection and was irrational.  There might well be  cases
    where a certificate was cancelled on grounds other than fraud but  that
    was not the situation in this case.  The only basis for cancelling  the
    ETS certificate was fraud and my attention was drawn to the  statements
    filed by the respondent in this and all other related cases.  The basis
    for the decision was fraud.  The only evidence  before  the  judge  was
    that the cancellation was about fraud such that she could not in  those
    circumstances proceed on the basis that it  might  be  about  something
    else.

15. As regards [33] the language certificate was not a requirement of leave
    to  enter  or  remain.   Paragraph  245ZV  required  30  points  and  a
    certificate of acceptance for studies (CAS) required  30  points.   See
    Appendix A [115].  The appellant had at all times a CAS.  Whilst not an
    issue before me, I do not accept that there is no language  requirement
    to obtain a CAS or under Paragraph 245ZV.

16. In any event however and fundamentally, the issue  for  the  judge  was
    whether the absence of  the  language  testing  certificate,  when  the
    appellant had previously had one, (it having been cancelled on  grounds
    of fraud which the judge had found not to have been made  out),  was  a
    change of  circumstances  such  that  leave  could  be  cancelled.   Mr
    Armstrong argued that the judge did not carry out that exercise and  to
    the extent that she did so, her analysis was  flawed  for  the  reasons
    given above at [11]-[15].

17. As a result, the judge failed properly to apply the threshold  required
    by Rule 321A(1). She  misdirected  herself  and/or  her  reasoning  was
    irrational in that it proceeded on the basis that there might  be  some
    basis for cancelling the certificate other than fraud  when  there  was
    none.

18. In any event, it would be conspicuously unfair and an  abuse  of  power
    assuming that the first ground at [11] above failed, if the  respondent
    was  permitted  to  cancel  leave  on  the  basis  of  the  change   of
    circumstances when the underlying substantive basis for that change  of
    circumstances had not been made  out.   That  was  because  ETS  was  a
    contractor of the respondent who had been requested by  the  respondent
    to investigate allegations of language testing fraud and the  appellant
    had no remedy against ETS.  What the respondent argued subsequently was
    that she did not need to make out fraud whilst that  was  the  original
    expressed basis for her decision; all she need do now was assert change
    of circumstances such that there need be no enquiry into the change  or
    whether it was well-founded.  That approach  was  a  classic  abuse  of
    power in public law terms. The appeal was not about a merely  technical
    breach.  The respondent had made an allegation and acted upon  it.  She
    could not subsequently act so as to pretend that allegation  was  never
    made and that the case was only about the technical  breach.   If  that
    was the case, the respondent would be acting to deny the  appellant  an
    effective remedy in respect of a finding made by ETS, the  respondent's
    contractor and upon which the respondent relied upon in the action  she
    took against the appellant.

19. As regards  Article  8,  Mr  Armstrong  submitted  that  there  was  an
    interference by the respondent in the appellant's private life  in  the
    United  Kingdom.   There  was  no  effective  justification  for   that
    interference and the judge failed to weigh that  point.   Mr  Armstrong
    also submitted that whereas the judge at  [32]  rejected  the  argument
    that there was no change in circumstances in any event, because if  the
    test certificate was invalid then it was invalid at the  outset,  hence
    nothing had changed, another judge had taken a different view.

20. Ms Isherwood relied upon the respondent's Rule 24 response.

Conclusion on Error of Law

21. The appellant was a student in the United Kingdom.  She had  been  here
    lawfully, since 2005.  In August 2014 she was returning here  following
    a trip home when she was stopped at port.  She  was  refused  leave  to
    enter, the reason given in the decision document being that a  language
    test certificate obtained two years earlier had been issued by  a  test
    centre that had been found to  have  awarded  fraudulent  certificates.
    Accordingly, the appellant's certificate was deemed invalid.   No  case
    against the appellant herself was alleged or made out.  On the  morning
    of the hearing before the judge documentary evidence was produced  from
    ETS that the appellant's certificate had been listed as invalid from 30
    May 2014, the reason being that she had allegedly relied  upon  a  test
    certificate obtained by the use of a proxy test taker.  At that  stage,
    the respondent sought leave to rely upon paragraph 321A(1) as  well  as
    the previously relied upon 321A(2).

22. Paragraph 321A(1)  is  concerned  with  change  of  circumstances,  the
    respondent's case being that whatever the position was with  regard  to
    fraud, there was not at  that  time  a  language  testing  certificate.
    Accordingly, there was a change of circumstances and the appeal fell to
    be dismissed on that basis alone.

23. Mr Armstrong submitted that  whilst  paragraph  321A  is  expressed  in
    mandatory terms, there was a threshold, by which he  meant  that  there
    needed to be an assessment of whether the change of  circumstances  was
    sufficient  to  justify  cancellation.   In  other  words,   that   the
    Immigration Officer was exercising a discretion.  Mr  Armstrong  relied
    upon Home Office guidance in the appellant's  bundle  "Cancellation  of
    entry clearance not conferring leave to enter: change of  circumstances
    or purpose".  This gives  general  grounds  for  refusal  Section  3  -
    v22.0EXT published for Home Office staff on 23 March 2015, although  Mr
    Armstrong said the guidance was no different on 4 August 2014 when  the
    appellant's leave was cancelled.  The guidance relied upon does not  in
    terms mention paragraph 321A but rather paragraph 321 and specifically,
    321(ii).  Paragraph 321 concerns refusal  of  leave  to  enter  whereas
    paragraph 321A refers to grounds on which  leave  to  enter  or  remain
    which is in force, is to be cancelled at port or while  the  holder  is
    outside the United Kingdom.

24. Paragraph 321 provides inter alia:

         "A person seeking leave to enter the United Kingdom  who  holds  an
         entry clearance which was duly issued to him and is  still  current
         may be refused leave to enter only where the Immigration Officer is
         satisfied that:

             (ii) a change of circumstances since it was issued has removed
                  the basis of the holder's claim to admission, except where
                  the change of circumstances amounts solely to  the  person
                  becoming over age for  entry  in  one  of  the  categories
                  contained in paragraphs 296-316 of these Rules  since  the
                  issue of the entry clearance."

25. The guidance reads:

         "Change of circumstances

         When a passenger's circumstances  have  changed  so  that  they  no
         longer have a basis for leave to enter in the  category  for  which
         they were granted entry clearance, you  may  (my  emphasis)  refuse
         leave to enter under paragraph 321(ii) or V9.2 for example, when  a
         passenger with entry clearance for employment has had  their  offer
         of employment withdrawn."

26. Paragraph 321A provides inter alia as follows:

         "The following grounds for the cancellation of a person's leave  to
         enter or remain which is in force on his arrival in, or  whilst  he
         is outside , the United Kingdom apply;

         (1) there has been such a  change  in  the  circumstances  of  that
         person's case since the  leave  was  given  ,  that  it  should  be
         cancelled"

27. In BA (321A Immigration Rules mandatory) Nigeria  [2006]  UKAIT  00080,
    the AIT concluded at [19]:

         "We conclude therefore that the immigration judge was wrong in  law
         when he held that the immigration officer had  a  discretion  under
         rule 321A. He does not. If the grounds are made out then any  entry
         clearance which a passenger arriving in the United Kingdom may have
         is to be cancelled."

28. In Boahen [2010] EWCA Civ 585,  Lord Justice  Pitchford  said  at  [38]
    inter alia:

         "The importance of identifying the true ground for the decision  to
         cancel lies in the fact that an immigration officer must  be  taken
         to have justified the exercise of a power of  cancellation  on  the
         grounds stated in the IS 82A  notice.  If  the  stated  ground  was
         unsustainable then the decision was unlawful despite the  existence
         of an alternative ground on which the same decision could have been
         reached."

29. Mr Armstrong relied upon [41] of MF (Pakistan) [2013] EWCA Civ  768  as
    support for his submission that the Immigration Officer was  exercising
    a discretion when he cancelled the  appellant's  leave.   Lord  Justice
    Pitchford said at [41]:

         "In my judgment the facts to  which  I  have  referred  in  summary
         undoubtedly enabled the Secretary of State to consider cancellation
         of the appellant's leave.  I would observe that cancellation is not
         an automatic consequence of a change of  circumstances.   The  Rule
         requires that the Immigration Officer should consider whether there
         has been 'such a change of  circumstances'  that  leave  should  be
         cancelled."

30. Lord Justice Pitchford went on to consider at [42]  that  whilst  there
    might be disadvantages to the appellant in the  event  that  leave  was
    cancelled, the respondent would not be acting in any way unfairly if on
    the facts of the case, she properly proceeded to consider cancellation.

31. There is a real distinction between Paragraph 321 and  321A.  Paragraph
    321 anticipates in my view an analysis of the circumstances with regard
    to a refusal which is not  required  for  a  cancellation  under  321A.
    Nevertheless, whilst the terms  of  Paragraph  321A  are  mandatory  in
    nature, that is not to say that the  respondent  has  power  to  cancel
    without lawful justification. It is in that  sense  only  that  she  is
    exercising a discretion in making her decision. There is no conflict in
    that regard between BA, Boahen and MF.

32. Mr Armstrong submitted that the  change  of  circumstances  had  to  be
    material for the respondent to cancel leave under paragraph 321A(1) and
    that the change of  circumstances  could  not  be  material  where  the
    allegation was about fraud and fraud had not been made out.

33. I find that in the respondent making a  decision  to  cancel  leave  at
    port, she was exercising  a  discretion  in  the  sense  that  she  was
    considering whether there had been such a change of circumstances  that
    leave should be cancelled. See MF at [29] above. I do not  accept  that
    the change of circumstances need be material in the manner in which  Mr
    Armstrong submits.

34. The appellant was interviewed at port on 4 August 2014, having  already
    established that ETS had cancelled the  appellant's  certificate.   The
    interview was carried out by Immigration Officer Johnson and  following
    that interview, the appellant had another interview with  Border  Force
    Higher Officer Dyson.  The interviews were set out in the  respondent's
    bundle.  It was only after the Immigration Officers had interviewed the
    appellant and considered her responses that her leave was cancelled  at
    port.  Full details of the  reasons  for  refusal  were  given  in  the
    respondent's  subsequent  letter  dated  30  October  2014.   In   such
    circumstances, I find that the respondent was not obliged to do more in
    the exercise of her discretion and particularly  bearing  in  mind  the
    mandatory nature of paragraph 321A as opposed to paragraph 321.

35. Mr Armstrong is correct in saying that the only  basis  for  cancelling
    the ETS certificate was fraud, but that was a decision  undertaken  not
    by the respondent, but by ETS.  If the appellant had any remedy in that
    regard, it was against  ETS  in  contract  or  tort,  not  against  the
    respondent.  I find  that  having  been  made  aware  of  an  extensive
    fraudulent operation and having been made aware that  ETS  had  decided
    for their own reasons, to cancel the appellant's language  certificate,
    that was such a change in the appellant's circumstances since leave was
    given  to  justify  cancellation  at  port.   Having  said  that,   the
    respondent went further. She did not immediately cancel the appellant's
    leave.  The appellant was interviewed at port, not once but  twice  and
    it was only after the second interview that her leave was cancelled.

36. Mr Armstrong would  have  me  accept  that  the  circumstances  of  the
    cancellation of the appellant's leave were conspicuously unfair and  an
    abuse of power which I do not accept on the evidence before me.  In  my
    view, the respondent was entitled to rely upon the ETS cancellation and
    make no further enquiry. Nevertheless, the respondent went further. The
    respondent did not accept the deception  assessment  of  the  appellant
    provided  by  ETS  at  face  value  but  twice  interviewed   her   and
    subsequently gave reasons for her  decision  in  the  letter  dated  30
    October 2014.

37. It might be that the judge did not  find  fraud  on  the  part  of  the
    appellant but I do not accept as a corollary that she erred in  failing
    to properly apply the threshold under  Rule  321A(1).   The  respondent
    cancelled the appellant's entry clearance because ETS had cancelled her
    certificate. It is not correct that the appellant had no remedy against
    ETS as Mr Armstrong submits.  The appellant had a remedy and still  has
    a remedy in contract and tort against ETS. In my  view,  there  was  no
    requirement on the respondent to prove fraud individually  against  the
    appellant.  It was in my view sufficient that a wide  scale  fraud  had
    been revealed, that ETS had carried out an investigation and  that  ETS
    had chosen to cancel the appellant's certificate leading to the  change
    in her circumstances which resulted in the  respondent  cancelling  her
    leave.

38. I do not accept Mr Armstrong's submission that there was no  change  of
    circumstances in any event because if the test certificate was invalid,
    it was invalid at the outset  and  so  nothing  had  changed.  See  the
    grounds at [21]. My attention was drawn  to  the  decision  of  another
    judge but the decision was not put before  me,  nor  did  Mr  Armstrong
    explain the facts of that appeal upon which the decision was based. The
    change of circumstances in the present appeal took effect  in  my  view
    only when the appellant's certificate was cancelled by ETS.

39. The respondent has never acted  to  deny  the  appellant  an  effective
    remedy in respect of a finding made  by  ETS.   On  the  contrary,  the
    appellant has chosen not to pursue a remedy against ETS.  That  clearly
    must be a matter for her.

40. Mr Armstrong said that there was no justification for the  respondent's
    interference in the appellant's private life and the  judge  failed  to
    weigh the issues, but that is to disregard what the judge had to say at
    [34]-[41] of her decision.  She acknowledged that proof  of  fraud  had
    not been made out on the part of the appellant in terms of RP (proof of
    forgery) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00086.  The judge found the appellant did
    not meet the criteria of paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM.  She went on
    to consider Article 8 outside the Rules in terms of Razgar.   She  took
    into account the fact that the appellant had been in the United Kingdom
    for nine years  and  had  undertaken  a  number  of  further  education
    courses.  She took  into  account  the  number  of  witness  statements
    submitted as well as the relationship with Mr Rasalingham.   There  was
    no suggestion of family life with Mr Rasalingham.  The judge found  the
    appellant had social ties, however, their  nature  was  weak  and  they
    could be established in another country.  Further,  the  appellant  had
    established those ties when she only had temporary  immigration  status
    such that there could be no expectation that she would be permitted  to
    remain.  The judge took into account s.117A and B of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in weighing the public  interest.   The
    judge took into account that the appellant appeared to  be  financially
    independent and had a good level of English.  She  weighed  the  issues
    and found the  respondent's  interference  proportionate.   Whilst  the
    judge did not refer  to  Patel  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  741,  [57]  of  Lord
    Carnwath's judgment was relevant:

         "57.     It is important to  remember  that  Article  8  is  not  a
             general dispensing power.  It is to be distinguished from  the
             Secretary of State's  discretion  to  allow  leave  to  remain
             outside the Rules, which may be  unrelated  to  any  protected
             human right. The merits of a decision not to depart  from  the
             Rules are not reviewable on appeal: Section  86(6).   One  may
             sympathise with Sedley LJ's call in Pankina for 'common sense'
             in the application of the Rules to  graduates  who  have  been
             studying in the  UK  for  some  years  (see  para  47  above).
             However, such considerations  do  not  by  themselves  provide
             grounds of appeal under Article 8,  which  is  concerned  with
             private  or  family  life,  not  education   as   such.    The
             opportunity for a promising student to complete his course  in
             this country, however desirable in general terms,  is  not  in
             itself a right protected under Article 8."

41. In summary, I conclude that the decision does not  contain  a  material
    error of law, such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  should
    be set aside.

Decision

42. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law  and
    shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 28 July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
