
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/30204/2014
     ia/30205/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th March 2015                             |On 10th March 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                      MRS AYSHA NILOFER PUTHAN PURAYIL
                    MR SAYYED INTHIKHAB ALAM MARANGALATH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Trussler, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of India who sought leave to remain here as
    a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant and a dependent partner  on  18th  June
    2014.  Her application was refused and their subsequent appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissed by a panel in a decision  promulgated  on
    26th November 2014.

 2. The panel noted that it was accepted by the  solicitor  for  the  first
    Appellant that a letter from  a  legal  representative  confirming  the
    first  Appellant's  signature  had  not  been  provided.    The   panel
    considered whether the Secretary of State  should  have  contacted  the
    first Appellant under paragraph 245AA of the Rules and found that  this
    paragraph did not apply.  Accordingly  they  went  on  to  dismiss  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 3. The Grounds of application submitted that the  panel  fell  into  error
    particularly in that the judges had failed to consider that  the  first
    Appellant had submitted all the required documents but only  the  legal
    representative  letter  had   missing   the    specified   information.
    Accordingly paragraph 245AA should have been applied.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted for reasons given in the  grounds.   A
    Rule 24 notice was lodged and it was said that it was properly recorded
    that  the  Appellant's  representative  had  conceded  that  the  first
    Appellant had  not  provided  a  letter  from  a  legal  representative
    confirming the Appellant's signature.  Furthermore, the panel had  been
    correct to find  that  the  provisions  of  paragraph  245AA  were  not
    applicable and therefore the Respondent was not  required  to  consider
    exercising her discretion to contact the Appellant.

 5. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 6. Before me Mr Trussler accepted that there had been a missing  signature
    but this was a case which fell under paragraph 245AA (b) (iv)  in  that
    the document did not contain all the  specified  information.   In  the
    circumstances the decision should be set aside  and  a  re-hearing  set
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  In response to comments from Mr Melvin
    it was accepted that the missing document was not in existence  at  the
    time but there was an affidavit at page 86  of  the  bundle  which  did
    contain relevant information.  In all the circumstances, having  regard
    to all the other information  supplied,  the  decision  should  be  set
    aside.

 7. Mr Melvin relied on his Rule 24 response.  It was quite clear from  the
    determination that the first Appellant had not appreciated she  had  to
    provide confirmation of a signature from a legal representative.   That
    was tantamount to accepting that she could  not  meet  the  Immigration
    Rules and there had been an acknowledgement by  the  representative  at
    the time that the first Appellant had not provided a  letter  from  the
    legal representative confirming the first Appellant's  signature.   The
    panel had been correct  to  find  that  the  first  Appellant  had  not
    provided the specified documents and that the  necessary  document  was
    not in existence at the time of the application.  There was no error in
    law and the decision should stand.

 8. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 9. It is well-known that the Rules under  points-based  system  cases  are
    strict and prescriptive. There is no scope for judges to  be  satisfied
    by evidence not  of  a  nature  specified  in  the  rules.   There  is,
    unfortunately for the Appellants, no near-miss principle.

10. It was accepted before the panel and also  before  me  that  the  first
    Appellant had  not  provided  a  letter  from  a  legal  representative
    confirming the first Appellant's signature.  It is also  recorded  that
    the first Appellant had said in evidence that she had  not  appreciated
    she  had  to  provide  confirmation  of  her  signature  from  a  legal
    representative.

11. As Mr Trussler properly put it this was  a  case  where  the  Appellant
    hoped that the Secretary of State might exercise her  discretion  under
    paragraph 245AA.  The particular segment relied on is 245AA  (d)  (iv),
    namely "a document does not contain all of the specified  information".



12. It is not disputed that the panel were correct  to  conclude  that  the
    necessary document was not in existence at the time of the application.
     What that means is that if the Secretary of State had gone back to the
    first Appellant and pointed out the defect  in  the  document  that  no
    document in the right form would have been forthcoming and  it  may  be
    said that this was appreciated by the Secretary of State.  No doubt the
    Secretary of State could have exercised her discretion differently  but
    that is a very different matter from saying that she was obliged to  do
    so and it is  well-established  that  the  Tribunal  will  not  lightly
    interfere with the discretion of the Secretary  of  State  unless  that
    decision  is  Wednesbury  unreasonable.   There  was,   correctly,   no
    submission to that effect and given the acceptance of the fact that the
    document did not exist it is difficult to see  how  the  panel  can  be
    criticised for making the findings they did.

13. The only argument that could properly be placed before me was  the  one
    that was placed,  namely  that  the  Secretary  of  State  should  have
    reverted to the first Appellant and asked for the required document  to
    be lodged.  In the circumstances that the  document  did  not  exist  I
    cannot see that the Secretary of State  has  exercised  her  discretion
    wrongly, and certainly not in the sense that the panel  were  bound  to
    conclude that she had exercised her discretion in an unlawful way.   As
    has been said the Rules in this type of case are particularly demanding
    on Appellants. Absent any error by the panel the decision must stand.

Notice of Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

15. I do not set aside the decision.

16. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 10th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
