
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30804/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16th April 2014                              |On 1st May 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

      THE HON MR JUSTICE BEAN SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                             NANA ABENA KUMIWAA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Kanu, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by Miss Nana Kumiwaa  against  a  decision  of  Judge
    Michael Harris in the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 27th  February
    this year following a hearing at Hatton Cross  on  13th  February.   By
    that decision the judge  dismissed  Miss  Kumiwaa's  appeal  against  a
    decision of the Home Secretary contained in a notice of 3rd  July  2013
    to remove the Appellant as an overstayer.

 2. Her principal ground for appeal was that the judge  should  have  found
    that she was entitled to leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of  fourteen
    years' continuous residence, whether lawful  or  otherwise,  under  the
    then applicable long residence provisions of the  Rules.  The  specific
    Rule was paragraph 276B(1)(b).  The Appellant's case was in  fact  that
    she continuously resided in the UK since 1989 and if that was right she
    would  also  be  able  to  satisfy  paragraph  276ADE   following   the
    introduction of a twenty  year  residence  condition.   The  subsidiary
    ground of appeal is that if the judge was not satisfied  that  she  was
    entitled to leave to remain under the  long  residence  provisions,  he
    should have found in her favour under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. The Appellant's evidence in support of her claim  that  she  had  lived
    continuously in the  UK  since  1989  was  based  partly  on  her  oral
    evidence, partly on a written statement from her sister,  but  also  on
    photographs of her performing the role of a carer in uniform, sometimes
    in the company of an elderly person, and also on work records.   It  is
    obvious from this recital of what the evidence contained that the  work
    records were of vital importance.  After all, a photograph as such does
    not prove a date and the Appellant had to show not simply that she  had
    been working from time to time in the UK over 25 years but that she had
    continuous residence for a period for at least fourteen years.

 4. The work documents were largely in the name of Juliana  Quarshie.   The
    Appellant was provided by a then boyfriend with  a  National  Insurance
    number in this name.   There  was  no  dispute  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, since the Appellant admitted it,  that  she  had  obtained  a
    number of jobs using the false name of Juliana Quarshie. It is obvious,
    and Mr Kanu has accepted before us today, that  she  did  that  because
    Juliana Quarshie,  whoever  that  had  been,  was  somebody  apparently
    lawfully in this country and in  possession  of  a  National  Insurance
    number. Had the Appellant used her own name  she  would  have  had  the
    difficulty that she had no lawful right to be here during the 1990s and
    the early years of the present century, and almost  certainly  did  not
    have a National Insurance number in her own name either.

 5. There was an issue before the judge as  to  whether  the  signature  of
    Juliana Quarshie appearing on many for the documents submitted  by  the
    Appellant in support of her application for  leave  to  remain  was  so
    similar to the signature of the Appellant's sister, Mrs Puplampu, as to
    suggest that  the  Quarshie  signatures  were  the  signatures  of  Mrs
    Puplampu rather than of the Appellant.  The judge found at paragraph 14
    that he was not satisfied that that allegation in effect of forgery had
    been proved by the Home Office.  On the other hand, he did go on to say
    in paragraph 16 that there were  striking  similarities  in  appearance
    between  the  signatures  and  the  Appellant  had   not   provided   a
    satisfactory explanation for the similarity, which raised doubts  about
    the reliability of her claims.

 6. When he went on in paragraphs 17  to  21  to  consider  the  employment
    records, his findings were unequivocal.  The Appellant's oral  evidence
    before him was that she had never used any  national  insurance  number
    other than that obtained for her by her former boyfriend connected with
    the name of Juliana Quarshie,  the  number  being  NW491147D,  but  her
    application submitted to the Home Office included a form P45 in another
    name and with another number.  The name was Nana Kumiwaa,  the  leaving
    date  of  employment  given  was  10th  February  2006.   The  national
    insurance number was PW149475A and the Appellant in her evidence denied
    that she had ever lived at the  address  which  was  given  in  another
    documents relating to N Kumiwaa in the bundle, that  is  22  Brentfield
    Gardens, although she conceded that the deceased husband  of  her  aunt
    had lived at that address.

 7. The judge took into account, as he said at paragraph 18, that that  P45
    was submitted by the Appellant at the time of her application  for  ILR
    and was part  of  the  bundle  of  her  employment  record  before  the
    Tribunal.  Moreover, at paragraph 19 he referred to another document in
    the Appellant's bundle, in her assumed name of  Juliana  Quarshie,  but
    this time using a different national  insurance  number  from  the  one
    referred to elsewhere in the evidence, namely NM941147D.

 8. Putting all these  factors  together,  he  said  that  the  significant
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence undermined the  reliability
    of the documentary evidence she  produced;  and  he  also  had  serious
    doubts as to the reliability of her evidence about  her  activities  in
    the name of Quarshie.

 9. We have mentioned that the evidence  before  Judge  Harris  included  a
    written statement from the Appellant's sister.  The Appellant explained
    that Mrs Puplampu, her sister, was unwell  and  unable  to  attend  the
    hearing, but nevertheless Mr Kanu on her behalf and on her instructions
    proceeded with the appeal.  In the absence of Mrs Puplampu to be tested
    in cross-examination, with no convincing medical evidence   as  to  her
    illness and inability to attend the hearing, it is not surprising  that
    the judge found that the written statement  could  not  be  given  such
    weight as to help to remedy the deficiencies elsewhere in the evidence.

10. It was for the judge who saw and heard the Appellant give oral evidence
    and be cross-examined to make an assessment of her  reliability  having
    regard also to the documentary evidence before him.  He concluded  that
    he was not satisfied that the Appellant had demonstrated on the balance
    of probabilities that she had resided continuously  in  the  UK  for  a
    period of at least fourteen  years.   That  was  a  conclusion  he  was
    plainly entitled to reach and there is no  error  of  law  which  would
    entitle this Tribunal to interfere.  It follows that the  same  applies
    to reliance on the twenty year continuous residence rule.

11. The judge then went on to consider the alternative claim under  Article
    8 and after reference to the decisions of this Tribunal in Izuazu,  the
    House of Lords in Huang and the questions posed by Lord Bingham in  the
    House of Lords in Razgar, he said that he was prepared to  accept  that
    the Appellant had resided in the UK since at least June 2011 and so has
    established private life here.  It may be, although he  did  not  spell
    this out, that he was satisfied that the Appellant had also  lived  and
    worked here at least intermittently for various  periods  between  1989
    and June 2011. But in any event that could not make a real  difference.
    Almost anybody who has spent time in the UK has some Article 8  private
    life.  The significance of that private life or family  life  obviously
    varies from case to case.

12. This is a case in which the Appellant had no dependent children in this
    country, no spouse or long term partner in this country,  no  dependent
    elderly or sick parents or anything of that kind.  She has a sister  in
    this country but the case law clearly establishes that the presence  of
    an adult sibling in this country does not  begin  to  establish  a  bar
    under Article 8 to removal. It was simply not arguable before the First-
    tier Tribunal and is not arguable before us that once the Appellant had
    failed to establish the continuous  residence  which  would  bring  her
    within the Rules, any  sensible  assessment  of  proportionality  could
    result in the Appellant being granted leave to remain  because  of  her
    Article 8 rights when  set  against  the  need  to  maintain  effective
    immigration control.

13. Accordingly the judge's conclusion on this issue that the  decision  of
    the Respondent is  proportionate  and  in  accordance  with  Article  8
    discloses no error of law and  it  follows  that  the  appeal  must  be
    dismissed.






Signed                              Date

The Honourable Mr Justice Bean
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal


