
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/30956/2013
     IA/07196/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 October 2014                             |On 15 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS

                                   Between

                           temitope peter akerele
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jafferji, Counsel instructed by Fitzpatrick &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss S L Ong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, Mr Temitope Peter Akerele, a citizen of Nigeria who  was
    born on 7 February 1986, applied on 20 July 2012 for an  EAA  residence
    card as the spouse of Miss Jana Vanakova, a citizen of  Slovakia.   The
    application was refused on 1 November 2012.   The  Appellant's  ensuing
    appeal  was  heard  initially  by  Judge  Morgan,  who   remitted   the
    application  to  the  Respondent  for  reconsideration,  and  following
    reconsideration  on  7  April  2014  by  Judge  Courtney,  who   in   a
    determination of 13 April  2014  dismissed  it  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the Regulations").

2.   Permission to appeal having been  granted  on  14  May  2014  by  Judge
    Lambert, I heard the error of law  hearing  on  29  July  2014.   In  a
    determination of 30 July, promulgated on 1 August, 2014,  I  set  aside
    the determination of Judge Courtney and directed that the appeal be re-
    heard on all issues.

3.   The basis for my decision was that  the  judge  had  not  afforded  the
    parties an opportunity to address the  implications  of  Kareem  (Proxy
    marriages - EU law) Nigeria [2014]  UKUT  24  (IAC).   As  subsequently
    explained in TA and Others (Kareem explained)  Ghana  [2014]  UKUT  316
    (IAC), this provides that  in  cases  of  marriage  between  a  non-EEA
    national and an EEA national who is a  qualified  person  the  starting
    point is to decide whether the marriage was contracted according to the
    national law of the EEA country of which  the  qualified  person  is  a
    national, so that he marriage must always  be  examined  in  accordance
    with the laws of that member state.

4.   On 2 October 2014 the Appellant's  solicitors  wrote  to  the  Tribunal
    seeking to convert the hearing on 8  October  into  a  case  management
    review hearing and  thus  effectively  seeking  an  adjournment.   They
    submitted that, whilst it was for the Appellant  to  establish  whether
    the marriage was valid under the law of Slovakia, the Appellant did not
    have a reasoned refusal from the Respondent setting out the  issues  as
    to validity under Slovakian law.  Only if the Respondent  rejected  the
    application, with reasons, would the issues between  the  parties  have
    been identified, which fairness to the Appellant required.

5.   The duty judge refused this application, whilst  permitting  it  to  be
    raised again at the hearing.   Mr  Jafferji  renewed  the  application,
    which Miss Ong opposed.  I took into account both of their  submissions
    in rejecting the application for an effective adjournment.  I said that
    the issue was entirely clear, and had been  since  promulgation  of  my
    determination on 1  August  2014.   There  was  no  evidence  from  the
    Appellant's solicitors that they had sought  advice  upon  the  law  of
    Slovakia and how it might treat the marriage.  Had they submitted,  for
    example, that they had sought to do so,  for  which  they  needed  more
    time, I would have been receptive.  A decision by the  Respondent  with
    reasons  would  have  added  nothing  to  clarifying  the  issue.   The
    Appellant had not been in any way disadvantaged and the hearing  should
    proceed.

6.   I said that, subject to any submissions which  Mr  Jafferji  wished  to
    make, it seemed to me that the appeal could not succeed on the issue of
    the Appellant's status as a spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty
    rights as a qualified person.  The issues were  therefore  those  of  a
    durable relationship between the Appellant and the Sponsor and  whether
    the Sponsor was exercising treaty rights  as  a  qualified  person  and
    perhaps alternatively Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

7.   Mr Jafferji withdrew with the Appellant and another  gentleman  whom  I
    took to be his solicitor in order to take instructions.  He returned to
    say that the Appellant was no longer relying on the issue of a  durable
    relationship because the relationship was no longer durable, which  was
    why the Sponsor was not present to  give  evidence.   Mr  Jafferji  did
    however ask that I preserve the positive and  unchallenged  finding  of
    Judge Courtney that the Sponsor had been exercising treaty rights.

8.   The hearing therefore took the form of submissions, which I have  taken
    into account, after which I reserved my determination.

Determination

9.   As stated, Kareem at paragraphs 14 and 68(g) and TA hold that  in  such
    cases the starting point is to decide whether a marriage was contracted
    according to the  national  law  of  the  member  state  of  which  the
    qualified person is a national:

         "Whilst considering the issue of evidence of  marriage,  we  remind
         ourselves that the proof of  the  law  of  another  country  is  by
         evidence, including proof of  private  international  law  of  that
         other country.  Such  evidence  will  not  only  have  to  identify
         relevant legal provisions in the other  country  but  identify  how
         they apply in practice.  A lack of evidence of relevant foreign law
         will normally mean that the party with the  burden  of  proving  it
         will fail." (Kareem, paragraph 14).


         "It should  be  assumed  that,  without  independent  and  reliable
         evidence about the recognition of the marriage under  the  laws  of
         the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage  took  place,
         the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that  sufficient
         evidence has been provided  to  discharge  the  burden  of  proof."
         (Kareem, paragraph 68(g)).

         "...the determination whether there is a marital  relationship  for
         the purposes of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 must  always
         be examined in accordance with the laws of the  Member  State  from
         which the Union citizen obtains nationality." (TA, head note).

10.  There is no evidence about the law of Slovakia.  The  Appellant  cannot
    therefore discharge the  burden  of  showing  that  it  recognises  the
    marriage between him and the Sponsor as a marriage.

11.    Accepting   this,   Mr   Jafferji   made   alternative   submissions.
    Acknowledging that the marriage could not be shown to be recognised  as
    valid under the law of Slovakia and thus under European Union  law,  he
    submitted that on the evidence it was valid under Nigerian law and  was
    capable of being recognised as valid under English law.  Regulations  2
    and 7 did not serve to negate its validity and,  properly  interpreted,
    recognised it was valid.  The appeal should therefore be allowed  as  a
    matter of English law under the Regulations.

12.  The short answer to that submission, as Miss  Ong  submitted,  is  that
    Kareem and TA prescribe how such marriages are to be appraised  in  the
    context of English law including  the  Regulations  and  the  Citizens'
    Directive.  They do  not  leave  any  scope  for  such  an  alternative
    construction.  I accordingly find that, on the issue of the validity of
    the marriage, the appeal fails.

13.  The alternative basis for the appeal was initially that  of  a  durable
    relationship between the Appellant and Miss Vanakova as an EEA national
    exercising treaty rights as a qualified person in  the  capacity  of  a
    worker.  As stated, Mr Jafferji  said  that  the  relationship  was  no
    longer a durable one.  With a view to any further  application  by  the
    Appellant in the future, he invited me  to  preserve  the  unchallenged
    finding of Judge Courtney that at the date of the hearing  the  Sponsor
    had been a qualified person exercising treaty rights as a worker within
    the meaning of the Regulations.

14.  This finding is unchallenged because it was the  Appellant  who  sought
    permission to appeal  and  this  finding  was  in  his  favour.   Other
    findings which were challenged were the subject of his application  for
    permission to appeal.  The finding is now historic.  It remains open to
    the Appellant to argue in the future that  it  was  made  and  was  not
    subsequently challenged.  Following the error of law hearing I set  the
    determination aside and directed that the appeal  be  re-heard  on  all
    issues.  It is not appropriate to preserve one finding which may assist
    the Appellant whilst setting  aside  all  of  the  others.   I  am  not
    required to review Judge Courtney's finding on this subject, but nor do
    I preserve it alone out of a determination which I have  otherwise  set
    aside.

15.  Nor, for the same reasons, do I make any findings  about  the  validity
    of the marriage under Nigerian or, as a matter of private international
    law, English law.

16.  In the absence of any  removal  directions,  Mr  Jafferji  stated,  and
    asked me to record, that he was making no submissions under  Article  8
    of the 1950 Convention.  He said that it might be open to the Appellant
    to adduce arguments under Article 8 in any future application which  he
    might make.

17.  The appeal fails, and is dismissed.

Decision

18.  The previous determination contains an error of law, and has  been  set
    aside.



19.  The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.

Signed
    Dated: 15 October 2014




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis

