
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30381/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18th September 2017                    |On 09 October 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                Shahroz Rias
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling, instructed by Goodfellows Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  7th  August  1991.  He
    appeals against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  L  Rahman,
    dated 22nd December 2016, dismissing his appeal against the refusal  of
    a residence card as confirmation of a  right  of  residence  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

2.   Permission to appeal was sought on  the  grounds  that  the  judge  had
    erred in law in his assessment of whether the  Sponsor  was  exercising
    Treaty rights. The Appellant's legal representative  drew  the  judge's
    attention to a bank statement showing that money had been  paid  in  by
    Apex Trust, which  showed  that  the  Sponsor  was  supplying  cleaning
    services to them. The judge failed to take this evidence  into  account
    in concluding that she was not exercising Treaty rights.

3.   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page on  10th  July
    2017 on the basis that the  judge  had  made  a  mistake  of  fact,  at
    paragraph 47, in recording that  the  Appellant's  solicitor  confirmed
    there were no documents from any  clients  to  show  what  any  of  the
    payments related to.


The judge's decision

4.    At  paragraph  41  the  judge  stated:  "When  asked  again   by   her
    representatives when she had started working as a cleaner, the  sponsor
    replied 'when registered the company on 25th March 2015'.   When  asked
    whether she had done any cleaning work  before  the  company  had  been
    registered, the sponsor replied 'no'. When the question was repeated to
    the sponsor, she replied 'Yes. Did work'.  When asked what work she had
    done, she replied 'cleaning private houses' and confirmed that she  had
    been paid cash in hand.

5.   At paragraph 63 the judge concluded: "The sponsor claims that  she  has
    been exercising Treaty rights  in  the  UK  by  working  as  a  cleaner
    (whether as a self-employed person or  as  an  employee  i.e.  worker).
    Based upon her own evidence she either started working as a cleaner  in
    November 2014, August 2014, February 2015, October 2014 or  25th  March
    2015.  I find that the question of when she has started  working  as  a
    cleaner is a fundamental issue and goes to the core  of  her  claim  to
    have been exercising Treaty rights in the UK. The  discrepancy  in  the
    dates provided are significant and the appellant has failed to  provide
    any explanation for the discrepancy. Even when provided an  opportunity
    to  explain  the  discrepancy,  the  sponsor  avoided   answering   the
    question."


Submissions

6.   In submissions, Mr Spurling took issue with paragraphs  41  and  63  of
    the decision. He accepted that there were no letters from  any  of  the
    Sponsor's employers to show that she had provided cleaning services for
    them. However, there were invoices and there were entries in  her  bank
    statements.  There  were  accounts  from  her  company  and  there  was
    information and records from HMRC. Mr Spurling submitted that the judge
    had drawn inferences which were not open to  him.  There  was  evidence
    before the judge to show that, on the  balance  of  probabilities,  the
    Sponsor was working as a cleaner in the UK.
7.   Further, having had his attention drawn to the bank  statement  showing
    that payments had been made into  the  Appellant's  bank  account,  the
    judge failed to take this into account. Even though  the  invoices  did
    not match the payments in the account, there was  clear  evidence  that
    money was paid into the Sponsor's account by  a  person  named  on  the
    invoices and therefore she was providing cleaning services.

8.   The judge had effectively looked at the evidence from the wrong  angle.
    He was approaching the case as if there had been an allegation of fraud
    rather than looking at whether there was sufficient evidence  to  show,
    on balance, that the Sponsor had been working. The basis on  which  the
    judge concluded that the Sponsor was not exercising Treaty  rights  was
    flawed. He had failed to consider alternative conclusions and  had  not
    taken the evidence as a whole. He looked at each  individual  piece  of
    evidence and assessed it in isolation, rather than looking at  all  the
    evidence which was before him. He had also drawn inferences which  were
    not open to him on the evidence.  His  approach  to  the  decision  was
    legally flawed because the judge had failed to demonstrate that he  had
    looked at the evidence collectively. The bank  statement  entries  were
    sufficient to show that the Sponsor was being paid for her services  as
    a cleaner.

9.   Mr Tufan submitted that the judge might well have come to  a  different
    conclusion, but he was entitled to come to the conclusion he did on the
    evidence before him.  Mr Tufan submitted that the challenge made by  Mr
    Spurling was in effect a rationality challenge. The  invoices  did  not
    match the dates or the amounts in the bank statements. It was  open  to
    the Appellant  to  make  a  fresh  application  and  submit  sufficient
    evidence of the Sponsor's employment or  self-employment.  The  judge's
    decision was adequately reasoned and his conclusions were open to him.

10.  Mr Spurling submitted that this was a  challenge  to  process  and  the
    outcome was unreliable. The evidence should be reassessed  because  the
    judge had not taken all the evidence together. The judge had found that
    individually each piece of evidence did not show that the Appellant was
    working, but taken  together,  and  looking  at  the  totality  of  the
    evidence, the judge could well have reached a different conclusion.


Discussion and conclusions

11.  Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the judge  had  made
    an error of fact. I am not satisfied that is the case.  The  judge  was
    aware, from the bank statement which was drawn to his  attention,  that
    monies were paid into the Sponsor's account by Apex  Trust.  The  judge
    found that there was no evidence from Apex Trust to  confirm  that  the
    Appellant had been paid for her  cleaning  services.  It  was  accepted
    there was no evidence from any of the Sponsor's employers to show  that
    she had provided cleaning services.

12.  I am also not persuaded by Mr  Spurling's  submission  that  the  judge
    failed to look at the evidence as a whole. The judge assessed the  oral
    evidence of the Sponsor, her  witness  statement  and  the  documentary
    evidence. He found her evidence, of when she  started  working,  to  be
    unclear.

13.  There was certainly a lack of clarity as to when the Sponsor was  self-
    employed and when she was working for  ASR  Services  or  when  it  was
    actively trading as a business. There was insufficient evidence  before
    the judge to show that ASR Services was or is trading in the  Sponsor's
    name. The accounts were not audited and the judge gave  cogent  reasons
    for why he attached little weight to them and the evidence  from  HMRC.
    It is quite clear from paragraph 58 onwards that the  judge  looked  at
    all the evidence in the round. He referred to every piece  of  evidence
    upon which the Sponsor relied  and  gave  reasons  for  the  weight  he
    attached to that evidence.

14.  There was no error of law in the judge's approach to the  evidence.  He
    concluded that the Sponsor's evidence was vague and contradictory about
    when she was working and for whom. There was  no  documentary  evidence
    from her claimed employers. It  was  unclear  whether  the  Sponsor  is
    trading as ASR Services and when the business started actively trading.
    The accounts were not audited. The entries in the bank  statements  did
    not correspond to the invoices on either the amount paid or  the  date.
    It was accepted by Mr Spurling that  none  of  the  invoices  submitted
    correlated with any of the  entries  in  the  Sponsor's  personal  bank
    statement.

15.  I am not persuaded by Mr Spurling's submission that  the  judge  failed
    to take in to account evidence  or  that  he  failed  to  consider  the
    totality of the evidence. It is clear from the decision that the  judge
    took into account all the evidence that was before him. He did not fail
    to refer to any of the evidence and there was no mistake of  fact.   He
    did not have any evidence from any of the people who had  employed  the
    Sponsor to provide  cleaning  services.  He  had  her  bank  statements
    showing payments into her account. These did not correlate with any  of
    the invoices. The  accounts  of  ASR  Services  were  not  audited  and
    therefore he attached little weight to them and to the information from
    HMRC.

16.  The judge's findings were open to  him  on  the  evidence  before  him.
    There was no error of law in his decision of 22nd December 2016  and  I
    dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 6th October 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 6th October 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


