
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/30428/2014
     ia/30430/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 15th September 2015                |On 1st October 2015                   |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

             Dulanjali Chathurika Ramawickrama (FIRST APPELLANT)
                  Prasana Kumara Gamage (SECOND APPELLANT)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Jafar, Counsel instructed by Liyon Legal Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants are both citizens of Sri Lanka.  The first Appellant was
    born on 12th January 1990, and  the  second  Appellant,  her  dependent
    husband, on 28th September 1987.  The  first  Appellant  had  leave  to
    remain in the UK as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant until 30th August  2015.
    She and her husband visited Sri Lanka on holiday, and on  their  return
    to the UK on 30th July 2014 they were refused leave to enter and  their
    existing  leave  to  remain  was  cancelled  under  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 321(a) of HC 395.  The Appellants appealed that decision, and
    their appeals were heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Fowell
    (the Judge) on 2nd February 2015.  He decided to  dismiss  the  appeals
    under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds for the reasons
    given in his Decision dated 7th February 2015.  The  Appellants  sought
    leave to appeal that decision, and on 29th April 2015  such  permission
    was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. As the Judge explained in paragraph 2 of his Decision, this is  one  of
    the many cases arising out of  the  BBC  Panorama  programme  reporting
    widespread fraud at English language test  centres.   The  decision  to
    refuse the Appellant's leave to enter  and  to  cancel  their  existing
    leave was on the basis that the first Appellant's English language test
    at South Quay College in October 2013 had been taken by a proxy tester.



 4. The Judge dismissed the appeals as he was satisfied from  the  evidence
    before him that this was the case.

 5. At the hearing Mr Jafar argued that the  Judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    coming to that conclusion as  he  had  applied  the  wrong  burden  and
    standard of proof.  He referred to paragraph 28 of the  Decision  where
    the Judge wrote:

         "28. The burden of proof is in fact on the Appellant in a  case  of
             this sort, and  the  standard  of  proof  is  the  balance  of
             probabilities, that the Secretary of State made  an  error  in
             revoking her leave to remain."

    And again at paragraph 34:

         "... I conclude that she has not been able to prove to the required
         standard that the decision was in error."

 6. In response, Mr Whitwell acknowledged that there was such an  error  of
    law, but argued that it was not material.  He referred to the  evidence
    produced by the Respondent before the Judge.  There  were  two  generic
    statements describing  how  the  investigations  had  come  about,  and
    further statements from an Immigration Officer and  a  case  worker  at
    Heathrow Airport setting out the particular facts of this  case.   This
    evidence was sufficient to establish on a balance of probabilities that
    an invalid English language test had taken place even  if  the  correct
    standard and burden of proof had been applied.

 7. I find that there was a material error of law in the  decision  of  the
    Judge such that it must be set aside.  It is not  in  dispute  that  in
    deciding the factual issues in the case the  Judge  applied  the  wrong
    standard and burden of proof.  It was argued by Mr Whitwell  that  this
    error was not material, but I do not find that to be the  case.   There
    was evidence from the first Appellant disputing that a proxy tester had
    been used, and the Judge in his analysis was critical of  the  evidence
    relied upon by the Home Office.  Therefore it cannot be said  that  the
    appeal would have been dismissed regardless of the standard and  burden
    of proof applied by the Judge.

 8. I then decided that as the relevant findings of fact had to be  remade,
    the appeal would  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
    decision to be remade there under the provisions of Practice  Statement
    7.2(b).

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The decision will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction  and  I  see  no
reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton








