
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30135/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd September 2016               |On 27th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                  Mr Katio Claudmiro Mendonca Pereira Sanca
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal brought by Mr Katio Claudmiro Mendonca Pereira Sanca
    against the decision of Judge Lamb made following a hearing at Richmond
    on 22nd February 2016.

 2. The appellant is a Portuguese national.   On  10th  July  2014  he  was
    served with notice, by reference to Regulations 20A and 21B(2), that he
    was considered to be a person in respect of whom removal directions may
    be given because he had engaged in conduct  which  appeared  to  be  an
    attempt to enter into or assist another to enter  into  a  marriage  of
    convenience fraudulently, or assisting another to  obtain  a  right  to
    reside, because he had attempted to enter into a marriage with Tolulope
    Olubukola Ajayi.

 3. The issue before the judge was therefore whether the appellant  had  in
    fact engaged in such conduct.

 4. The judge assessed the evidence and then wrote as follows:

         "I consider the answers given by the appellant and by Ms  Ajayi  in
         the interviews with the Immigration Officers, which I have set out,
         to be reliable and accurate evidence of what they said at the time.
          I further find those answers to be  compelling  evidence  that  on
         10th July 2014 they were about to enter into a sham marriage.  Each
         of the factual matters in respect of  which  I  have  set  out  the
         answers  is  a  matter  which  anyone  in  a  genuine  and   loving
         relationship can reasonably be expected to recall.  Instead,  their
         answers were, in the main, in stark conflict."

    He then gave various  examples  of  the  inconsistencies.  He  reminded
    himself that the burden of proof lay with the respondent and  that  the
    standard of proof was the balance of probabilities.  He concluded  that
    the appellant's appeal should be dismissed.

 5. The appellant's representatives, Londoninium Solicitors, put in various
    grounds of  challenge  which  consist  of  generalised  allegations  of
    unfairness and unreasonableness, and stating that  there  was  evidence
    that they were in a genuine relationship.

 6. Permission to appeal was subsequently granted  by  Judge  Simpson,  who
    said that the decision was silent as to any relevant case  law.   There
    was no mention of the  Regulations  and  nothing  in  the  decision  to
    confirm or contradict the appellant's claim to have permanent residence
    in the UK.

 7. Before the hearing the Tribunal received a letter  from  the  appellant
    stating that he was not going to attend. He said that he would like  to
    make it clear that he  did  not  make  any  application  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and as far as he knows it was made  by  his  solicitors.   The
    solicitors also wrote saying that they were without instructions.

 8. Mr Wilding, who represented the respondent,   asked  that  the  judge's
    decision should stand.

 9. I conclude, first, that there is in fact no challenge  to  the  judge's
    decision because it is  clear  from  the  appellant  himself  that  the
    grounds were submitted to the Tribunal without instruction.  Second, in
    any event, the challenge is without any merit.  The judge  was  plainly
    entitled to come to the conclusions that he did for the  reasons  which
    he gave.  The observation in  the  grant  of  permission  to  permanent
    residence is a complete red herring, because there is no  reference  as
    to whether or not the appellant had permanent residence in the  grounds
    but even if he did, there is nothing  in  Regulation  21B  which  would
    prevent his removal.

10. For the above reasons the judge's decision will stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed[pic]                             Date 26 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor




