
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30125/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25 July 2017                          |On 07 August 2017                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                              MISS DO HYANG LEE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kadri (QC) instructed by Lexlaw Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant was born in 1985  and  is  a  national  of  South  Korea.
    According to the immigration history provided  by  the  respondent  the
    appellant entered the UK in 2003 to join her parents.  She had an entry
    clearance issued from 13 March 2003 until 13 August 2004.   It  is  the
    respondent's case that the appellant overstayed for three years without
    regularising her stay in the UK.  However she applied on 30  July  2007
    for leave to remain as a student which was granted from  5  March  2008
    until 31 October 2009.  An application for leave to remain on the basis
    of long residency made  on  2  November  2012  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Scott-Baker on 30 March 2015.  The judge noted  that  it
    was accepted at the hearing that the appellant could  not  come  within
    the terms of the Rules but  no  consideration  had  been  given  as  to
    whether the Secretary  of  State  had  complied  with  her  own  policy
    contained in the Long Residence Guidance valid from 11  November  2013.
    The appellant believed she had  been  included  in  her  father's  work
    permit but could produce no evidence of this.  There was  a  discretion
    to consider applications exceptionally and at the material time she had
    been aged 17 and a minor.  The  proportionality  of  the  decision  was
    questioned given that the Secretary of State had granted the  appellant
    a student visa on 30 July 2007  "which  would  have  implied  that  the
    respondent was aware of the appellant's own circumstances in the period
    2004 to 2007 and no issue had been taken that there was no valid  leave
    at that time."  Being satisfied  that  the  respondent  had  failed  to
    consider her discretion under the  policy,  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law and was remitted to the Secretary of  State  to
    consider the matter.

2.   A further decision was taken by the respondent on 20  August  2015  and
    the appellant brought an appeal against that decision.  The matter came
    before First-tier Judge  Kaler  on  4  August  2016  who  required  the
    respondent to issue a supplementary decision dealing with the  exercise
    of discretion among other directions.   Further  directions  were  made
    requiring the respondent to serve evidence supporting an allegation  of
    deception on the part of the appellant that had been made.

3.   The appellant's appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hussain
    on 27 February 2017.

4.   The judge noted that the Secretary of State had alleged  the  appellant
    had made false representations in her decision on 24  August  2015  but
    that despite directions  from  the  Tribunal  the  respondent  had  not
    produced the evidence to support the allegations.  It is  to  be  noted
    that there was no Presenting Officer at the hearing  before  First-tier
    Judge Hussain.  The judge concluded that the burden of proof was on the
    Secretary of State and the allegations had not been proved.

5.   The judge then turned to consider the claim that there  was  a  gap  in
    the  appellant's  long  residence.   He  noted  that  the  respondent's
    position was straightforward in that  there  had  been  a  gap  in  the
    continuity of the appellant's lawful residence between  the  expiry  of
    her initial leave on 13 August 2004 and  the  grant  of  leave  to  her
    subsequently on 5 March 2008.  The judge noted  that  it  was  accepted
    that there was such a gap in paragraph 17 of his determination.

6.   The judge then refers to the respondent's letter  of  13  January  2017
    which had been issued in response to the directions that had been made.
     The judge set out an extract from page 4  of  the  refusal  letter  as
    follows:

         "It has been decided that exercising discretion to your  client  is
         not appropriate because it was her responsibility to ensure she has
         valid leave in the UK when her entry clearance expired. Your client
         knew when she entered the UK that her entry clearance was  limited.
         Your client claims the reason her father left the  UK  was  because
         his employer had not renewed his work  permit  visa.   Your  client
         came to the UK as her father's dependent, she was  aware  that  her
         father no longer had any valid leave  and  has  not  produced  with
         anything to suggest that she had valid leave.  Your client's  claim
         that she was unaware her visa had expired is unsubstantiated.  When
         your client did eventually apply for further leave in the  UK,  she
         provided false information on the method of entry questionnaire  to
         the home office..."


    On the issue of the apparent gap in leave the judge took  into  account
    the following extract from the decision:


         "Your client has also raised that although she had a gap  in  leave
         from 13 August 2004 until 05 March 2008, she  was  still  issued  2
         student  visas  and  discretionary  leave.   The  only  application
         submitted when your client did not have valid leave was her student
         application submitted on 30 July 2007.  Our  records  confirm  that
         the case worker at the time was  aware  that  your  client  was  an
         overstayer, but this was not  an  application  which  required  the
         applicant not to be in breach of immigration laws."


7.   The judge then dealt  with  the  submission  made  by  the  appellant's
    Counsel and concluded his determination as follows:

         "21. Mr Blake sought to prove that the claim that  the  application
             made by the appellant did not require her not to be in  breach
             of the immigration rules to be wrong produced  an  extract  of
             the Immigration Rules from the  time.   It  does  appear  that
             paragraph 60(i)(d) does require an  applicant  to  have  valid
             leave in order to obtain an extension.


         22.  I have taken into account all of the submissions made  on  the
             appellant's behalf and I recall that they have been made  with
             serious enthusiasm.  However the plain fact remains  that  the
             appellant has accepted and in my view for good  reasons,  that
             there was a long period in her immigration  history  when  she
             was without any leave.  As such the continuity of  her  lawful
             residence was broken.


         23.  As is well known  the  tribunal  can  only  interfere  with  a
             decision taken under the immigration rules if  it  is  not  in
             accordance with it.  The tribunal can also  remit  a  decision
             for reconsideration if, as in this  case,  there  has  been  a
             failure to exercise a discretion outside  of  the  immigration
             rules.  In this case there clearly was a failure  to  exercise
             the discretion which is why no less than two  previous  judges
             required the Secretary of State to make a decision  exercising
             that discretion.  That discretion has now been exercised.  The
             tribunal can well understand that  the  appellant  is  unhappy
             with the outcome of the exercise of discretion but it  is  not
             within the  gift  of  this  tribunal  to  substitute  its  own
             decision for that of the Secretary of State.  This is because,
             to repeat the point, the exercise of the  discretion  in  this
             case was outside of the immigration  rules.   It  is  for  the
             Secretary of State to exercise that discretion which  she  has
             done.  It  is  not  within  the  powers  of  the  tribunal  to
             interfere with the outcome  of  that  exercise.   If,  as  the
             appellant appears to  contend,  that  the  outcome  is  either
             irrational  or  for  some  other  reason  unlawful,  then  any
             challenge must lie elsewhere.


         24.  In view of the above, I conclude that I do not find  that  the
             respondent's decision to refuse  the  appellant's  application
             for  leave  on  long  residence  grounds   contrary   to   the
             Immigration Rules.


         25.  I note that the  tribunal's  direction  of  15  February  2017
             records that the ground on which the appellant will  rely  was
             article 8.  However what is not clear is whether this reliance
             is within the immigration rules or outside.  For completeness,
             I have considered the appellant's claim under the  immigration
             rules as far as long residence is concerned.  In so far as the
             appellant is also able to rely  on  the  separate  immigration
             rule dealing with private life, that  needs  to  be  found  in
             paragraph 276ADE.  The sub-paragraph  that  the  appellant  is
             able to comes closest to is (vi) which requires  her  to  show
             that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   her
             integration into South Korea.  Given that  she  came  to  this
             country at the age of 17 when she would have  been  almost  an
             adult and given that she has resided in this country for  only
             13 years, I find it difficult to conclude that  the  appellant
             has not retained real ties with her home country.  Her parents
             still reside there.  She clearly has  linguistic  cultural  as
             well as national ties with Korea.  Whilst no doubt  she,  like
             anyone else, would find settling  in  a  little  difficult  to
             start with, there is no reason with a bit of support from  her
             family and friends she cannot re-integrate into Korean society
             again.


         26.  In so far as the appellant's claim under article 8 outside  of
             the immigration rules is concerned, as  is  well  established,
             any such consideration is  only  merited  if  the  appellant's
             circumstance is exceptional.  I have considered  the  evidence
             before me and do not find anything that suggests that  despite
             failing to satisfy the immigration rules, the appellant should
             nevertheless be granted leave outside of it."

8.   The judge accordingly dismissed the appeal.  There was  an  application
    for permission to appeal and permission to appeal was granted on 5 June
    2017  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   A  response  was  filed  by  the
    respondent on 20 June 2017.  It was submitted  that  the  grounds  were
    without merit.  The discretion  had  been  considered  in  the  refusal
    letter  and  there  were  no   exceptional   circumstances   warranting
    discretion being granted in the appellant's favour.  The appellant  had
    been an adult during the period where she had no leave.  The discretion
    was to be found in the Long Residence Policy Guidance and not under the
    Rules.  It was a fact that the appellant had been in the UK  unlawfully
    for three and a half years and it had not been disputed in the  grounds
    of appeal that the discretion had not been  exercised.   Reference  was
    made to AG (Policies; executive discretions; Tribunal's powers)  Kosovo
    [2007] UKAIT 00082 and paragraphs 4  and  5  of  the  head  note  which
    stated:

         "(4)     If the policy was taken into account and the claimant  can
             show that the terms of the policy and the facts  of  his  case
             are such that there was no option open to  the  decision-maker
             other than to grant him the remedy he seeks, his appeal should
             be allowed with a direction.


         (5)  But where within the terms of the policy the  benefit  to  the
             appellant depends on the exercise of a discretion outside  the
             Immigration Rules, the Tribunal has no power to substitute its
             own decision for that of the decision-maker."


9.   It was submitted that the  grounds  failed  to  identify  what  in  the
    policy could lead to the conclusion that the only option  open  to  the
    decision-maker was to grant  the  appellant  the  remedy  sought.   The
    Secretary of State had not waived the period of unlawfulness as argued.
     No unambiguous promise had been made to that effect and reference  was
    made to Jakhu v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (ETS:
    legitimate expectations) IJR [2015] UKUT 00693 (IAC).

10.  Reference was then made to the  Long  Residence  Policy  Guidance  v.15
    which had been in effect at  the  date  of  hearing  on  the  issue  of
    overstaying:

         "When refusing an application on the grounds  it  was  made  by  an
         applicant who had overstayed by more than 28 days from 24  November
         2016, you must consider any evidence of  exceptional  circumstances
         which prevented the applicant from applying  within  the  first  28
         days of overstaying.


         The threshold for what constitutes 'exceptional  circumstances'  is
         high,  but  could  include  delays  resulting  from  unexpected  or
         unforeseeable causes.  For example:


           .  serious  illness  which  meant   the   applicant   or   their
             representative was not able to submit the application in  time
             - this must be supported by appropriate medical documentation


           . travel or postal delays which meant  the  applicant  or  their
             representative was not able to submit the application in time


           . inability to provide necessary documents  -  this  would  only
             apply in exceptional or unavoidable circumstances  beyond  the
             applicant's control, for example:

         ?    it is the fault of the Home Office because it lost or  delayed
             returning travel documents


         ?    there is a delay because the applicant  cannot  replace  their
             documents quickly because  of  theft,  fire  or  flood  -  the
             applicant must send evidence of the date of loss and the  date
             replacement documents were sought


         ?    Any  decision  to  exercise  discretion  and  not  refuse  the
             application on these grounds must be authorised  by  a  senior
             caseworker at senior executive officer (SEO) grade or above.


         ?    When granting leave in these circumstances, the applicant must
             be granted leave outside the rules for the same  duration  and
             conditions that would have applied had they been granted leave
             under the rules."

11.  It  was  submitted  that  there  was  nothing  stopping  the  appellant
    regularising her stay for three and a half years  and  the  appeal  had
    been correctly dismissed.

12.  Mr Kadri submitted that the respondent had  known  that  the  appellant
    had overstayed and had not applied the Rules.  The Rules  required  her
    to have had leave in order to be granted leave to  remain.   Discretion
    had not been exercised, and in any event the  Secretary  of  State  had
    been asked to consider the case outside the Rules.  The allegations  of
    falsehood had not been made good.   The  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    considered the appellant's private life.  She had put  down  roots  and
    would suffer unjustifiably harsh consequences when returning  to  South
    Korea.  Reference was made to Nagre v Secretary of  State  [2013]  EWHC
    720 (Admin) and the submissions that had been made in paragraphs 31(ff)
    of the skeleton argument.

13.  The appellant had been granted leave to  remain  and  her  studies  and
    expertise would confer a public benefit.  She was a genuine student.

14.  In reply Mr Armstrong relied on  the  Secretary  of  State's  response.
    The appellant had been an adult when her leave expired in 2004 and  had
    taken no steps to regularise her  stay.   She  had  not  completed  ten
    years' residence and there were no  exceptional  circumstances.   There
    was not a discretion under the  Rules  and  the  First-tier  Judge  had
    correctly decided the matter in paragraph 23 of his determination.   In
    the light of  AG  and  Others  there  was  no  power  to  substitute  a
    discretion in this case.  Reference was  made  to  the  Long  Residence
    Policy Guidance as set  out  in  the  response,  although  I  was  also
    provided with a full copy of the Guidance published on  3  April  2017.
    In relation to Article 8  the  appellant  needed  to  establish  twenty
    years' residence and had only achieved fourteen and time spent studying
    would not weigh in the scales so far as  private  life  was  concerned.
    There was no material error of law.

15.  In reply Mr Kadri submitted that the  judge  had  been  wrong  to  find
    there was no jurisdiction to consider discretion outside the Rules.  If
    discretion had not been exercised properly then the judge should  quash
    it.   The  decision  of  AG  and  Others  supported  this  proposition.
    Reference was made to the findings of Judge Scott-Baker.  None of these
    matters had been taken into account.  Mr Kadri referred to the case  of
    Butt [2017] EWCA Civ 184.  As in that case, the appellant would provide
    a benefit to the UK.  I was referred  to  the  appeal  bundle  and  the
    references in paragraph 32 of  the  skeleton  argument  were  helpfully
    cross-referenced to the page numbers  in  the  appellant's  bundle.   I
    should also  mention  that  I  was  referred  to  file  copies  of  the
    respondent's case records and it was  confirmed  that  these  were  not
    before the First-tier Judge.

16.  Although the issue of a wasted costs order was raised  in  relation  to
    the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal, it was  accepted  after
    reflection I had no jurisdiction in the circumstances to deal  with  it
    and I say no more about that issue.

17.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge if it was materially flawed in law.

18.  At the hearing before the First-tier Judge it was  submitted  that  the
    appeal should be allowed on the basis that the Secretary of  State  had
    waived the period of overstay by granting leave on 5 March 2008.  While
    the Secretary of State had argued that the  application  the  appellant
    had then made did not require the applicant not  to  be  in  breach  of
    immigration laws, the judge accepted that the  Rules  had  required  an
    applicant to have valid leave in order to obtain an extension.

19.  I do not consider that any argument can be advanced to the effect  that
    the appellant's gap in residency was waived by the Secretary  of  State
    to the extent that it should somehow be overlooked when calculating the
    period of long residence.  It is clear from the case of Thebo  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer Islamabad [2013] EWHC 146 (Admin) that the  Secretary
    of State has power to exercise discretion in favour of a migrant "which
    is more favourable than a literal reading of  the  Rules  allows".   In
    other words it was open to the respondent to grant the appellant  leave
    in this case even though she did not have leave to remain as a  student
    and indeed was without leave at the material time.  Indeed, it  is  now
    accepted that the appellant was without leave for the relevant  period.
    It is said that the appellant was unaware of the position and  she  was
    young and this should be weighed in the balance.   Reference  was  also
    made to the admirable progress the appellant has made as a student  and
    to the glowing testimonials made  on  her  behalf  to  which  Mr  Kadri
    rightly drew my attention.  While it was said that  the  appellant  was
    unaware that she  did  not  have  leave,  it  is  pointed  out  by  the
    respondent that she was an adult when her leave expired and she is,  of
    course, an intelligent individual.

20.  The judge deals with the question of the gap in the  residence  pithily
    in paragraph 22 of his determination in observing that the  plain  fact
    remained that the appellant had accepted, and  in  his  view  for  good
    reasons, that there was a long period in her immigration  history  when
    she was without any leave.

21.  The Rules are clear as set out in paragraphs 276B to 276D in  requiring
    a period of continuous residence as defined.  In order to succeed under
    the Rules ten years' continuous lawful residence is  required  and  the
    judge was correct to conclude that the appellant had had a long  period
    in her immigration history when she was without any leave.   The  judge
    was  also  correct  to  conclude  that  the  respondent  had  exercised
    discretion.  The respondent  refers  to  the  Policy  Guidance  in  the
    response and I have set out the extract relied  upon  above.   As  made
    clear in the Guidance, the threshold as to what constitutes exceptional
    circumstances is high and it is clearly not the case,  and  it  is  not
    argued, that the appellant comes  within  the  circumstances  that  are
    described.  It is then argued that the judge failed to consider matters
    properly outside the Rules and reference is made to Nagre.

22.  The judge notes in paragraph 25 of his decision that it was not  clear,
    in relation to Article 8, whether reliance was placed within or outside
    the Rules.  The judge makes  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE  and  the
    requirement that there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration into South Korea and he deals with  that  issue
    satisfactorily in paragraph 25.  In paragraph 26 the  judge  identified
    no exceptional circumstances and his approach appears to be  consistent
    with what is said in Nagre and it was  not  necessary  for  him  to  go
    further than he did. Neither the  grounds  of  appeal  nor  the  points
    emphasised  by  Mr  Kadri  (including  reference  to  the   appellant's
    praiseworthy achievements and testimonials) raise any material error of
    law with his approach.

24.  The judge dealt with the issues putting  out  of  his  mind  the  false
    representation allegations.  He  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    respondent had exercised discretion and he did not arguably err in  law
    or misdirect himself in concluding as he did in the light of  what  the
    Tribunal decided in AG (Kosovo). I do  not  find  that  this  authority
    assists the appellant as Mr Kadri argued, and I accept the points  made
    by Mr Armstrong.

25.  I am not satisfied that the determination of the First-tier  Judge  was
    materially flawed in law and accordingly his decision stands.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.


Anonymity Direction

The First-tier Judge made no anonymity direction and I make none.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.






Signed                                  Date 3 August 2017


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal


