
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Number:
IA/30094/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
Heard  at  Field  House,  London                                 Decision  &
Reasons Promulgated
On the 4th  January  2016                                                 On
the 4th May 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

Between:
                               MRS AKSAR BIBI
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Chakmahjian (Counsel)
For the Respondent: Miss Savage (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Turquet dated the 6th May 2015, but promulgated on  the
      12th  May  2015,  dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal   against   the
      Respondent's  decision  to  issue  removal  directions   against   her
      following the Respondent's refusal to grant her  indefinite  Leave  to
      Remain as a dependent relative under paragraph 317 of the  Immigration
      Rules and after the refusal of her human rights claim.

Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan who was born on the  1st  July
      1952. On the 5th July 2012 she applied for indefinite Leave to  Remain
      as the dependent relative of her  son  and  sponsor  Mr  Khalil  Ahmed
      Sudhan under paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules. That  application
      was considered by the Respondent in a  decision  dated  the  1st  July
      2013, in which her application was refused under  paragraph  317,  but
      also her claim was considered in respect of her private life under the
      Immigration Rules, and consideration was given as to  whether  or  not
      her application should be allowed outside of the Rules. A decision  to
      remove the Appellant was made under Section  47  of  the  Immigration,
      Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


   3. The Appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier  Tribunal,  and
      that appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Coutts  in  a
      decision promulgated on the 4th March 2014, in which  he  allowed  the
      Appellant's  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules.  The   Respondent
      appealed that decision to the Upper Tribunal, and  that  decision  was
      set aside by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances on the 4th June 2014,
      and the  case  was  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
      rehearing. The matter  then  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Turquet on the 4th April 2015. He  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
      both under the Immigration Rules and on Human Rights grounds  for  the
      reasons set out within his decision.



   4. The Appellant sought to appeal against  that  decision  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal, and permission to appeal has been granted by Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Finch on the 18th September 2015, in which she  stated  that  it
      was arguable that the Judge  had  erred  in  law  in  considering  the
      question as to whether or not the Appellant enjoyed family  life  with
      her son and daughter for the purposes of Article 8.



   5. At the appeal hearing before me in the Upper Tribunal, Miss Savage  on
      behalf of the Respondent conceded  that  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Turquet did contain a material error  of  law.  It  was
      agreed with both advocates that the Appellant in this case had applied
      in country for a variation of her Leave. The Appellant had arrived  in
      the United Kingdom on the 2nd May 2011 on a visit visa  which  expired
      on the 22nd October 2012. Her application dated the 5th July 2012  was
      for a variation  of  that  Leave.  It  was  therefore  agreed  by  the
      representatives that Section 85 (4) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
      and Asylum Act 2002 applied and that in considering the appeal  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Turquet was able to consider  evidence  about  any
      matter which the Tribunal considered relevant to the substance of  the
      decision, including evidence which concerned a  matter  arising  after
      the date of the decision. It was therefore agreed with  the  advocates
      that First-tier Tribunal Judge Turquet, therefore had to consider  the
      circumstances if the Appellant were to be returned back to Pakistan as
      at the date of the appeal hearing on the 24th April 2015.


   6. However, Miss Savage on behalf of the Respondent  conceded  that  when
      considering  the  Appellant's  application  both  in  respect  of  the
      application under the Immigration Rules and in respect of  Article  8,
      that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  considered  the  circumstances
      appertaining at the time when the Appellant was still in  Pakistan  in
      2011, rather than the circumstances which she would face, were she  to
      be returned to Pakistan as at the date of the appeal  hearing  on  the
      24th April 2015. Although Miss Savage  stated  that  consideration  of
      past circumstances may well be relevant to the circumstances as at the
      date of the appeal, were the Appellant to be returned, she did concede
      that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had not gone  on  to  consider  the
      circumstances that would be faced by the  Appellant  were  she  to  be
      returned to Pakistan as at the date of the appeal hearing before him.



   7. Indeed, I find that concession was perfectly  properly  made  by  Miss
      Savage. When one considers the decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Turquet, the Judge  has  erred  in  law,  in  simply  considering  the
      circumstances that the Appellant  faced  as  to  whether  or  not  the
      Appellant was living alone outside of the United Kingdom in  the  most
      exceptional compassionate circumstances, at the time when she  was  in
      Pakistan in 2011, rather than considering whether or not she would  be
      living alone outside  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  most  exceptional
      compassionate circumstances as at  the  date  of  the  appeal  hearing
      before him on the 24th April 2015.



   8. Further, in considering whether or not family life existed between the
      Appellant and her sponsor, it  is  clear  again  that  the  Judge  has
      considered this based on the  circumstances  when  the  Appellant  was
      still in Pakistan in 2011, rather than the  circumstances  as  at  the
      date of the appeal hearing. At [33],  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      considered  the  living  accommodation  that  was  available  to   the
      Appellant while she was living in Pakistan,  rather  than  considering
      the living accommodation which would be available to her if  she  were
      to be returned. The Judge went on at [34] to  find  specifically  that
      "there is no medical evidence from Pakistan indicating  that  she  was
      unable to look after herself" and the Judge went on to state that "the
      current problem relates to her knee injury a few months  ago.  I  note
      that the consultant surgeon, who saw her, stated in his  letter  dated
      31st March 2015 that the Appellant denied any previous  knee  symptoms
      and pain now appeared to be the overriding feature rather instability.
      It was affecting her walking distance, which  had  been  approximately
      500  yards.  Her  pain  was  improving  and  she  was  taking  regular
      paracetamol. This has been a recent problem and I do not find  can  be
      taken into account when considering her  circumstances  in  Pakistan".
      Clearly, this was something that the Judge was able to  consider,  and
      the Judge was in error in a matter of law in finding that he could not
      take account of the change in the Appellant's medical condition.


   9. It was as a result of the Judge considering the  circumstances  as  at
      the wrong date, that led to the problems identified within the Grounds
      of Appeal, namely that the Judge had failed to  take  account  of  the
      recent  medical  evidence  and  had  focused  too  much  on  the  care
      previously provided by Arshad  Mahmood,  when  the  Appellant  was  in
      Pakistan, despite the fact that the evidence was that he had  gone  to
      Saudi Arabia in 2011. At [40] the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  stated
      specifically that  "she  has  not  satisfied  me  on  the  balance  of
      probabilities that she was living alone outside the United Kingdom  in
      the most exceptional compassionate  circumstances"  and  at  [42]  the
      Judge found that "she was not financially wholly or  mainly  dependent
      on her relative present and settled in the United Kingdom this clearly
      shows that the Judge has applied the wrong date when  considering  the
      appeal under the Immigration Rules, as conceded by Miss Savage.



  10. It is also perfectly clear  that  the  Judge  further  erred,  as  was
      conceded by Miss Savage, in respect of the date  of  consideration  of
      the Article 8 claim, in that again, the Judge  has  simply  considered
      the circumstances of the Appellant whilst  in  Pakistan,  rather  than
      considering whether  or  not  family  life  actually  existed  between
      herself and her son, when she was now living in the UK, as at the date
      of the appeal hearing and had simply taken account of  the  fact  that
      the sponsor and his sister would have been aware that  their  decision
      to leave Pakistan would mean  separation  from  their  mother  and  in
      finding that there was no evidence of more than normal emotional  ties
      between the son and parent took account of the fact that "the son took
      the decision to stay in a  country  far  away  from  his  mother.  The
      Appellant has lived in the same community all her life. I do not  find
      that family life has been established for the purpose of  Article  8".
      In this regard, the Judge again has clearly  failed  to  consider  the
      circumstances as at the date of the appeal hearing, at which time  the
      Appellant was living in the UK.


  11. In light of the concession made by Miss Savage, that the  decision  of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Turquet does contain  a  material  error  of
      law, which concession I wholly support and it is clear that the  Judge
      has considered the application both under the  Immigration  Rules  and
      outside of the Rules, on the basis of the  circumstances  appertaining
      at the wrong date, namely at a time when the Appellant  was  still  in
      Pakistan in 2011, rather than as at the date of the appeal hearing,  I
      do set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Turquet.



  12. As again quite properly conceded by  Miss  Savage  on  behalf  of  the
      Respondent, I do find that it is appropriate to remit the case back to
      the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing de  novo  given  that
      all of the Judge's findings I consider have  been  contaminated  as  a
      result of this error. The matter is therefore  remitted  back  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal for rehearing before any First-tier Tribunal Judge
      other than First-tier Tribunal Judge  Coutts  or  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Turquet.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Turquet does  contain  a  material
error of law and is set aside;
The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  rehearing  before
any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Coutts
or First-tier Tribunal Judge Turquet;
No anonymity order was made before the First-tier Tribunal,  no  such  order
was sought before me. No anonymity order was therefore made.

Signed
Dated 4th January 2016
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
