
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30554/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 17 July 2017                           |On 20 July 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                          Augustine Uzodimma Ngoka
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, of Counsel, instructed by Victory At
Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria born on  7  October  1971,  appeals
    with permission against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    M A Khan, who  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  2  November  2016
    dismissed his appeal against a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    refusing to grant him permanent residence in Britain.

   2.   The  appellant  entered  Britain  in  2002  and  began  an  arranged
    relationship with Miss  Carina  Isabel  Neto  Do  Carmo,  a  Portuguese
    national who was born in August 1984.  They married  in  December  2003
    after, the appellant asserts, they had lived together for a  year.   In
    March 2004 the appellant made an application for a  residence  card  to
    confirm his right of residence in Britain.  He  instructed  solicitors,
    Messrs Russell Stanley &  Co,  who  prepared  the  application.   On  7
    September 2004 the appellant was issued with a five year residence card
    until 6  September  2009,  his  wife  being  issued  with  a  residence
    certificate also valid for five years.

3.   In 2009 the appellant  made  an  application  for  permanent  residence
    here.  That  application  was  made  through  Ark  of  Hope  Consulting
    Solicitors of Hanover House,  St  Leonards-on-Sea,  East  Sussex.   The
    Secretary of  State  did  not  consider  that  application  which  also
    included tax certificates for the appellant's wife covering  the  years
    2004 to 2009, as well as the appellant's own P60s for those years.

4.   The appellant received no response from the Home Office and called  the
    Home Office and his solicitors whom he had instructed. New  solicitors,
    Victory At Law Solicitors continued to contact the Home Office  on  his
    behalf.  The appellant and his wife were divorced in January 2012.   In
    September 2015 the appellant was  informed  that  his  application  for
    permanent residence had been refused.  The reasons for refusal given by
    the Secretary of State stated that Ark of Hope Solicitors  had  applied
    for the EEA residence card which had been granted in September 2004 and
    that they had also applied on his behalf  for  permanent  residence  in
    September 2009.  It had come to light that Ark of Hope  Solicitors  had
    been involved in a scheme to  facilitate  a  marriage  of  convenience,
    mostly between Nigerian nationals and EEA nationals, and  had  provided
    packages of documents to support applications  under  EEA  Regulations.
    It was stated that the appellant's evidence fell within the  parameters
    of such a package and that was why his application had been put on hold
    while further investigations were carried out.  Moreover, the appellant
    had been divorced in January 2013.  It was stated that his  application
    had been considered under  the  provisions  for  a  retained  right  of
    residence - Regulation 10(5) of the 2006 EEA  Regulations  as  amended.
    It was also stated that in June 2015 the Sussex Immigration CE Team had
    carried out a visit to the house where the appellant was living and  it
    was discovered that he had moved out of the address some  months  prior
    to the visit, but an occupant of that address said  that  he  had  been
    living with a woman who did not fit the description of the  appellant's
    wife.  It was  therefore  stated  that  he  had  provided  insufficient
    evidence to show that he had lived for five years with his EEA national
    sponsor  while  they  were  exercising  Treaty  rights  and  that   the
    background of where he was married and his  chosen  representative  had
    serious doubts on the validity of the marriage  to  the  EEA  national,
    Carina  Isabel  Neto  Do  Carmo.  It  was  stated  that  therefore  his
    application fell  to  be  refused  under  Regulation  2  -  that  is  a
    Regulation dealing with marriages of convenience.

5.   It was also pointed out that the Home Office had been informed that  he
    had become divorced and it was therefore considered that the  appellant
    did not meet the requirements of the Rules.  It  was  stated  that  the
    appellant had provided no evidence that he was divorced  and  therefore
    the Secretary of State was unable to  consider  his  application  under
    Regulation 10(5).  It was also considered that the appellant could  not
    succeed under the Article 8 provisions of the Rules.

6.   In his determination Judge Khan  considered  that  there  were  various
    discrepancies in the evidence of the appellant and in paragraph 8 said:



     "It is for the appellant to establish on the civil standard  of  proof,
         the balance of probabilities that  he  meets  the  requirements  of
         Regulations 15(1)(b) 2 and 10(5) of the EEA Regulations 2006."

7.   The determination  is  brief  and  the  conclusions  of  the  judge  at
    paragraphs 23 onwards, the reasons for his decision are in three  short
    paragraphs.  The judge stated that the appellant's evidence was  vague.
    He had not known the employer for which his wife had worked or for  how
    long she had worked for a particular  employer  and  this  led  to  his
    conclusion therefore that the marriage was not genuine.

8.   Although  Mr  Tarlow  argued  that  the  decision  was  sustainable,  I
    consider that there are clear errors  of  law  therein.   Firstly,  the
    judge errs when he  states  that  the  burden  of  proof  lies  on  the
    appellant.  The reality is that it is for the  Secretary  of  State  to
    prove that the marriage was one of convenience.  That is clear from the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in the case of Collins Agho [2015] EWCA
    Civ 1198.  Secondly, having made that error the judge does not indicate
    in any way in which the Secretary of State might have  discharged  that
    burden of proof.  Indeed, the reality is that the  Secretary  of  State
    made factual errors in the decision.  It was not Ark of Hope Solicitors
    who  had  represented  the  appellant  when  he   made   the   marriage
    application.  Moreover, the visit to the appellant's house in 2015  was
    two years after the Secretary of  State  had  been  informed  that  the
    appellant was divorced.  No weight  can  therefore  be  placed  on  the
    evidence that at that stage he was  not  living  with  his  wife.   The
    Secretary of State I consider very clearly did not discharge the burden
    of proof upon her.  Moreover, the judge when considering  the  evidence
    does not appear to have taken into account the details of the  evidence
    that was put before the  Secretary  of  State  in  2009  of  where  the
    appellant and his wife had worked, nor does he seem to have taken  into
    account the fact that this was a marriage which had existed  for  eight
    years between 2004 and 2013, that the application had been made in 2009
    and that the appeal took place in 2016.  I consider that the judge  had
    nothing to on which to base his conclusion that the  marriage  was  not
    genuine, nor that it had not  subsisted  for  five  years.   These  are
    material errors of law and on that basis I set aside the  determination
    of Judge Khan.

9.   For the same reasons I remake the decision and allow this appeal.   The
    Secretary of State has not discharged the burden upon her to show  that
    this was a marriage of convenience.  Moreover, the  appellant  had  put
    forward evidence to show that the  marriage  was  subsisting  for  many
    years.  That evidence has not been unseated by anything put forward  by
    the Secretary of State.

10.  Having set aside the determination of the First-tier Judge I  therefore
    remake the decision and allow this appeal.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed   [pic]                      Date: 20 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

