
IAC-AH-SAR-V1
                                    [pic]


First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30214/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court    |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 18th March 2015                   |On 15th April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    JUDGE of the first-tier tribunal JUSS


                                   Between

                             MR MUHAMMAD SHERAZ
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Sarwar (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms L Curran (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born  on  12th  February
    1980.   He  appeals  under  the  provisions  of  Section  82   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against  the  decision  of
    the Respondent dated 3rd July 2013, to refuse  to  vary  leave  of  the
    Appellant on the basis of his relationship with  Ms  Sabina  Kausar,  a
    British citizen present and settled in the UK, the decision being  made
    outside the Immigration Rules.

 2. I had the bundle submitted for the Appellant.

 3. It is a feature of this case, that there has  been  a  previous  appeal
    before Judge Pirotta, which was promulgated on 10th March  2014,  which
    resulted in a successful appeal by  the  Appellant  whereby  the  Upper
    Tribunal, on 15th April 2014, observed how the judge had appeared to go
    behind a concession made by the Secretary of State, that the  Appellant
    was in a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  Ms  Sabina  Kausar,
    although at the time of the decision, not married to her.   That  grant
    of permission, led to an appeal before Judge Davey, who  accepted  that
    the Secretary of State had properly  withdrawn  any  "concession"  made
    with respect to  the  Appellant  being  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with the  Sponsor,  Sabina  Kausar.   Mr  Sarwar,  in  the
    hearing before me, accepted that this was  the  case,  and  no  further
    point was taken on this.

 4. In  giving  his  evidence,  the  Appellant,  adopted  his  two  witness
    statements.  These were dated 13th February 2014 (at pages 122  of  the
    first bundle) and dated 11th March  2015  (the  latest  bundle)  and  a
    correction was made with respect to the reference to the partner having
    passed away on account of a "lung cancer" being  changed  to  "a  liver
    cancer".  No further questions were asked by Mr Sarwar.

 5. In cross-examination, Ms Curran asked the Appellant why he  was  afraid
    to return back to his family in Peshawar.   He  explained  that  he  is
    afraid of his former family in the Punjab.  He was then asked about any
    problems with his own family in Peshawar.  He said that he had  married
    Ms Sabina Kausar contrary to their wishes and they  were  unhappy  with
    this and so he could not return back to the family  house  in  Peshawar
    where he had previously lived with his mother and sister.  He was asked
    whether his  wife,  Sabina  Kausar,  was  aware  that  his  status  was
    "precarious" in that he had come as a student and had then  stayed  on.
    He said that he could always apply  for  an  extension  as  a  student,
    although his wife was perfectly aware that his status was only that  of
    a student.  There was no re-examination.

 6. I made it plain to the Appellant that I do not accept his  evidence  in
    two respects.  I do not accept that he was under any threat  whatsoever
    from people  in  Punjab.   I  also  do  not  accept  that  he  had  any
    difficulties whatsoever with his own family in Peshawar on account that
    he had married against their wishes.  If  anything,  the  opposite  was
    likely to be the case, given that the marriage in  the  UK  would  have
    given the Appellant the benefit of being  able  to  remain  here,  with
    which his family would only have been only too happy.

 7. No further questions were asked by either side.

 8. The second witness was Ms  Sabina  Kausar.   She  adopted  her  witness
    statement which was signed before me on  18th  March  2015.   She  also
    amended her witness statement to say  that  the  death  of  the  former
    partner had occurred due to liver cancer.  No  further  questions  were
    asked in examination-in-chief.

 9. In cross-examination, the witness was asked about her son, Kashif Khan,
    who is presently 16 years of age, and the youngest of her two children,
    the two eldest now being at university.  She explained that she and the
    son had not been in touch with the former partner of Ms  Sabina  Kausar
    since 2002.  She was asked about the  emotional  problems  that  Kashif
    Khan had, following the witness's separation from  her  partner,  which
    was on account of being in an abusive relationship.  She explained that
    the last time he had any problems was between 2006 and 2011.  There had
    been no emotional problems since 2011.  She was  asked  about  her  own
    mother.  She confirmed that her own mother was a  British  citizen  and
    that she was a carer of her mother because her mother had problems.  Ms
    Curran then asked the witness whether she would go with  the  Appellant
    to Pakistan if he  had  to  go  there  in  order  to  make  a  spouse's
    application to re-enter.  She paused for  a  moment.   She  thought  it
    through.  Then she said that she would not go because her  son,  Kashif
    Khan, was presently doing GCSEs at  school,  being  aged  16,  and  his
    examinations were imminent, and her leaving him in  any  way  would  be
    disruptive to his studies.

10. In re-examination the witness was asked about the  allowance  that  she
    got and she explained that she had to fill in  forms  and  to  have  an
    assessment made before the carer's allowance was made.

11. The third witness was Kashif Khan.  He adopted his witness statement at
    pages 7 to 8 of the bundle, and the witness statement was signed before
    me on 18th March 2015.  There was no examination-in-chief.

12. In cross-examination the minor witness was asked about  his  uncles  in
    the UK.  He said that he sees them occasionally.  He has a  grandmother
    also whom he sees.  He was asked what would happen  if  his  stepfather
    had to return to Pakistan to  make  an  application,  so  that  he  was
    temporarily separated from him.  He explained that, "I would be worried
    because I am doing GCSEs and there would be  no-one  at  home  to  look
    after me and my mother".  There was no re-examination.

13. In her closing speech, Ms Curran relied upon the note  dated  6th  June
    2014, taken by Mr Smart,  a  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,
    during the hearing before Judge Davey  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  which
    confirmed that there was no concession made in relation  to  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship between the Appellant and Ms Sabina Kausar.
     Mr Sarwar again stated that there was no issue taken  in  relation  to
    this.  Otherwise, she relied upon the refusal  dated  25th  June  2013.
    She explained that at the time of the decision there  was  no  evidence
    that the parties were married.  The application was made on  the  basis
    of a partner's relationship, and there was no evidence  that  they  had
    been living  together  for  two  years,  and  so  the  application  was
    rejected.  Today they are married.  Nevertheless, it is not  enough  to
    be married.  It is not enough to be married to  show  that  one  has  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship.  This was still a matter that fell
    for me to be determined.

14. Even so, it could not be said that it was not reasonable to expect  the
    husband and wife to return to Pakistan if  the  husband  needed  to  go
    there in order to make an application to come back  into  the  country.
    This was only a temporary exercise.  Ms Curran began making submissions
    on the basis of paragraph 276ADE but Mr Sarwar again interjected to say
    that no issue was taken in relation to this.

15. She then moved on to a consideration of Section 117B of the  2014  Act,
    which refers to the fact that "little weight is to  be  given"  to  any
    family life developed when the status of the applicant is "precarious".
     She submitted that Ms Sabina Kausar knew that the  Appellant's  status
    was precarious.  If he had  to  go  to  Pakistan  this  would  only  be
    temporary.  She did not have to accompany him.  This was  a  matter  of
    choice for her.  The fact was that Article 8 was  a  "qualified  right"
    and one could not insist upon using Article 8 to remain in this country
    as a matter of choice.

16. As to the interests of Kashir Khan, the stepson, these had  been  taken
    into account but this does not mean that he has to go to  Pakistan,  or
    that his remaining in the UK will disrupt his Article  8  rights.   The
    arrangement would only be temporary.  He  had  a  grandmother  in  this
    country in any event.  He saw her on a regular basis.  He may have  had
    emotional problems in the past.  He does not have any now.  On balance,
    the considerations did not fall in favour of allowing the Appellant  to
    remain in the UK.  She asked me to dismiss the appeal.

17. For his part, Mr Sarwar relied upon his helpful skeleton argument.   He
    said that the primary route had been the "partner's route" on the basis
    of which the application had been made (addressed  at  page  2  of  the
    skeleton argument).  When the application was submitted they  were  not
    married.  This is uncontroversial.

18. However, if the Appellant was now married, there is no need to look  at
    "exceptional circumstances" and the only  question  was  whether  there
    were "insurmountable obstacles".  There were because Kashif Khan was  a
    British citizen and so was his mother.  In LD,  Mr  Justice  Blake  had
    made it clear that "very weighty reasons are needed  for  separating  a
    parent from a minor child".  This applied as much to his stepfather  as
    it did to his  mother.   It  was  clear  that  he  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship here with his stepfather and  his  mother.   It
    was clear that the Appellant had a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with Sabina Kausar.

19. Accordingly,  it  was  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  identify  an
    alternative care arrangement if  the  Appellant's  wife  had  to  leave
    Kashif Khan and go to Pakistan for the time that he had to be there  in
    order to make an application to re-enter.  If she did not go, then this
    would impact upon her relationship,  as  a  British  citizen,  with  Mr
    Sheraz, the Appellant.

20. Finally, he relied upon paragraph 117B(6) in that, once it was accepted
    that there was  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and the "qualifying child", then all  I  had  to  do  was  to
    conclude that it would not be reasonable to expect  a  British  citizen
    child, who had never been to Pakistan, to relocate there  in  order  to
    enjoy his Article 8 rights with his stepfather.

21. I have given careful consideration to all the documents before  me  and
    to the oral evidence and submissions, which are set out in  the  Record
    of Proceedings.

22. I find that the Appellant discharges the burden of proof that  is  upon
    him for the reasons that I now give.  First, I find that  it  is  plain
    that there  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and Ms Sabina Kausar.  I make this finding on  a  balance  of
    probabilities.  This is a case where  the  application  was  originally
    made on the basis that they were living together,  though  not  at  the
    time married.  Since then, they  have  been  married,  and  are  living
    together, and there  is  nothing  untoward  about  their  relationship.
    Second, Ms Sabina Kausar, has explained that she would not leave the UK
    to go to be with her husband  in  Pakistan  while  he  returned  there.
    However, she is plainly worried.  She has also said that  there  is  no
    certainty in his being able to re-enter the country  as  she  would  be
    left without her  husband.   Third,  and  even  more  importantly,  the
    evidence from Master Kashif Khan, a British citizen child in the UK, is
    that not only would he not himself be prepared to go to Pakistan  given
    that he has never lived there, but that he would  be  troubled  by  the
    fact that, two months away from his GSCE exams,  his  mother  would  be
    left without a head of the house in the UK.  The line  of  cases  under
    Section 55 of the BCIA, make it quite clear,  that  not  only  are  the
    interests of the child a primary consideration, but that  active  steps
    must be taken to ensure that these interests  are  properly  identified
    and observed.

23. In circumstances  where  the  public  interest  considerations  do  not
    militate against the Appellant's removal in any way, it  is  noteworthy
    that paragraph 117B(6) makes it clear that

         "The public interest does not require the  person's  removal  where
         ... ...

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom".

24.  I have no hesitation in finding that  the  child,  Kashif  Khan,  is  a
    "qualifying child" and that someone who  has  had  a  troubled  earlier
    life, and has only now managed to come to terms  with  it  since  2011,
    that it would not be reasonable to  expect  him  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  He is two months away from  his  GCSE  exams.   He  is  doing
    relatively well.  The risk of disruption to his life, as made evidently
    clear in his own evidence  before  me,  is  something  that  cannot  be
    ignored.

25.  In Hayat [2012] the court made it clear that

         "Once there is an interference with family  or  private  life,  the
         decision maker must justify the interference.  Where what is relied
         upon is an insistence on complying with the formal procedures  that
         may be insufficient to  justify  even  a  temporary  disruption  to
         family life".

    I find  that  this  applies  here.   Mr  Sarwar  has  represented  this
    Appellant with his customary charm and efficiency and the  points  have
    been well taken in his skeleton argument  such  that  I  am  driven  to
    conclude that this appeal must, in all the circumstances of this  case,
    be allowed.

24. On the totality of the evidence before me, I find  that  the  Appellant
    has discharged the burden  of  proof  and  the  reasons  given  by  the
    Respondent do not justify the  refusal.   Therefore,  the  Respondent's
    decision  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  the  applicable
    Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

25. The appeal is allowed.

26. No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date

Judge Juss
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal        11th April 2015




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award of the whole amount that has been  paid
or is payable and hereby do so.



Signed        Date

Judge Juss
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal    11th April 2015

