
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/30976/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 23 March 2016                       |On 12 May 2016                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                  IMRAN ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr G Brown counsel instructed by Arshad & Co Solicitors

For the Respondent: Ms Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Manuel promulgated on 16 February 2015 which dismissed the
   Appellant's appeal on all grounds.
Background


4. The Appellant was born on 23 April 1978 and is a national of Pakistan.
5. The Appellant entered the UK on 5 April 2009 with entry clearance as  the
   dependent partner of a Tier 1 Migrant namely his  spouse  Anshad  Rafique
   Khan. His wife and two children entered the UK at the same  time  and  at
   the date of hearing the children were aged 11 (DOB 16.1.2003) and 12 (DOB
   25.2.2002). Further leave was granted in that capacity until 19 May 2014.
6. The Appellants wife and two children were  granted  Indefinite  Leave  to
   Remain on 18.3.2014.
7. On 17 May 2014 the Appellant applied for leave to remain on the basis  of
   his family and private life.
8.  On  17  July  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:
9. The Appellant could not succeed under Appendix  FM  because  he  did  not
   meet the requirements as he was  a  persistent  offender;  he  could  not
   benefit from EX.1 as his partner was not at  the  time  of  the  decision
   settled in the UK and his children had not lived in the UK for 7 years at
   the date of the decision and there were no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
   them relocating. He  did  not  meet  the  private  life  requirements  of
   276ADE(1) and there were no circumstances warranting  a  grant  of  leave
   outside the Rules
10. In September 2014 the Appellant and his wife had a third child.


The Judge's Decision
11. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Manuel ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the  Respondent's
   decision.
12. Grounds of appeal were lodged which argued that :
   a) The Judges approach to section 117B of the 2002 Act was flawed in that
      she failed to demonstrate in her assessment that she had regard to the
      factors set out in the provision.
   b) The Judge failed to take into account that  the  Appellants  wife  and
      children were British (paragraph 21)
   c) The Judge attached a disproportionate weight to the offending  of  the
      Appellant.
13.  On 17 April 2015 Designated Judge Campbell gave permission to appeal.
Rule 24 Notice
14. In a Rule 24 response the Respondent  argued  that  the  Judge  directed
   herself accordingly; it was not raised at  the  hearing  that  the  third
   child was a British citizen and even if it  had  been  it  would  not  be
   unreasonable for him to return to Pakistan with his  parents;  the  Judge
   was not required to particularise the individual sections of section 117B
   of the 2002 Act; when read as a whole the decision takes into account the
   relationship between the Appellant and his children and  whether  it  was
   reasonable for them to return to Pakistan.

15. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Brown  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that:

   a) There is no definition of 'persistent offender  '  in  the  Rules  and
      therefore it cannot simply mean that the applicant has committed  more
      than one offence. The Judge made no finding of the basis on which  she
      determined that the Appellant was a persistent offendr.

   b) At the time of the hearing the third child was  a  'qualifying  child'
      for the purpose of section 117B(1)6 in that she was a British  citizen
      by virtue of the  mothers  settled  status.  This  provision  was  not
      engaged with.

16. On behalf of the Respondent  Ms  Johnstone submitted that:

   a) The Judge made clear findings about criminality in paragraph 9 of  the
      decision.

   b) The Judge did not ignore the position of the third child but she  does
      consider that in paragraph 27.

Finding on Material Error

17. Having heard those  submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no errors of law that were material to the outcome  of  the
   decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal against a refusal of leave  to
   remain on the basis of family and private life.

18. In relation to the submission that the Judge erred in her assessment  of
   whether the Appellant,  who  had  two  sets  of  offences  identified  at
   paragraph 7 of the decision, was a persistent  offender  I  am  satisfied
   that the Judge was entitled  to give the words their normal  meaning  and
   conclude that he was a persistent offender in that he had committed  more
   than one offence. This view has since the date of hearing been reinforced
   by the decision in Chege("is a persistent offender")  [2016]  UKUT  00187
   (IAC) that a persistent offender for the purpose of the Rules is  someone
   who keeps breaking the law. I note the argument in the grounds  that  the
   Judge gave too much weight to the offending but that was a matter for her
   and she gives clear well reasoned explanations for  the  conclusions  she
   reached about the offending at paragraphs 15-23 of her decision.

19. I am also satisfied that there is no merit  in  the  argument  that  the
   Judge gave too much weight to the Appellants offending is without  merit.
   The assessment f weight is  a  matter  for  her  and  therefore  she  was
   entitled to note that the second set of offences (which were of a similar
   nature) were committed within  14  months  of  his  last  conviction  and
   themselves  involved  the  breach  of   a   court   order(driving   while
   disqualified).

20. I have considered the argument  that  the  Judge  failed  to  take  into
   account that the third child was a qualifying child for  the  purpose  of
   paragraph 117(1)6.  I have read the decision carefully together with  the
   record of proceedings and the bundle of documents. I note that there  was
   no skeleton argument before the Judge. While I accept that this  argument
   is advanced in  the  grounds  of  appeal  drafted  by  Ms  Pickering  who
   represented the Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal there is nothing
   to show that it was an argument advanced before the Judge: if the case is
   to be argued differently now the Judge is not in error.

21. However even if I were to accept that the  Judge  should  have  accepted
   that the third child was automatically entitled to British citizenship as
   the child of a person with settled status the Judge was still obliged  to
   consider whether it was 'reasonable' for her to return to  Pakistan  with
   her family under section 117(1)6: the fact  of  her  British  citizenship
   alone was not determinative of whether it was reasonable  for  a  British
   Citizen child to leave the UK . The Judge was required  to  carry  out  a
   fact specific analysis against a background history  which  included  the
   fact that neither at the time of the  application  nor  at  the  time  of
   hearing had any of the children been in the UK for 7 years in determining
   whether it was reasonable for this family to return to Pakistan and  this
   is what she did at paragraphs 24-37 of her  decision  stating  explicitly
   that it was reasonable for the family to return together to Pakistan .

22. Having decided that  section  117B(1)6  did  not  apply  the  Judge  was
   required to consider the other provisions of  s117B  having  acknowledged
   this herself in her decision earlier. I am satisfied that the failure  of
   the Judge to make specific reference to the other provisions  of  section
   117B has not been identified as making a difference  to  the  outcome  in
   this case particularly given that an appellant  can  obtain  no  positive
   right to a grant of leave  to  remain  from  either  s117B  (2)  or  (3),
   whatever the degree of his fluency in English, or  the  strength  of  his
   financial resources.

23. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

24. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

25. The appeal is dismissed.
Signed                                                              Date
9.5.2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
