
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30023/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th July 2017                             |On 20 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR HASSAN AKHTER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr T Wilding (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:     Mr L Lourdes (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary  of  State  in
    relation to a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Oliver)
    promulgated  on  14th  November     2016  in  which  he   allowed   the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision, taken  on
    20th July 2015, to refuse his application for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student on the basis that the Secretary of  State  had  information  to
    suggest the Appellant had used a proxy to take an English language test
    in October 2012.

 2. The Judge, considered the Upper Tribunal case of  SM  &  Qadir  (ETS  -
    Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 and found that the  generic
    evidence of Rebecca Collings, Peter Millington  and  Ms  Singh,  relied
    upon by the Secretary of State did not meet the burden of proof on  the
    Secretary of State to establish fraud and allowed the appeal.

 3. Since then the Court of Appeal have  decided  in  SM  &  Qadir  (ETS  -
    Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016]  EWCA  Civ  1167  that  the  generic
    evidence is sufficient to meet the evidential burden on  the  Secretary
    of State to raise a doubt such that the evidential burden shifts to the
    Appellant to proffer an innocent  explanation.   If  he  can  then  the
    Secretary of State may be unable to meet the legal burden of proof.

 4. The Judge in this case considered only the burden on the  Secretary  of
    State, did not consider the evidential burden on the Appellant and  did
    not consider the explanation and decide whether an innocent explanation
    had been provided. I do not criticise the First-tier Tribunal as at the
    date of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  the  Upper  Tribunal  case
    remained good law.  However we have  been  informed  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal what the correct law is and so the Judge made a  material  error
    of law in allowing the appeal on the basis he did.

 5. That being the case the First-tier Tribunal's decision  is  set  aside.
    Although I was prepared to redecide the appeal, the Appellant was taken
    ill and so it was agreed by both representatives that  the  appropriate
    procedure would be to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing
    de novo.

Notice of Decision

    The appeal is allowed to the extent that the appeal is remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.





Signed                              Date 19th July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

