
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/30365/2015
                                                               IA/30366/2015
                                                               IA/30367/2015
                                                               IA/30368/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th September 2017                        |On 26th September 2017        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         Mr I.F. (FIRST RESPONDENT)
                        Mrs H.F. (SECOND RESPONDENT)
                       MASTER S.F.1 (THIRD RESPONDENT)
                      MASTER S.F.2 (FOURTH RESPONDENT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr S Ahmed, Counsel


Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction is made on the basis that two of the Appellants are
minor children and the decision concerns their welfare.
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State for the Home Department appeals with  permission
    against the decision of a First-tier Tribunal (Judge Stewart)  allowing
    the appeals of Mr I.F., Mrs H.F., Master S.F.1 and Master S.F.2 against
    the refusal of the Secretary of State to grant them leave to remain  in
    the UK.  The date of the refusal decision is 25th August 2015.

 2. For the sake of clarity throughout this decision I shall refer  to  the
    Secretary of State as "the Respondent", and to I.F.,  H.F.,  S.F.1  and
    S.F.2 as "the Appellants".  This reflects  their  respective  positions
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 3. The Appellants are a family of four.  Mr I.F. and Mrs H.F. are  husband
    and wife; S.F.1 and S.F.2 are  their  dependent  minor  children.   The
    family are all citizens of Pakistan.  S.F.1 was born on  [  ]  2004  in
    Pakistan and entered the UK in March 2009 accompanied  by  his  mother.
    Both  have  remained  here  since  that  time.   By  the  time  of  the
    Respondent's refusal, S.F.1 had lived in the United Kingdom just  short
    of seven years.  By the time  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal however, it was accepted that S.F.1 had lived here over  seven
    years and thus became a qualifying child for the  purposes  of  Section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. Likewise S.F.2, who was born in the United Kingdom in 2010,  also  fell
    short  of  the  seven  year  qualifying  period  at  the  date  of  the
    Respondent's refusal but it is correct to say that by the time  of  the
    hearing before me S.F.2 also has now lived in the United  Kingdom  over
    seven years.

 5. I.F. entered the United Kingdom on  25th  June  2005  and  applied  for
    asylum.  That application was refused.  However he remained  here,  and
    in 2009 his wife and child S.F.1 entered the United Kingdom lawfully on
    visit visas.  At the time of Mrs. H.F.'s entry, S.F.1 was  5  years  of
    age, having been born in Pakistan.

 6. Mrs H.F. remained in the UK outwith the terms of her visa entry  as  an
    overstayer, and in 2010 S.F.2 was born in the UK  and  accordingly  has
    lived all his life here.

 7. In June 2012, Mr I.F. applied for leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  under
    family and private life, with his wife  and  children  being  named  as
    dependants.  That application was refused on 6th February 2013 with  no
    right of appeal.  Mr  I.F.  asked  the  Respondent  to  reconsider  her
    decision.  She refused to do so on 10th April 2014.  This  led  to  all
    four Appellants commencing judicial  review  proceedings  on  1st  July
    2014.  That action was compromised on 9th June 2015 and by  consent  it
    was agreed that the Secretary of State would reconsider the Appellants'
    application and if  the  reconsideration  resulted  in  the  Respondent
    maintaining her refusal, the Appellants would have a right of appeal.

 8. Suffice to say the Secretary of State did reconsider, but announced her
    decision to maintain her refusal of the applications by  letter,  dated
    25th August 2015.  It is that refusal which  forms  the  basis  of  the
    present appeals.

FtT Hearing

 9. When the Appellants' appeals came  before  the  FtT,  the  judge  heard
    evidence from Mr I.F. and Mrs H.F.  The judge  noted  their  background
    history and then turned his attention to the third Appellant, S.F.1.

10. In [20] to [23] the judge set out what he called the "pros" and  "cons"
    of what amounted to the best interests of S.F.1 remaining in the United
    Kingdom.  He judged that it would not be reasonable to expect S.F.1  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

11. Thereafter, the judge said the following at [25]:

         "As I see it, the case turns on the interference with the rights of
         the Appellants to a private and family life under Article 8 of  the
         European Convention on Human Rights."

    He then set out the five stage test in Razgar.   Following  that  self-
    direction the judge simply said at [26] the following:

         "I am satisfied that the proposed removal of  the  third  appellant
         would be an interference with his right to a private life which has
         consequences  of  such  gravity  as  to  engage  Article  8.    The
         interference is in accordance with  the  law  and  necessary  in  a
         democratic society in the interests  of  maintaining  an  effective
         immigration controls  (sic).   However  such  interference  is  not
         proportionate to that legitimate public end."

    He then allowed the appeals of all Appellants on human rights  grounds.



12. Permission to appeal the FtT decision was granted by DJ  Murray.   Thus
    the matter comes before me to decide whether the decision  of  the  FtT
    discloses such error of law that it must be set aside and re-made.

Error of Law Hearing

13. I heard submissions from Ms Willocks-Briscoe for the Respondent and  Mr
    Ahmed for the Appellants.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that the issue
    before me is a narrow one.  A proper reading  of  the  decision  showed
    that the FtT Judge had erred in that he had treated the best  interests
    of the eldest child, S.F.1, as paramount. He had therefore applied  the
    wrong test.  In other words, the judge had not done that which  he  was
    tasked to do, which was to assess the  family  unit  as  a  whole;  the
    starting point being the best interests  of  S.F.1.   The  test  to  be
    applied was whether it would be reasonable to expect S.F.1 (and  S.F.2)
    to relocate to Pakistan with their parents.  A holistic approach to the
    facts must be taken, bearing in mind that both parents were present  in
    the UK unlawfully, their father being a failed asylum seeker and  their
    mother being an overstayer.

14. The FtT had taken no account of the fact that the family  were  reliant
    upon state schools for the children's education and  reliant  upon  the
    NHS.

15. She submitted that the decision should be set aside for material  error
    and re-made.

16. Mr Ahmed on behalf of the Appellants sought to defend the decision.  He
    pointed out that the FtT had kept in mind the fact that  S.F.1  was  in
    education.  He referred to [17].  He agreed that the point in issue  is
    a narrow one - that is to say the reasonableness  test.   He  submitted
    however that the decision was a balanced one and  it  should  therefore
    stand.

17. At the end of submissions I announced my decision that I was  satisfied
    that the decision of the FtT contained material error of law  requiring
    it to be set aside and  re-made.   I  now  give  my  reasons  for  this
    finding.

Consideration

18. The approach to be taken to  reasonableness,  particularly  within  the
    structure of 117B is set out and defined by the Court of Appeal  in  MA
    (Pakistan and Others) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

19. Section 117B(6) provides that the public interest does  not  require  a
    person's  removal  where  a  person  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship  with  a  qualifying  child  and  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.  This is  a
    freestanding provision and requires the decision-maker to decide  first
    of all what are the best  interests  of  the  child,  and  secondly  to
    consider the reasonableness of any proposed return.  It was  recognised
    by the court in MA (paragraph 47) that, even accepting the  focus  upon
    the child, it would not follow that leave must be granted whenever  the
    child's best interests are in favour  of  remaining.   Even  where  the
    child's best interests are to stay, it may still not be unreasonable to
    expect the child to leave.  In considering the reasonableness  test  it
    is necessary to pay regard to the wider public interest, which includes
    the  factors  set  out  in  117B,  namely  the  burden  on   taxpayers;
    integration into society; immigration status of  the  parents  and  the
    full context in which the matter arises.

20. I find that in the  present  cases  the  judge  has  not  directed  his
    attention to the relevant considerations nor applied to them the degree
    of detail that might reasonably be expected.

21. In terms of the wider immigration history, the parents  are  both  long
    time overstayers.  In terms of their integration into society there  is
    very little evidence as to where their income is derived  from.   There
    is very little consideration, as I so find, as to what quality of  life
    the family may expect if returned to Pakistan.   From  the  information
    that there is, it appears that the children's  father  is  educated  to
    degree level and certainly the evidence indicates that the  mother  has
    family members living in Pakistan with whom she and the children are in
    contact.  There was some mention of  linguistic  difficulties  for  the
    children but it was clear from the hearing  before  the  FtT  that  the
    children's mother required an Urdu interpreter and therefore there  was
    no evidence that the children would be unable to pick up the language.

22. I find therefore that there has been inadequate consideration as to the
    element of reasonableness and that this amounts to an error of law such
    that the decision shall have to be set aside.

23. Having  announced  my  decision,  I  canvassed  with  the  parties  the
    appropriate venue for disposal of this matter indicating that if  there
    was no further evidence to be brought, then  I  would  dispose  of  the
    matter in the Upper Tribunal.  Mr Ahmed at this point said  that  there
    was further evidence which was not available  presently  but  would  be
    obtained for the rehearing.  He said that this would take the form of a
    medical report on S.F.1, who has now been diagnosed with  diabetes.  In
    addition school reports on S.F.2 would be presented.

24. Clearly therefore findings of fact will need to be  made  again  and  a
    proper consideration conducted as to all  elements  in  favour  of  the
    children remaining and those that support their leaving.  In accordance
    therefore with the Senior President's Practice Directions, this  matter
    will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.  No findings
    of fact are preserved.  I was informed that the new evidence should  be
    available in around six weeks time, and I express the  hope  that  this
    matter can be set down for hearing sooner rather than later.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is  allowed  to  the  extent  that  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for it  to  be  re-made  in
that tribunal (not Judge Stewart).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     23 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
