
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30203/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 April 2014                              |On 20 June 2014              |
|Oral determination given following the hearing|                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                           Mr Sopiriala Hans Harry

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Physsas, Counsel instructed by Graceland
                    Solicitors (Lewisham)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant in this case is a national of Nigeria who was born on  24
    January 1982.  On 1 May 2012 he made an  application  for  a  residence
    card pursuant to Regulation 7 of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 on the basis that he was the spouse  of  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty rights in the UK.  His  alleged  wife  is  a
    French national.  The respondent refused to grant him a residence  card
    and the decision refusing this application was made on 1 November 2013.
     The basis of the respondent's decision was she was not satisfied  that
    there was a valid marriage between the parties.

 2. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes sitting at  Hatton  Cross  on  2
    December 2013.  By the time of this hearing it was the appellant's case
    that he was not living any longer with his wife and that she had  moved
    out of the matrimonial home on 30 June 2013 because he had not  changed
    the job which he was in.  It was  possibly  for  this  reason  that  no
    alternative claim to an  entitlement  to  a  residence  card  was  made
    pursuant to Regulation  8  on  the  basis  that  there  was  a  durable
    relationship in any event even if the parties were not validly married.

 3. The appellant's case was that he had been lawfully and validly  married
    to Ms Labarde who was a French national exercising treaty rights in the
    UK by means of a customary proxy marriage in Nigeria.  It appears  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge considered his appeal on the  basis  that
    his case was that the marriage was a statutory  marriage  whereas  that
    was not his case.  In any event the judge was not satisfied that  there
    was a valid proxy marriage in accordance  with  Nigerian  law  and  the
    appeal  was  accordingly  dismissed  in  a  determination   which   was
    promulgated on 5 February 2014.

 4. Not only did the First-tier Tribunal Judge consider that there was  not
    a valid proxy marriage in accordance  with  Nigerian  law  but  in  her
    determination she also relied upon the decision  in  this  Tribunal  in
    Kareem  (Proxy  marriages  -  EU  law)  [2014]  UKUT  00024  which  was
    promulgated after the  hearing  but  before  the  promulgation  of  the
    determination in this case.

 5. In the grounds of appeal it is asserted that the judge made a number of
    mistakes of fact,  in  particular  by  considering  that  the  marriage
    asserted on behalf of the appellant was a statutory marriage whereas it
    had been his case that the marriage was a customary  marriage.   It  is
    said that this led to "a series of errors rendering  the  determination
    unsafe".  It is also submitted that the judge should  not  have  relied
    upon the decision of this Tribunal in Kareem without  at  least  giving
    the parties or in this case the  appellant  an  opportunity  of  making
    submissions as to  the  effect  of  this  decision  or  if  appropriate
    submitting further evidence in light of that decision.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hemingway
    on 26 February 2014.  When stating his reasons for granting  permission
    to appeal Judge Hemingway stated as follows:

         "...

         2.    The  grounds  of  application  for  permission  assert,  with
             arguable merit, that the judge erred in  misunderstanding  the
             type of marriage it was said to be contracted and  in  relying
             upon new  matters  not  canvassed  at  the  hearing  including
             matters  raised  in  the  decision  in  Kareem  ...,   without
             affording the parties an opportunity to address them ...".

 7. Following the grant of permission to appeal on 28  February  2014  this
    Tribunal gave directions to the parties which included the following:

         "1.  Any response which the respondent of  this  appeal  wishes  to
             make under Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
             Rules 2008 must be sent or delivered to the Upper Tribunal  so
             that it is received no later  than  fourteen  days  after  the
             respondent was sent notice that permission to appeal had  been
             granted.  At the same time, a copy of  the  response  must  be
             sent to the appellant.

         2.   The parties shall prepare for the forthcoming hearing  on  the
             basis that, if the Upper Tribunal decides  to  set  aside  the
             determination  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal,   any   further
             evidence, including  supplementary  oral  evidence,  that  the
             Upper Tribunal may need to consider if it  decides  to  remake
             the decision, can be so considered at that hearing.  ...".

 8. In accordance with these directions  the  respondent  made  a  response
    under Rule 24 dated 19 March 2014 but no further evidence was submitted
    on behalf of the appellant.

The Hearing

 9. I heard  submissions  on  behalf  of  both  parties  which  I  recorded
    contemporaneously.  As these submissions are contained within my Record
    of Proceedings I shall not set out below everything which was  said  to
    me during the course of the hearing but shall refer only to such  parts
    of  the  submissions  as  are  necessary  for  the  purposes  of   this
    determination.  I have, however, had regard  to  everything  which  was
    said to me in the course of the hearing as well as to all the documents
    contained within the file whether  or  not  the  same  is  specifically
    referred to below.

10. Ms Physsas' primary submission was that, for reasons which she gave  in
    the course of her cogent  and  persuasive  arguments,  there  had  been
    substantial  errors  within  the  judge's  determination.   It  is  not
    necessary to set these out in any detail in  light  of  my  substantive
    decision below.  The primary mistake which she says the judge made  was
    to consider whether or not the marriage was or might have been valid in
    accordance with Nigerian law on the  basis  that  it  was  a  statutory
    marriage whereas it was the appellant's case that it  was  a  customary
    marriage.  However, when she was asked whether or  not  she  was  in  a
    position to address the difficulties which it would seem were faced  by
    this appellant in light of the decision by this Tribunal in Kareem  she
    properly and openly informed  the  Tribunal  that  she  was  not  in  a
    position to do so today.  However, she wished to seek an adjournment if
    this Tribunal found an error of law in order to make further efforts to
    obtain such evidence as may be required in light  of  the  decision  in
    Kareem.  For reasons which I give below I refused her  application  for
    an adjournment.

11. On behalf of the respondent Ms  Everett  accepted  properly  that  with
    regard to Ms Physsas' argument that the judge would appear to have been
    wrong to apply some of the tests  as  to  whether  there  was  a  valid
    statutory marriage this argument seemed to be  correct.   She  did  not
    contest that the appellant had argued that his asserted marriage was  a
    customary one and that it was arguable that the  judge  had  not  dealt
    with these arguments satisfactorily.  However, in light of the guidance
    now given in Kareem the appellant's appeal could not succeed.  She also
    opposed the application for an adjournment.

Discussion

12. I am very grateful to both  representatives  for  the  very  clear  and
    concise way in which their respective  parties'  cases  have  been  put
    before  me.   Ms  Physsas  in  particular  maintained  her  submissions
    notwithstanding the difficulties that she faced  due  to  the  lack  of
    evidence which for reasons I give below  this  Tribunal  considered  it
    would be necessary to have before this appeal could succeed.  She asked
    for an adjournment on the basis that she needed a reasonable amount  of
    time in which to obtain this evidence.

13. I refused the application for  an  adjournment  because  following  the
    directions which were sent to the parties as long ago  as  28  February
    2014 (that is two months ago) the appellant and those representing  him
    must have been aware of the need to provide the material without  which
    in light of the judgment in Kareem which I will refer to below  it  was
    necessary for him to provide.  Whether or not the judge would have been
    better  advised  to  have  allowed  the  appellant  an  opportunity  of
    addressing her as to the relevance of this decision before promulgating
    her determination the appellant has undoubtedly had an  opportunity  to
    do so before this Tribunal.   Before  an  error  can  be  shown  to  be
    material it must be apparent that but  for  this  error  another  judge
    might have come to another decision.

14. I turn now to the reason why in light of the decision  in  Kareem  this
    appellant's appeal cannot in my  judgment  succeed.   I  refer  to  the
    exposition of the law which is summarised in the head note  as  follows
    (I only quote the relevant parts of this head note):

         "a.  A person who is the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national  who  is  a
             qualified person in the United Kingdom can  derive  rights  of
             free  movement  and  residence  if  proof   of   the   marital
             relationship is provided.

         ...

         d.   In appeals where there is  no  such  marriage  certificate  or
             where there is doubt that  a  marriage  certificate  has  been
             issued by a competent authority, then the marital relationship
             may be proved  by  other  evidence.   This  will  require  the
             Tribunal to determine whether a marriage was contracted.




         e.   In such an appeal,  the  starting  point  will  be  to  decide
             whether a marriage was contracted between  the  appellant  and
             the qualified person according to the national law of the  EEA
             country of the qualified person's nationality.

         f.   In all such  situations,  when  resolving  issues  that  arise
             because of conflicts of law, proper respect must be  given  to
             the qualified person's rights  as  provided  by  the  European
             treaties, including the right to marry and the rights of  free
             movement and residence.

         g.   It should be assumed that, without  independent  and  reliable
             evidence about the recognition of the marriage under the  laws
             of the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage  took
             place, the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that
             sufficient evidence has been provided to discharge the  burden
             of proof.  Mere production of legal  materials  from  the  EEA
             country or country where  the  marriage  took  place  will  be
             insufficient evidence because they will rarely show  how  such
             law  is  understood  or  applied  in  those  countries.   Mere
             assertions as to the effect of such  laws  will,  for  similar
             reasons, carry no weight".

15. In this case it is clear that there is an issue as to  whether  or  not
    marriage certificate has been issued by a competent authority and  this
    Tribunal must thus have regard to  the  guidance  given  in  Kareem  as
    summarised in head note e. that:

         "The starting point  will  be  to  decide  [whether  this  asserted
         marriage] was contracted between the appellant  and  the  qualified
         person according to the national law of  the  EEA  country  of  the
         qualified person's nationality"

    which in this case it is said is France.  Regard must be  had  by  this
    Tribunal to what is summarised in head note g. to the effect that:

         "It should  be  assumed  that,  without  independent  and  reliable
         evidence about the recognition of [this marriage under French  law]
         the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that  sufficient
         evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of proof".

16. Ms Physsas recognised as she was  obliged  to  do  that  there  was  no
    evidence before this Tribunal to the effect that the marriage which  it
    is said took place between the appellant and the French national  would
    be recognised in France.  The most she could do was to submit that  she
    ought to be allowed a further  opportunity  to  obtain  such  evidence.
    However, as I have already noted, the appellant  has  already  had  two
    months in which to obtain such evidence if it was available  and  I  do
    not consider that there is any proper reason why he should  be  allowed
    any more time.  In the event that the appellant is able to obtain  such
    evidence there is nothing to preclude him making a further  application
    either from within this country if he is still here or from outside but
    there is no  proper  justification  for  granting  any  more  time.   I
    consider that I can deal justly with this appeal on the  basis  of  the
    evidence (or in this case the lack of evidence) which is before me.  In
    the absence of any evidence that the marriage which  according  to  the
    appellant was lawfully contracted between him and Ms Labarde  according
    to Nigerian customary law, he is in my  judgment  unable  to  establish
    following the decision of this Tribunal in Kareem  whether  in  fact  a
    valid marriage has indeed been  contracted  because  he  is  unable  to
    establish that such a marriage was contracted according to the national
    law of France which is the country of  Ms  Labarde's  nationality.   In
    those circumstances even though there may well have been errors in  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge these errors  could  not
    have been material because this  appellant's  appeal  would  have  been
    bound to fail in any event.   It  follows  that  this  appeal  must  be
    dismissed and I will so find.

Decision

The appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Signed:                                 Date: 18 June 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

