
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30356/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th May 2016                              |On 27th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                             mr narayan rasaili
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kumar instructed by Capital Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kelly made on 25th September 2015,  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision  of  11th
    July 2014 to refuse his application (dated 8th April 2014) for leave to
    remain on the basis of his  private  and  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom and to remove him to Nepal by way of directions  under  Section
    10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. The application was refused because it was alleged  by  the  respondent
    that the appellant had submitted a  fraudulent  English  language  test
    certificate in support of his application.  It was also said he did not
    meet the relevant requirements of Appendix FM or  paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules.

 3. I cite the following paragraphs from Judge Kelly's decision:

         "14. In order to establish the alleged fraud, the respondent relies
             upon the witness  statements  of  Michael  Sartorius,  Rebecca
             Collings and Peter Millington and a document entitled "Annex A
             - Evidence from ETS in respect of R1250022".  These  documents
             explain how the alleged fraud came to light in the wake of  an
             investigation by the BBC's  Panorama  programme  and  how  the
             appellant's case was one  of  many  where  voice  verification
             software had suggested that his test was  taken  by  a  proxy.
             The test results in question had been cancelled as a result.

         16.  The aforementioned witness statements are  generic  in  nature
             and do  not  specifically  deal  with  the  appellant's  test.
             However,  the  witness  statement  of  Mr   Sartorius   cross-
             references to the Annex A  document  which  does  specifically
             relate to the appellant's test results.  Annex A is an excerpt
             from a spreadsheet which was provided to the  Home  Office  by
             ETS.  The appellant's test result is one of those  categorised
             as "invalid", thereby indicating that it was one of the  cases
             where ETS was certain that impersonation or proxy test  taking
             had been relied upon.

         19.  While I recognise that the voice testing analysis relied on by
             the  respondent  is  unlikely  to  be  wholly  infallible,   I
             nevertheless attach significant weight to the  fact  that  the
             appellant's test result was one of those where ETS was certain
             that deception had been deployed as opposed to  being  amongst
             the  inconclusive  results.   Whilst  the  statements  of   Ms
             Collings and Mr Millington are open to legitimate criticism in
             some respects, as observed by McClosky J, I find that  overall
             they are thorough and comprehensive and adequately explain how
             the appellant's test was one of those where the use of a proxy
             taker had been identified.  However, I do not base my decision
             solely on this evidence.  I find that there are also a  number
             of  other  features  of  the  evidence   which   support   his
             conclusion.

         20.  The appellant failed to provide any  satisfactory  explanation
             as to why he would have  chosen  to  travel  all  the  way  to
             Nottingham to take his English language test when  there  were
             many test centres in  London  far  closer  to  his  home.   He
             initially suggested that he had been unable  to  book  into  a
             test in any one of the London test centres within a reasonable
             time frame.  However, he later admitted that  he  had  not  in
             fact made any attempt to book in for a test at any one of  the
             London centres.  I do not find it credible that he would  have
             chosen to expend the time and to incur the cost of  travelling
             to Nottingham to take the test if he didn't have to.

         21.  The appellant's claim to have travelled to Nottingham to  take
             the English test was not supported  by  the  evidence  of  the
             Sponsor.  She believed that he had taken the test  in  London.
             She was asked whether she recalled the appellant travelling to
             any city outside of London in the last year or two.  She  said
             that he had not done so and that they  had  both  remained  in
             London throughout that period.  Were  it  the  case  that  the
             appellant had in fact travelled  to  Nottingham  to  take  the
             test, which he said lasted all day, I would expect his wife to
             be aware of this.

         22.  Furthermore, although the appellant gave his oral evidence  in
             English and did not wish to benefit from the assistance of  an
             interpreter, there were many times throughout the hearing when
             I struggled to understand what he was saying due to  his  lack
             of fluency in English.  Many of his answers had to be repeated
             or clarified due to my difficulty in following  his  evidence.
             I accept that this could have been the result  of  nervousness
             on his part giving the importance and  the  formality  of  the
             occasion.  Nevertheless, even making allowance for his nerves,
             I find that the relatively poor standard of his spoken English
             lends further weight to the respondent's case.

         23.  The appellant seeks to rely on the  fact  that  he  passed  an
             English Language Test in 2011.  He suggests  that  his  spoken
             English language skills were likely to be  stronger  still  by
             2013 when the test relevant to this appeal was taken and  that
             he would therefore have had no need to rely on a proxy  taker.
             However, in light of my findings in respect of this appeal,  I
             cannot rule  out  the  possibility  that  deception  was  also
             deployed in respect of the 2011 test.

         24.  When I consider the evidence as  a  whole,  I  find  that  the
             respondent has discharged the burden  of  proof  upon  her  to
             establish  that  the  English  Language  Test  Certificate  in
             question was indeed false and that the appellant did rely on a
             proxy to take the test on his behalf.  I therefore  find  that
             the respondent was justified in refusing his application under
             S-LTR.2.2. of Appendix FM and seeking to remove him  from  the
             United Kingdom under Section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum
             Act 1999."

 4. As stated above the judge dismissed the appeal.

 5. The challenge was made by the appellant on the following basis.  At the
    start of the hearing it was clarified that the Presenting  Officer  was
    not relying on the statements of Michael Sartorius and Rebecca Collings
    and Peter Millington, the generic statements of the Secretary of  State
    and therefore there was no need to provide a legible copy.   The  judge
    noted that the respondent relied upon that evidence and had  given  due
    weight to those statements at paragraph 16.

 6. At paragraph 8 of the grounds the appellant did  explain  that  he  was
    unable to book the test as he did not have much time and his  wife  was
    unaware of the fact as she was at her father's house when he  went  for
    the test.  While she was right in saying that she was unaware.  I  make
    it clear from the outset that I do not take  this  further  explanation
    into account because this does not appear to  be  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 7. At the hearing before  me, Mr Kumar  made  the  point  that  the  judge
    assessed the appellant's English language fluency which  was  poor  and
    still went ahead for the hearing without adjourning for an interpreter.
     This, he submitted, was  not  consistent  with  the  fairness  of  the
    proceedings.

 8. Further the judge made a baseless and irrelevant comment in relation to
    a previous language test and that the judge  could  not  rule  out  the
    possibility but in 2011 the appellant deployed deception.

 9. In conclusion, I took account of the submissions made by Mr Bramble and
    note that SM & Kadir v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (ETS
    - evidence - burden of  proof)  [2016]  UKUT  00229  (IAC)  appears  to
    indicate that the generic evidence does discharge the evidential burden
    of proving dishonesty on the part of the appellant but it also confirms
    that it is important to look at the factors in each case and each  case
    is fact-sensitive.  The head note of SM & Kadir reads:

         "(i) The Secretary of State's generic evidence, combined  with  her
             evidence particular  to  these  two  appellants,  sufficed  to
             discharge the evidential burden of proving  that  their  TOEIC
             certificates had been procured by dishonesty.


         (ii) However, given the multiple frailties from which this  generic
             evidence was considered to suffer and, in  the  light  of  the
             evidence adduced by the appellants,  the  Secretary  of  State
             failed to discharge the legal burden of proving dishonesty  on
             their part."

10. Mr Bramble indicated that there were a number of factors in  this  case
    which were taken into account, particularly that there was  no  further
    evidence from  the  appellant  on  the  specific  facts  and  that  the
    appellant appeared to have changed his  evidence.   I  have  cited  the
    evidence given by the wife recorded  in the Record of  Proceedings  and
    there is some variance  between  that  and  what  is  recorded  in  the
    decision of the judge at paragraph 21 cited above.  The wife  says  she
    does not remember and states 'we' are not going  out  of  London.   She
    does not categorically state that her  husband  had  not  been  out  of
    London.

11. In the Record of Proceedings it is stated

         "What over cities has your husband visited in the last two years?

         Just London.

         Has he ever been outside London to another city?

         I don't remember.  We are not going out of London."

12. It is also clear that the generic evidence served at the  hearing,  and
    indeed that evidence is marked by the judge as having  been  served  at
    the hearing, omits paragraphs on each page.   Unfortunately  the  judge
    has stated at paragraph 19 cited above  that  he  attached  significant
    weight to the appellant's test result and found the  statements  of  Ms
    Collings and Mr  Millington  were  open  to  legitimate  criticism  but
    overall they were thorough comprehensive and adequately explained.  The
    evidence however served on the day of the hearing was incomplete and it
    is not clear to me  that  these  statements  would  have  been  readily
    available to the appellant  via  other  means  (i.e.  appendixed  to  a
    reported case).

13. As a final issue, the judge appeared to assess the appellant's  English
    through his oral evidence but there is no indication that the judge was
    aware of the standard that was to be reached in the TOEIC  examinations
    as compared with the standard of the appellant's oral evidence given in
    the hearing, and thus the conclusion of  judge  which  was  as  follows
    "even making allowance for his nerves I find that the  relatively  poor
    standard of his spoken English lends further weight to the respondent's
    case" is an inadequate basis on  which  to  proceed  and  therefore  an
    irrelevant factor and unsafe.

14. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

15. The parties should serve on the opposing party and the Tribunal legible
    copies of any evidence upon which it is intended to rely  at  least  14
    days prior to the substantive hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date 27th May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
