

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30193/2013
                                                               IA/30194/2013
                                                               IA/30195/2013
                                                               IA/30196/2013
                                                               IA/30197/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 11th April 2014                            |on 30th April 2014           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                  C A B (1)
                                  T A B (2)
                                  E A B (3)
                                  E A B (4)
                                  J A B (5)
                       (Anonymity direction in force)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Peer of Peer and Co
For the Respondent: Mr Smart - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge P.J. Holmes promulgated on  19  December  2013,  following  a
        hearing at Stoke on 6th December 2013, in which  he  dismissed  the
        linked appeals of the first appellant, a married woman born on 18th
        December 1977, her husband J A B born on 2nd August 1973 and  their
        children born on 23 December 2006 (T A B), 31st May  2008  (E  A  B
        [A3]), and 18th October 2004 (E A B  [A4]).  All  are  citizens  of
        Ghana.


     2. The appeal is against a refusal to grant leave to remain,  said  by
        the Appellants to arise from an application made on  30th  November
        2011 outside the Immigration Rules on the basis of their family and
        private life.


     3. The Judge sets out his findings between paragraphs 15 to 27 of  the
        determination. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge
        of the First-tier Tribunal Campbell on  15th  January  2014.  Judge
        Campbell noted that it was contended in the grounds that the  Judge
        failed to consider whether the requirements of the Rules  in  their
        pre- 9th July 2012 form were met.  The  application  for  leave  to
        remain in form FLR(O) was said to have been made on  25th  November
        2011. Although representations were made on the Appellants'  behalf
        in July 2012, following a refusal to grant leave, it was said to be
        arguable that the immigration decision giving rise to  the  appeal,
        including a further rejection  of  the  applications  made  by  the
        Appellants made only on 3rd July 2013, meant the  Appellants'  were
        therefore entitled to the benefit of  the  transitional  provisions
        contained in HC 194.


     4. The grounds also argued that  in  any  event  the  requirements  of
        paragraph 276ADE were in fact met.



Discussion



     5. The Judge noted in his determination that some of the paperwork
        that had been provided in respect of the appeal was lacking. For
        example neither party before the Judge provided a copy of the
        completed application form although the Judge was able to ascertain
        the nature of the application made in November 2011.  It is not
        disputed that the application made on the 30th November 2011 was
        refused by the Secretary of State in a refusal letter dated 4th
        July 2012. The Judge was not provided with a copy of this document
        either although Mr Smart has now provided a copy for the purposes
        of these proceedings.


     6. In the 4th July 2012 letter the Secretary of State sets out in
        detail her consideration of the immigration history, family life
        which is accepted between the first appellant, her husband, and
        three dependent children, section 55 relating to the best interests
        of those children, and their private life. As the date of
        consideration was prior to the introduction of the new Immigration
        Rules the case was considered by reference to the case law that
        existed and was relevant at that time.  Following the Secretary of
        State's conclusions that it was proportionate and reasonable in all
        the circumstances for the family to return to Ghana the letter
        contains a statement that there is no right of appeal against the
        decision as the first appellant had no leave to remain when she
        submitted her application.   The letter notes that the family are
        illegal overstayers and that they should arrange to depart
        voluntarily.


     7. On 18th July 2012 a letter headed "proposed claim for judicial
        review" was written by Peer and Co to the decision maker. It refers
        at length to the letter of 4th July 2012 and challenges the
        conclusion that there was no right to appeal against the decision
        on the basis that, although the first Appellant did not have leave
        to remain at the time of the application, the applications were not
        made under any specific immigration rule but under Article 8 ECHR.
        It was argued that if section 82 (2) (d) was to be interpreted as
        requiring existing leave to remain such a requirement can only be
        restricted to applications under the Immigration Rules and could
        not apply to applications outside the Rules.


     8. It was also submitted that there is no requirement for there to be
        a removal direction in place before the applicant is entitled to
        exercise a right of appeal and on this basis it was asserted that
        the decision was unlawful.


     9. The challenge to the decision not to make an  immigration  decision
        conferring a right of appeal has no arguable merit. The decision is
        a refusal to grant leave to remain as a  result  of  the  Applicant
        having no lawful leave to remain at the time  the  application  was
        made. This is not an immigration decision, as that term is  defined
        in section 82 of the 2002 Act, and so there is no right of  appeal.
        It is also settled case law that the Respondent is not required  to
        grant a right of appeal in all cases and no arguable legal error is
        proved - see Murdoch Daley [2011] EWCA Civ  161  and  Patel  [2013]
        UKSC 72. The grounds fail to establish a  requirement  to  grant  a
        right of appeal at this stage based upon either law or policy.  The
        refusal refers to the fact an immigration decision giving rise to a
        right of appeal may be issued at a later date.


    10. There is no arguable merit in the claim there  is  no  need  for  a
        removal direction to be in place before an applicant is entitled to
        exercise a right of appeal as many decisions such as a  refusal  to
        grant asylum or leave  to  remain  are  not  immigration  decisions
        conferring a right of appeal in themselves.   Such  a  right  often
        only arises as a result of the removal  direction  made  consequent
        upon such as a refusal.


    11. The additional submissions contained in the letter  were,  however,
        considered by the case worker  as  further  representations  giving
        rise to a further refusal  letter  dated  3rd  July  2013  and  the
        issuing of removal directions under section 10 of  the  Asylum  and
        Immigration Act 1999 to Ghana which conferred upon the  Appellant's
        a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.


    12. I find no merit in the assertion the Judge erred  when  considering
        the  decision  by  reference  to  the  provisions  of  the  current
        Immigration Rules which came into force after 9th July 2012. It  is
        settled law that it is the Rules in force at the date  of  decision
        which are  those  applicable  to  an  appeal,  in  the  absence  of
        transitional provisions, if there has been a change  in  the  Rules
        between the application  and  consideration.  In  this  appeal  the
        application that led to the decision was the further submissions to
        be found in the letter dated 18th July 2012 made after the  9  July
        2012 and so the Appellants' are not assisted by the recent Court of
        Appeal decision in Edgehill v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
        Department [2014] EWCA Civ 402 which is  a  case  which  very  much
        turned on its facts.  It was a case in which there  was  a  tension
        between an application made and considered  under  Appendix  FM  in
        relation to a person who made the application prior  to  the  Rules
        coming into force whereas, in  respect  of  the  applicant  JE  who
        already had fourteen years' residence in the United Kingdom,  there
        was a pre-existing Rule which may have made a  material  difference
        to the outcome.


    13. It is also clear from reading Edgehill that the Court of Appeal did
        not give express consideration  to  a  number  of  aspects  of  the
        Immigration Rules. I refer in this regard to the fact the  judgment
        does not deal with paras A277-A280 and so in broad terms  does  not
        arguably apply to applications made under the old Part 8  to  which
        Appendix FM applies except where  the  provisions  of  Part  8  are
        preserved and continue to apply as set out in  A280.  Changes  have
        also been made to the Immigration Rules in 276A0 (and  Appendix  FM
        Gen 1.9) which will mean that such issues can be considered in  any
        event.


    14. I find no legal error proved in relation to the jurisdictional
        aspects.  I find no arguable merit in the claim the First-tier
        Tribunal materially erred or misdirected themselves in law in
        relation to the relevant applicable provisions.


    15. Ground (b) refers to the provisions of paragraph 276ADE (iii)
        requiring a person to make a valid application for leave to remain
        on the grounds of private life in the UK.  The grounds argued that
        as the first appellant made the application at a time when this
        paragraph was not in force it could not possibly be said that the
        child applicants had made a valid application and so the
        conclusions reached by the Judge at paragraph 16 to 18 of the
        determination are flawed.


    16. I find no merit in this argument. The date of application has been
        found to be after 9th July 2012 and so the provisions of the Rules
        in force prior to 9th July 2012 would not have benefited any of the
        Appellants'.  Whilst 276 ADE as originally drafted had the
        requirement referred to in the grounds for a valid application
        those rules were amended as from April 2013 to include 276A0 which
        is in the following terms:


              276A0. For the purposes of paragraph 276ADE the requirement
to make a valid                 application will not apply when the Article
8 claim is raised:

                  (i)  as part of an asylum claim, or as part of a further
submission in                           person after an asylum claim has
been refused;

                  (ii)     where a migrant is in immigration detention;

                  (iii)    where removal directions have been set pending
an imminent                         removal;

                  (iv)     in an appeal; or

                  (v)  in response to a (one stop) notice issued under
section 120 of the                      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
Act 2002.



    17. As the Article 8 claim was made in the appeal the requirement for a
        valid application is arguably not a bar to the Judge considering
        276 ADE in relation to this matter and so no misdirection or
        misapplication of the law is established.


    18. The Grounds also challenge the conclusions at paragraph 20 of the
        determination in relation to consideration of the best interests of
        the child appellants' asserting that the Judge considered this
        issue as a freestanding matter rather than as part of the overall
        assessment of proportionality under Article 8 ECHR, and further
        allege the reasoning and conclusions reached by the Judge failed to
        indicate the evidence taken into account in arriving at such
        findings.


    19. I am satisfied the Judge considered all the material made available
        with the degree of care required in an appeal of this nature, that
        of anxious scrutiny, and has given adequate reasons in support of
        the findings made. Accordingly the weight to be given to the
        evidence, which it was submitted before the Upper Tribunal was
        "wrong", was a matter for the Judge.


    20. In Zoumbas v Secretary of state for the Home Department [2013] UKSC
        74, at paragraph 10, the Court paraphrase  the  principles  arising
        from the cases of ZH (Tanzania) [2011] 2 AC 166, H v Lord  Advocate
        [2012] SC (UKSC) 308 and H(H) v Deputy Prosecutor  of  the  Italian
        Republic [2013] 1 AC 338, as follows:


              (1) The best interests of the child are an  integral  part  of
   the                          proportionality assessment under  article  8
   ECHR;


              (2)      In making that assessment, the best interests of  the
   child must be  a                   primary  consideration,  although  not
   always the  only  primary                        consideration;  and  the
   child's best interests do  not  of  themselves                  have  the
   status of the paramount consideration;


              (3) Although the best interests of the child can be outweighed
   by the                  cumulative effect  of  other  considerations,  no
   other consideration                   can be treated as  inherently  more
   significant;


              (4)      While different judges might approach the question of
   the best                     interests of the child in different ways, it
   is important to ask  oneself                the  right  questions  in  an
   orderly manner in order to avoid the risk                   that the best
   interests   of   the   child   might   be    undervalued    when    other
   important considerations were in play;


              (5)      It is important to have a clear  idea  of  a  child's
   circumstances and                what is  in  a  child's  best  interests
   before  one  asks  oneself  whether                those  interests   are
   outweighed by the force of other considerations;


              (6)      To that end there is  no  substitute  for  a  careful
   examination of all               relevant factors when the  interests  of
   the child are involved in an                  article 8 assessment; and


              (7) A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she
   is not                  responsible, such as the conduct of a parent.


    21. In paragraph 20 the Judge sets out his findings in relation to the
        best interests of the child appellants and clearly considered the
        period of time they have lived in the United Kingdom together with
        their circumstances in the this country which were referred to in
        the first Appellant's witness statement.  It was noted E A B [A4]
        has been in the United Kingdom for seven years as was the claim
        that he could satisfy the requirements of 276ADE(iv) whereas the
        other children could not. The Judge referred to relevant case law
        and noted there was no evidence to suggest any of the children have
        any particular difficulty, special educational needs, special
        ability or particular dependency on any provision made by the
        school or evidence of health problems.  The Judge concluded
        "Weighing up these various factors, I find that no significant
        grounds exist in the case of any of these children to depart from
        the proposition that it is in the best interests of the child to
        live with and be brought up by his or her parents, in whatever
        country they may be".


    22. The Judge is criticised for not setting out the information he
        considered or for not making specific findings on the benefits for
        the children of remaining in the United Kingdom.  As stated I am
        satisfied the Judge did consider all the evidence together with
        circumstances in the United Kingdom and any submissions made
        regarding the benefit to the children of preserving the status quo.
         The Judge is not required to set out findings on each and every
        aspect of the evidence and I find that the approach that was
        adopted, evidence considered, and reasons given, to be in
        accordance with the guidance provided in Zoumbas and other relevant
        case law.   It was found in Zoumbas that there was no
        "irrationality in the conclusion that it was in the children's best
        interests to go with their parents to the Republic of Congo. No
        doubt it would have been possible to have stated that, other things
        being equal, it was in the best interests of the children that they
        and their parents stayed in the United Kingdom so that they could
        obtain such benefits as health care and education which the
        decision-maker recognised might be of a higher standard than would
        be available in the Congo. But other things were not equal. They
        were not British citizens. They had no right to future education
        and health care in this country. They were part of a close-knit
        family with highly educated parents and were of an age when their
        emotional needs could only be fully met within the immediate family
        unit. Such integration as had occurred into United Kingdom society
        would have been predominantly in the context of that family unit.
        Most significantly, the decision-maker concluded that they could be
        removed to the Republic of Congo in the care of their parents
        without serious detriment to their well-being".


    23. In relation to paragraph 276 ADE (iv) this was considered in
        paragraph 24 of the determination. This paragraph contains two
        elements the first being that the person concerned is under the age
        of 18 and has lived continuously in the UK for seven years, which
        it is not disputed E A B [A4]  can satisfy, but also that it would
        not be reasonable to expect him to leave the United Kingdom.  The
        Judge went on to consider whether it was reasonable to expect him
        to leave the UK as part of the general proportionality issue for
        which his findings are set out later in the determination.  The
        conclusion is that it is proportionate in all the circumstances.
        Indeed in paragraph 27 the Judge finds that he was satisfied it was
        reasonable to expect each of the child appellants to accompany
        their parents in order to continue to enjoy family life together as
        a family unit.  It was not disputed that there will be some degree
        of temporary disruption but it was also found that with the
        protection and assistance of their parents the children will be
        able to integrate into Ghanaian life, language and culture.  Ties
        with friends and distant relatives in the United Kingdom did not
        involve relationships of a particular dependency and contact can be
        maintained with such individuals.  It is clear that the best
        interests of the children were afforded proper weight and
        incorporated into the Article 8 assessment and not artificially
        separated such as to amount to a structural failure as alleged in
        the Grounds.


    24. I find that the Judge undertook a proper consideration of the
        competing interests as part of the proportionality exercise albeit
        this was considered outside the Immigration Rules.  In accordance
        with the guidance set out by the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria)
        [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, the High Court in Nagre [2013] EWHC 720
        (Admin) and by the Upper Tribunal in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640, as
        confirmed by Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085
        (IAC), the Judge was required to consider the question of
        proportionality in the context of the Immigration Rules first with
        no need to go on to a specific assessment under Article 8 if it is
        clear from the facts that there are no particular compelling or
        exceptional circumstances requiring that course to be taken. That
        approach is consistent with what the Court of Appeal said in MF
        (Nigeria) and with the approach of the House of Lords, particularly
        in cases such as Huang [2007] UKHL 11 and Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. In
        Shahzad it was found that where an area of the Rules does not have
        an express mechanism such as that found in the provisions relating
        to deportation appeals, the approach in Nagre ([29]-[31] in
        particular) and Gulshan should be followed: i.e. after applying the
        requirements of the rules, only if there may be arguably good
        grounds for granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary
        for Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether there are
        compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them.


    25. The starting position for the Judge was to look at  the  Rules  and
        see whether the Appellants' are able  to  meet  such  requirements.
        They are not and so the next question to be considered should  have
        been whether the decision would lead to a breach of Article  8  but
        in the context of whether there are  factors  not  covered  by  the
        Rules which give rise to the need to consider Article 8 further.


    26. Whilst the Judge failed to identify whether all  the  circumstances
        of this case are issues not covered by  the  Rules,  and  chose  to
        conduct an 'old style' Article 8 ECHR assessment,  it is clear that
        the final decision is proportionate is also a finding that  it  had
        not been established that the removal  of  this  family  unit  will
        result in compelling circumstances  giving  rise  to  unjustifiably
        harsh consequences for the Applicant or any family member, such  as
        to establish an arguable case at this time. Accordingly I  find  no
        legal error material to the decision to dismiss  the  appeal  under
        either the Rules or on human rights grounds has been established.


    27. The Judge's conclusions are in accordance with the  law,  have  not
        been shown to be susceptible to challenge on  public  law  grounds,
        nor to be perverse or irrational. The conclusions  are  within  the
        range of findings the Judge was entitled to make on  the  evidence.
        As Patten LJ stated in NN (South Africa)  &  Anor  v  Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 653 "Judges  are  not
        required  to  elevate  the  disruption  and   inconvenience   which
        inevitably flows from a move abroad to  a  breach  of  the  child's
        Article 8 rights."









Decision

    28. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.






   Anonymity.


    29. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005.


          I make that order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
   (Upper              Tribunal) Rules 2008 to protect the identity of the
   minor children.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 29th April 2014












