


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30097/2014
                                                               IA/30106/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd March 2015                            |On 25th March 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                               MRS KULDIP KAUR
                             MISS KHUSHVEEN KAUR
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Mahmoud (instructed by Dent Abrams Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellants,  with
    permission, against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Stephen Pacey promulgated on 21st October 2014 by  which  he  dismissed
    the Appellants' appeals against the Secretary of State's  decisions  to
    refuse them leave to remain in the UK on the basis of their private and
    family lives.  Permission was granted by a First-tier Tribunal Judge on
    the basis that the Judge may have made an error of law by having regard
    to the "new rules" despite the application being made  prior  to  their
    coming into force. Reliance was placed on the guidance in Edgehill  and
    Anor [2014] EWCA Civ 402.

2.   Before setting  out  Mr  Mahmoud's  submissions  I  will  set  out  the
    background to this case. The Appellants are a mother and  daughter  who
    are nationals of India. The mother was born on 10th August 1964 and her
    daughter on 9th July 1990. Both came to the United Kingdom on 6th  June
    2006 with leave to enter. Mother had been granted leave  to  enter  for
    the purpose of settlement with her spouse who  was  a  British  citizen
    with her daughter  as  her  dependent.  However,  the  British  citizen
    husband had in fact died on 21st April 2006, some two months  prior  to
    their entry. That leave  was  due  to  expire  on  5th  May  2008.  The
    Appellants put in an application on 2nd June 2008 for indefinite  leave
    to remain as a bereaved spouse and her daughter. That  application  was
    refused of 17th February 2010. The refusal was appealed to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal, all of which were  unsuccessful  such
    that they became appeal rights exhausted on 4th July 2011.

3.   However, on 4th July 2011 a fresh application was  submitted  based  in
    no small part on  the  fact  that  the  first  Appellant  was  by  then
    cohabiting  with  another  British  citizen.  In   relation   to   that
    application, on  15th  May  2013  a  judicial  review  application  was
    submitted with  regard  to  the  delay  in  the  defendant  reaching  a
    decision. That judicial review was compromised by a  consent  order  in
    which the Secretary of State agreed to make a  decision.  That  consent
    order was sealed on 11th September 2013. The Appellants' representative
    submitted further  evidence  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  which  the
    Secretary of State erroneously referred to in the Letter of Refusal  as
    the application, in June 2014. A decision was ultimately made  refusing
    the application on 16th June 2014 and it is  that  decision  that  gave
    rise to the appeal before Judge Pacey.

4.   In his determination, Judge Pacey indicated that he had heard  evidence
    from both the Appellants and a number of witnesses and he set  out  the
    immigration history. He noted that in  the  refusal  the  Secretary  of
    State had applied Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
    Rules. The refusal was on the basis that the first  Appellant  did  not
    satisfy the Rules in relation to either a  partner  or  a  parent.  The
    length of time the first Appellant and her new partner had been  living
    together did not meet the required two years according to the Secretary
    of State and the Secretary of State also concluded that the  exceptions
    in paragraph Ex.1 did not apply.

5.   The skeleton argument before Judge Pacey argued, in summary,  that  the
    mother and her partner had been living together  since  July  2012  and
    that in any event there were insurmountable obstacles to her return and
    that  of  her  daughter  to  India.  It  was  argued  that  there  were
    significant obstacles to the re-integration of the Appellants in  India
    and furthermore there  were  exceptional  circumstances  in  this  case
    warranting consideration of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

6.   Judge Pacey analysed the evidence carefully and at paragraph 13 of  his
    decision found that he was satisfied on a balance of probabilities that
    the first Appellant and her partner have  been  living  together  in  a
    relevant relationship since July 2012. However, he then concluded  that
    made no material difference to the outcome since the Rules required the
    period to have been two years prior to the date of the application  and
    in this case that was not the case.

7.   He then went on to consider paragraph Ex.1 of the Rules and found  that
     it did not avail the Appellants as it was made clear in  Sabia  [2014]
    UKUT 63 (IAC) that paragraph Ex.1 is not a freestanding element of  the
    Rules but is parasitic on the relevant Rule.

8.   Judge Pacey then went on to consider paragraph 276 ADE and in  relation
    to the mother found that she had spent the vast majority of her life in
    India and must therefore be familiar  with  its  history,  culture  and
    traditions and it was not reasonably likely that she  would  have  lost
    all cultural ties with India. He found  it  significant  that  she  had
    formed a relationship with  a  man  from  the  same  culture.  He  also
    referred to the determination in the previous appeal in 2010  where  it
    was recorded that she had  a  brother  in  India.   However,  he  found
    irrespective of family ties, that she had not lost all cultural ties.

9.   In relation to the daughter he found, which is clearly the  case,  that
    she is no longer dependent of her mother. He noted  her  claim  not  to
    speak the national language of India and only a little Punjabi  but  he
    also noted that she had also spent the majority of her  life  in  India
    and for similar reasons found she had not lost cultural ties  with  the
    country.

10.  Having found that neither Appellant  succeeded  under  the  Immigration
    Rules Judge Pacey then referred himself to the then applicable case  of
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)  [2013]  UKUT  00640
    (IAC).  He  considered  the  claimed  health  issues  of  the   mother,
    hypertension Type II diabetes and high cholesterol but found there  was
    no evidence that medical care for those conditions is not available  in
    India nor was it the case that she would be without  her  daughter  for
    support. He noted that the daughter had obtained  a  university  degree
    from the UK which would be highly relevant to her being  able  to  make
    way in India and found overall no  compelling  reasons  justifying  the
    appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

11.  When permission to appeal was  sought  on  the  Appellants'  behalf  in
    relation to that determination it was based  mainly  on  the  assertion
    that the judge had made mistakes  which  fundamentally  undermined  the
    determination. Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that  he
    Judge had not followed the approach of Edgehill. The grounds suggest he
    was led to the error by mistaking the date of application as 2014  when
    in fact it was 2011 (before the new Rules).

12.  Dealing with that argument first, it was  acknowledged  by  Mr  Mahmoud
    that it had been swept away by the subsequent decisions of the Court of
    Appeal in Singh and Khalid [2015] EWCA Civ 74 . Given  that  the  Rules
    were changed again in September 2012 it is now clear that the rationale
    of Edgehill is applicable only to a window of  time  between  9th  July
    2012 and 6th September 2012. That does not  apply  in  this  case.  The
    application was made in 2011 and the decision not until 2014. Therefore
    the Secretary of State and the Judge were correct to refer to  the  new
    rules and in particular to Appendix FM and paragraph 276 ADE.

13.  Mr  Mahmoud  sought  to  rely  on  a  different  ground  in  particular
    paragraph 24 of the determination were Judge Pacey said:-"additionally,
    however, I am entitled to attach little weight to a private life  or  a
    relationship formed with a qualifying  partner,  if  established  by  a
    person at a time when the person is in the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully
    and little weight should be given to a private life  established  by  a
    person at a time when the person's immigration status  is  precarious."
    Referring to the chronology I have outlined above, that  indicates  the
    Judge was wrong to find that the first Appellant had at any  time  been
    unlawfully in the United Kingdom and thus  wrong  to  take  that  as  a
    factor against the Appellants.  Conversely  he  pointed  out  that  the
    Appellants spoke English and were not a burden on the taxpayer and that
    the Judge's error meant that the whole  assessment  of  Article  8  was
    fundamentally flawed.

14.  He also referred to the case of Singh  and  Khalid  and  in  particular
    Lady Arden's contribution submitting that the rationale  of  that  case
    was limited in its application to the long residence rules. In my  view
    that misreads the findings of the Court of  Appeal.  In  particular  at
    paragraph 43 the Court of Appeal made clear that the opening  words  of
    Appendix FM, with the amendment, contains an  explicit  statement  that
    the suitability provisions of Appendix FM apply  where  a  decision  is
    made  on  or  after  9th  July  2012,  irrespective  of  the  date  the
    application was  made.  The  Court  of  Appeal  said  that  inescapably
    provides that the  provisions  in  question  should  apply  to  pending
    applications.

15.  So far as the mistake of fact made by the Judge infecting his  decision
    such as to render fatally flawed his assessment of Article 8, I find no
    merit in that argument.

16.  It has not been argued  either  Appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
    either Appendix FM or paragraph 276  ADE.  Rather  it  is  argued  that
    looking at the case in the round it ought to have been successful under
    Article 8. What Singh and Khalid also tells us  is  that  any  previous
    arguments about separate assessments and  an  intervening  step  as  to
    whether it is necessary to find compelling reasons to consider  Article
    8 outside the Immigration Rules is no longer helpful.  Rather  what  is
    required is a decision on whether in the  factual  matrix  of  a  given
    case,  there  is  anything  falling  outwith   the   Rules   to   merit
    consideration. So far as Gulshan suggested an intervening stage  it  is
    wrong.  However the changes are of form rather than substance as  Singh
    and Khalid made clear.  Clearly  in  this  case,  the  facts  disclosed
    nothing of substance not covered by the Rules as I now explain.

17.  So far as the mistake as to lawfulness is concerned, that  is  relevant
    when a Judge  considers, as he is required to do, paragraph 117B of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as inserted by section  19
    of the Immigration Act 2014. Those are considerations which a court  or
    tribunal must take into account when considering  proportionality.  The
    Secretary of State's consideration of  proportionality  is  encompassed
    within the Rules. It is true to say however that the contents of s.117B
    reflect the provisions  of  the  Rules  and  the  exceptions  contained
    therein.

18.  What is of particular relevance in this case  is  that  paragraph  117B
    does not present the Tribunal with an inclusive list of factors  to  be
    considered. The use of the word "in particular"  in  s.117A  (2)  makes
    clear that there may also be other factors, not listed,  which  may  be
    relevant. However those factors which are listed  must  be  taken  into
    account. It is also true to say that if an Appellant can bring  himself
    within the exception contained in section 117B (6) then the  assessment
    of proportionality would result in a decision in the Appellant's favour
    because the public  interest  side  of  the  scale  has  been  removed.
    However, in this case the Judge gave reasoned findings as to  why  that
    exception did not apply.

19.  So far as the  unlawfulness  aspect  is  concerned,  it  is  true  that
    technically the first Appellant has never been in  the  UK  unlawfully.
    However, that is not to say that her  immigration  history  is  one  of
    which she should be proud. She came to  the  UK  for  settlement  as  a
    spouse  knowing  full  well  that  her  spouse  had  died  two   months
    previously. Even if she had not  known,  which  I  find  to  be  highly
    unlikely, she would have known as soon as  she  arrived.  Nevertheless,
    she remained in the UK enjoying the benefit of a visa to which she  was
    no longer entitled right up until its expiry when she sought to  extend
    her leave. An honest Appellant would have notified the Entry  Clearance
    Officer that her husband had died or, if in the unlikely event that  it
    was news to her, should have notified the Secretary of State after  she
    had arrived. Had she done so the likelihood is that her visa would have
    been cancelled, which may provide the explanation for why she did  not.
    She then made an application which failed and her leave thereafter  was
    statutory leave whilst she pursued her appeals until  all  rights  were
    exhausted and then made a fresh application, on the same day it appears
    that her appeal rights became exhausted. Therefore, whilst it  is  true
    that she has not been in the UK unlawfully, she was certainly here  for
    the  first  two  years  on  a  false  premise  and  deceiving  the   UK
    authorities. That has to be highly relevant to an assessment of Article
    8 and in particular to the fact that she  embarked  on  a  relationship
    with her partner knowing that was the basis of her stay. Both  she  and
    her partner would/should have known that her ability to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom was precarious indeed and that it may be that  in  order
    to continue to live together they may have  to  face  the  prospect  of
    doing so in India. Those are considerations that  Judge  Pacey  clearly
    had in mind as they form part of his reasoning.

20.  The remaining grounds, not pursued before me, amount to no more than  a
    disagreement with Judge Pacey's conclusions.  This was a  thorough  and
    detailed assessment of the Appellants' case and any  minor  mistake  of
    fact as to the date of application or whether  the  Appellant's  lawful
    status was technical or real had no bearing on the  outcome.  I  cannot
    envisage any Judge coming to a different conclusion  on  the  facts  of
    this case and therefore any error by Judge Pacey was not material and I
    uphold his decision.

21.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Signed        Dated 25th March 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
