
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30255/2013,
                                               IA/30233/2013, IA/30242/2013,
                                               IA/30246/2013 & IA/30251/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 27th August 2014                             |On 24th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between
               the SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          CEI, LNI, LOI, JCI & JCI
                                                                   Claimants

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk, instructed by Fursden,Knapper Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison , Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The claimants are all citizen of Nigeria. These appeals relate  to  the
    mother and father of a family and their children.

 2. These proceedings concern the welfare,  well  being  and  interests  of
    children. Taking account all of the circumstances, in order to  protect
    the interests of the children, I  consider  it  necessary  to  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department.  I
    have however for the purposes of the  present  determination  described
    the original applicants/appellants to the First -tier Tribunal  as  the
    claimants. I refer to the Secretary of State for the Home Department as
    the SSHD.

 4. The SSHD seeks  to  appeal  against  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Cameron  promulgated  on  9th  January  2014.   By  the
    determination the judge allowed the appeals of  each  claimant  against
    the decisions of the SSHD. The decisions taken in respect  of  each  of
    the claimants was to refuse the claimant further leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom and thereupon to remove each of them to their country of
    nationality. The decisions are dated 27 August 2013.

 5. In allowing the appeals the judge allowed each appeal on the  basis  of
    article 8 of the ECHR. The judge  had  considered  whether  the  appeal
    should be allowed under the Immigration Rules or Article 3 of the  ECHR
    and  determined  that  the  claimants  could  not  succeed  under   the
    Immigration Rules [paragraph 276ADE Private life  or  Appendix  FM]  or
    under Article 3.

 6. Leave to appeal was granted to the  respondent  on  8  April  2014.  In
    granting leave to appeal it is suggested that  the  judge  applied  the
    wrong test in respect of the health of  the  appellant  LOI  submitting
    that the threshold in medical cases is a high one and there is  a  lack
    of adequate reasoning.  There is a reply and the representative for the
    claimants before me sought to re-open other issues in the case.

Factual background

 7. The basis for these appeals relies upon the  condition  of  the  child,
    LOI, date of birth the 29  August  2006.  There  are  several  experts'
    reports, which deal with  the  medical  condition  of  the  child.  The
    remaining claimants are dependants upon the claim of LOI. Were  it  not
    for the condition of LOI, the remaining appellants would  have  limited
    prospects of remaining in the UK.

 8. The mother of the family obtained leave to enter the United Kingdom  as
    a student prior to January 2009. Consistent with the leave granted  the
    mother came to the United Kingdom as a student. The family came to  the
    United Kingdom as dependants of a student  and  entered  the  UK  on  2
    January 2009.

 9. It has to be noted that at the time of entry LOI would  have  been  two
    years and three months old.

10. Subsequently the mother was granted further leave to remain as a  Post-
    Study Work Migrant until 7 June 2013, with  the  family  being  granted
    leave in line with the mother. On 14 May 2013  applications  were  made
    for further leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom.  The  applications
    were refused on the 9th August 2013.

11. The basis of the appellants' case to  remain  relates  to  the  medical
    condition of the child LOI. As noted by the judge in paragraph  21  LOI
    suffers from a series of medical conditions. The  judge  has  carefully
    considered the medical reports submitted.

12. As of 14 October 2013 Dr Curran  ,  Consultant  Paediatric  Neurologist
    describes the condition of the child in the following terms:-

        "[He].....  has  profound  and  severe  neuro-disability.  He   has
        quadriplegic    cerebral    palsy    following    hypoxic-ischaemic
        encephalopathy, epilepsy,  long-term  chronic  oxygen  requirement,
        recurrent chest infections and severe  and  profound  developmental
        delay.

    In dealing with the child's medical requirements in the same letter  Dr
    Curran states: --

        "His medical condition remains unstable, where he continues to have
        frequent  chest  infections  requiring  antibiotics.   He   is   on
        continuous oxygen. This is essential for his health  and  continued
        well-being. He requires regular reviews  by  the  multidisciplinary
        team which  includes  dieticians,  physiotherapists,  oxygen  nurse
        specialist,   consultant   neurologist,   consultant    respiratory
        physician and the consultant palliative care specialist."

    In the conclusions it is questioned whether or not the appellant  would
    receive appropriate healthcare  in  Nigeria.  However  there  does  not
    appear to be a definite opinion that the child would not.

13. Other reports refer also to the cerebral palsy -- spastic  quadriplegia
    secondary  to  birth   asphyxia,   scoliosis,   epilepsy,   significant
    developmental delay and "gastro-intestinal dysmotility". There  appears
    to be a technological  dependency  on  a  pump  feed.   There  is  some
    reference to his "spasticity and dystonia"  having  improved  with  his
    change of medication.

14. The reference to birth asphyxia is significant as the cause of many  of
    the symptoms emanates from problems at birth.  By  the  time  that  the
    child was entering the UK there would have been a marked  lack  of  his
    achieving developmental stages at least, if not clear evidence of  some
    of his symptoms.

15. The letter from Alder Hey Children's Hospital by  Dr  Susie  Holt  does
    refer to the fact that the child has had complex needs since birth. The
    letter also makes reference to the fact that the life of the child will
    be significantly shortened from the norm.

16. LOI is wheelchair-bound and is oxygen dependent. He has a large  number
    of daily medications. There is reference in the reports  to  his  daily
    regime requiring the assistance of between one  and  two  people  on  a
    regular basis. It is clear that the funding for that is being  provided
    by public authorities, whether that be the NHS, the central  government
    or local government is unclear.

17. In a letter from Ms Leanne  Turner  Clinic  Specialist  Physiotherapist
    there is the following: --

        "L has spastic quadriplegia cerebral palsy which  has  resulted  in
        multi-complex medical problems which vary from him needing moderate
        intervention  from  multiple  specialist  professionals  to  higher
        levels of intervention. L has severe restriction  in  his  mobility
        and requires full care from 1 to 2 people and specialist  equipment
        to help him move  around.  He  also  needs  specialist  eating  and
        pastoral care equipment to maintain his posture to prevent pain and
        discomfort.

18. There is then  reference  to  the  chest  problems  which  have  to  be
    monitored on a daily basis as the same could prove fatal. The child has
    a complex feeding regime to avoid reflux and seizures.

19. There is in place an emergency care plan. There  is  reference  to  LOI
    experiencing seizures more  often  and  suffering  from  a  poor  sleep
    pattern. There is an End of Life Care Plan in place  with  a  placement
    being made at Claire House Hospice. The care plan makes  provision  for
    resuscitation and  maintenance  of  bodily  functions  where  there  is
    reversible illness. The care plan  does  contemplate  the  prospect  of
    further brain or  cardiac  damage  and,  whilst  it  acknowledges  that
    necessary  medication  to  ensure  comfort  would  be  appropriate,  it
    concedes circumstances in which a natural death may be appropriate.

20. The medical condition of the child appears to be  accepted.  The  issue
    before the first-tier tribunal was how that was to be considered  under
    article 8 including consideration of the best interests of the child.

Appeal and grounds

21. The appeals were heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cameron  on  23
    December 2013 and the determination  promulgated  on  the  9th  January
    2014.

22. Application for leave to appeal was not lodged  by  the  SSHD  until  9
    March 2014. There would normally be only five days in which to lodge an
    application for leave to appeal. In the normal  course  of  events  the
    application is  over  six  weeks  late.  The  judge  dealing  with  the
    application extended time.

23. The grounds of the application in essence are:-

         a) The findings by the  judge  are  inadequate,  specifically  with
            regard to whether the LOI could access the  quality  of  medical
            care in Nigeria comparable with that  he  is  receiving  in  the
            United Kingdom. The judge has misapplied the law as set  out  in
            MM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 279.

         b) The case law makes clear that medical care is only  relevant  to
            article 8 where an individual has personal ties to the UK.

         c) The case of GS & EO (Article 3-health cases) India  [2012]  UKUT
            00397 makes clear that whilst it may be that article 8 is  wider
            than article 3, it would still be a  rare  case  where  a  claim
            could succeed on article 8 grounds in health cases. Reliance  is
            also placed on KH (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ. 1354.

         d) It is asserted that the judge has failed to consider the case of
            Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 00197  and  the  legal  guidance  given
            therein.

         e) Finally it is  asserted  that  the  judge  has  failed  to  give
            adequate consideration to the legitimate interest of maintaining
            effective immigration control.

Issues in the case

24. The appeals have been allowed on Article 8 grounds.

25. The starting point with regard to medical treatment and the ECHR  is  N
    2005 UKHL31 and D v UK (1997) 24 ECHR, although the cases were  in  the
    main considering Article 3 and emphasise the high threshold that exists
    in respect of Article 3.

26. The threshold for Article 3 can be seen in  the  cases  of  AN  v  SSHD
    (2013) CSIH 111, R on the application of SQ  (Pakistan)  v  UTIAC  2013
    EWCA Civ 1251 and AE (Algeria) v SSHD 2014 EWCA Civ  653.  However  the
    cases also make the point that in respect of children and the statutory
    duty under Section 55 of the 2009 Act to consider the best interest  of
    the child Article 8 may provided better and wider remedy or  protection
    to the child than Article 3.

27. The case of JA (Ivory Coast) 2009 EWCA Civ 1353 makes the point that  a
    distinction has to be drawn between individuals, who entered the United
    Kingdom lawfully and those who  entered  unlawfully.   It  acknowledges
    that in respect of those entering unlawfully the case of  N  2005  UKHL
    sets out the criteria to be applied. Those that  are  lawfully  in  the
    country and who have acquired a right to NHS  treatment  would  however
    have a stronger basis for seeking to rely upon Articles 3 and 8.

28. Even in respect of such individuals the consequence to the health of an
    applicant has to be considered carefully.  The case of Akhalu   (health
    claim: ECHR) Nigeria [ 2013] UKUT 400  deals with the issue  of  claims
    on the basis of health. In Akhalu it has to be noted that the appellant
    was suffering from kidney failure and required kidney dialysis. Without
    such treatment her life would be significantly  foreshortened.  It  was
    found to be inappropriate for her to live in a semi rural area  in  her
    home country, where  treatment  would  not  be  available.   The  Upper
    Tribunal upheld a decision by the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the
    appeal on article 8 grounds.

29. In Akhalu  careful  consideration  was  given  to  a  number  of  cases
    including MM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 279 and GS & EO (Article
    3 -- health cases) India [2012]  UKUT  397.  In  dealing  with  MM  the
    submission made by the SSHD has been considered, that  is  that  it  is
    only where otherwise there are  significant  aspects  of  private  life
    tying an individual to the United Kingdom  that  the  healthcare  issue
    needs to be considered. That approach is not  an  accepted  within  the
    case law. Rather it seems to be a factor to be taken  into  account  in
    carrying out proportionality exercise.

30. As set out in Akhalu at paragraph 45 and 46 in respect of Article 8 :-



        45 The correct approach is for the judge to have  regard  to  every
        aspect  of  the  claimant  private  life  here,  as  well  as   the
        consequences for her health of removal, but to have  in  mind  when
        striking the balance of  proportionality  that  the  comparison  of
        levels of medical treatment available is something that will not in
        itself have any real impact on the outcome  of  the  exercise.  The
        judge must recognise, ..... that  it  will  be  a  rare  case  that
        succeeds where this is an important aspect of the claimant case.

        46 Put another way, the consequences of removal for the  health  of
        the claimant who would not be able to access equivalent health care
        in their country of nationality as was available in  this  country,
        are plainly relevant to the question of proportionality.  But  when
        weighed against the public interest in ensuring  that  the  limited
        resources of this country's health service are  used  to  the  best
        effect for the benefit of those for whom they are  intended,  there
        was consequences do not weigh  heavily  on  the  claimant's  favour
        speak cogently in support of the public interest in removal.


31. The case law and the approach to be taken with this kind  of  case  are
    otherwise fully rehearsed in the case of Aklahu.

32. Before the First-tier Tribunal it was not contended that the appellants
    could  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  (see   paragraph   19).
    Submissions were made on the basis of article 3 and article  8  of  the
    ECHR.

33. The First-tier Tribunal has clearly  considered  the  matters  set  out
    above and has considered the medical reports in detail. Of significance
    in that regard is the fact that  the  reports  referred  to  the  child
    needing daily oxygen and a steady and  constant  supply.  Without  such
    there would be a serious risk to the child's life.

34. It has to be acknowledged, as it is in the case law,  that,  where  the
    NHS is providing such a level of care,  given  the  limited  funds  the
    provision of this level of care to one individual is depriving  others.
    As is stated in several of the cases the UK is not the  health  service
    for the world. However such is but one factor to be taken into  account
    in assessing the proportionality exercise. It has to be  considered  in
    light of the fact that the  entitlement  to  NHS  health  care  can  be
    acquired by and is based upon residence. If it had been  intended  that
    more stringent condition were appropriate regulations could  have  been
    put in place to set such conditions.

35. There is a degree to which it is suggested within the determination  by
    the judge that the child was not diagnosed until he  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom for some time. That has to be looked in the light of the
    fact that the condition has existed since  birth  by  reason  of  birth
    asphyxia. The child was two when he came to the United Kingdom and  his
    condition must have been apparent prior to the family coming to the UK.



36. Having carefully considered the case law the judge has  looked  at  all
    the material aspect of this case including the best  interests  of  LOI
    and the other children. The judge has also  considered  the  importance
    and significance of the public interest [ see paragraph 31]. The  judge
    has  identified  that  the  medical  issues  related  to  LOI  and  the
    consequences to the family of those issues are  a  significant  factor.
    The judge has properly balanced the public interest  in  assessing  the
    Article 8 rights of the child and the family.

37. The child was lawfully in the UK with  his  parents.  He  was  lawfully
    receiving NHS treatment. The family have been in the UK for some years.
    Whilst the regime to deal  with  the  child's  problems  is  at  public
    expense and significant public expense, the access  to  such  treatment
    was acquired through  lawful  residence.  There  is  in  place  a  very
    structured regime to ensure that the basic needs of this child are  met
    and that suffering, pain  and  discomfort  are  controlled  as  far  as
    possible. There are problems as to whether treatment would be available
    in Nigeria.  There is an End of Life Care Plan in place  to  deal  with
    the passing of the child and  to  ease  such  as  far  as  possible.  A
    significant and substantial factor in the present appeal  is  the  best
    interests of the child.

38. Having carefully considered all aspects  of  the  case  the  judge  was
    entitled to find that the decision in respect  of  the  child  was  not
    proportionately justified. In the light of  that  the  decision  is  in
    respect  of  the  remaining  members  of  the  family  were  also   not
    proportionately justified and that the appeals  were  therefore  to  be
    allowed on article 8 grounds. The judge  was  not  merely  allowed  the
    appeals because of the disparity of treatment. The  judge  has  clearly
    assessed circumstances of the child LOI and was satisfied that this was
    one of those very rare cases where the need for continuation  treatment
    being received in the United Kingdom to  the  child  coupled  with  the
    other factors was such as to justify the appeal on article 8 grounds.

39. The appellants' representative sought to argue  that  this  is  one  of
    those rare appeals, which meets the requirements of  article  3.  Given
    the case law cited above the judge's approach with regard to article  3
    has been properly justified and I do not find that there is  any  error
    of law in the approach of the judge to article 3.

40. In the  circumstances  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination.  I uphold the decision to allow these appeals on article
    8 grounds.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure          27th August 2014


Direction regarding anonymity- rule 45 (4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellants are
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellants or any member of the appellants' family.
This direction applies both to the appellants and the respondent. Failure
to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings

Signed                                       Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure              27th August 2014
