

                                                                   [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/30332/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision and Reasons         |
|On 10th October 2016                          |On 14th October 2016         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


                                   Between

                           Miss Mandeep Kaur Toor
                           (No Anonymity Direction)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Arayn, instructed by Farani Javid Taylor
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant made an application for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant on 29th March 2012.  Twice, the  colleges  for
    which she obtained a Confirmation of Acceptance of  Studies  (CAS),  had
    their licences revoked by the Secretary of State.   After  nearly  three
    years, on 9th February 2015 the appellant was given  60  days  leave  in
    order to obtain a further CAS.  Her application was then refused on 26th
    August 2015 for lack of a CAS.  As she had failed to provide a  CAS  the
    Secretary of State was also unable to assess the funds evidence she  had
    produced. Her application was refused  under  paragraph  322(9)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, that is a failure within a reasonable time to produce
    a document or other evidence required  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    establish the claim to remain under the Rules.  As she was refused under
    the general provisions her application was also refused under  paragraph
    245ZX (a) and as she did not have the relevant points under  Appendix  A
    she was refused under paragraph 245ZX (c).  She was, however, granted an
    in country right of appeal which she exercised.

 2. First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sweet  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    recording in his/her decision at [8] that

         'The appellant's college, London School of Technology, has  in  the
         meantime had its licence revoked and the  appellant  was  given  an
         opportunity on 9th February 2015 to find an alternative CAS from  a
         licensed sponsor within 60 days but she failed to do so.  According
         to her grounds of appeal this was because the respondent failed  to
         provide her passport and other educational certificates  to  enable
         her to find an alternative CAS.  No documentation was provided with
         that notice of appeal, nor any correspondence,  nor  was  a  bundle
         provided for this appeal, though the Appellant was  represented  by
         solicitors'.

 3. The appellant made an application for permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that she had indeed supplied further documentation
    to the First-tier Tribunal for her appeal.  Her appeal  bundle  included
    copies of correspondence from her solicitors to the Secretary of  State,
    prior to the refusal of her application, requesting  documents  such  as
    her passport and educational documents or at least attested  copies,  to
    produce to colleges, to enable her to obtain  the  necessary  CAS.   The
    correspondence from her solicitors to the Secretary of  State  explained
    that without those documents, colleges were rejecting  her  applications
    for a CAS.

 4. Initially permission to appeal was refused by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but was then granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam.

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Arayn produced a witness  statement  of  the
    caseworker from Farani Javid  Taylor  who  confirmed  sending  a  timely
    appeal bundle to the First-tier Tribunal.  That statement was  supported
    by evidence of the posting of the appeal bundle, in the form of an excel
    sheet.  This showed that documentation had been forwarded to the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 29th October 2015 by first class post in order to  meet
    the evidential deadline of 3rd November 2015.

 6. I accept that it is more than probable than not, that the posting record
    referred to the appeal bundle said by the judge to be missing, and  that
    either it was lost in the post or not linked with  the  file.    I  find
    that there is a procedural error and resulting unfairness.  There can be
    no fault attributed to the appellant.  The appeal  bundle  documentation
    was simply not with the file. In the making of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision there  was  an  error  of  law  stemming  from  the  procedural
    irregularity.  I set that decision aside.  In passing I note  the  error
    was not the fault of the judge. I was  encouraged  by  both  parties  to
    remake the decision myself.

 7. The omission of the appeal bundle was rectified in accordance with  Rule
    15(2) of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  the
    appeal bundle put before me.

 8. It is clear that the Secretary of State offered the appellant, by way of
    letter dated 9th February 2015, the opportunity to obtain a new CAS.  Mr
    Kotas submitted that the appellant should not  succeed  in  her  appeal.
    There had been no failure on the part of the Secretary of State and  the
    rules needed to be applied consistently.  He drew my  attention  to  the
    last paragraph of the letter which stated

         'if you fail to submit a new, valid CAS together with the  required
         supporting documentation  within  this  60  day  period,  then  our
         application will be considered on  the  basis  of  the  information
         currently available and will therefore fall to be refused'.

 9. Mr Kotas added that the Secretary of State had given the appellant  more
    than 60 days as the refusal did not take place until 26th  August  2015.
    Mr Kotas also referred to the letter which he said accompanied all  such
    letters.  This was in the form of an information  leaflet  addressed  to
    the appellant  but  informed  any  college  that  the  passport  of  the
    applicant had been retained by the Secretary of State.

10. The appellant's case was that she had attempted to  obtain  a  CAS  from
    numerous colleges but they would not entertain her  application  without
    attested educational certificates and passport copies.

11. Mr Arayn pointed out, however, that the solicitors had  written  to  the
    Secretary of State twice before the expiry of the 60  day  period  which
    would have been on or around 10th April 2015, both on  19th  March  2015
    and again in April (the actual date is indecipherable but appears to  be
    a single  digit),  explaining  that  despite  the  information  leaflet,
    colleges would not offer a CAS without the original passport or attested
    copies and  original  academic  certificates  and  requesting  that  the
    Secretary of  State  forward  these  to  the  appellant.  There  was  no
    response.  The letter of 19th March 2015 to the Secretary of  State,  in
    order  to  underline  the  recognised  difficulties  relating   to   the
    production of documents in such circumstances, contained  the  following
    extract from Kaur (Patel  fairness:  respondent's  policy)  [2013]  UKUT
    00344 (IAC)

         '13.     The appellant, through Mr Murphy, expressed  concern  that
         she would not be able to obtain a CAS without her passport and that
         this was with the Home Office. Mr Deller referred to  the  internal
         case working instruction which states that a certified copy of  the
         student's passport will be given to the appellant because  colleges
         will require evidence of status. We suggested to Mr Murphy that the
         appellant contacts the respondent forthwith to secure her  passport
         to enable her to vary her application. We do not know when  the  60
         days period commences and neither party was able to assist in  this
         regard'.

12. That is  self  explanatory.   A  further  letter  from  the  appellant's
    solicitors with a similar exhortation followed in April 2015  this  time
    also quoting Thakur (PBS decision  -  common  law  fairness)  Bangladesh
    [2011] UKUT 00151 (IAC).

13. Neither the appellant nor the solicitors received a  response  prior  to
    the refusal.  Mr Kotas could locate no response on his file.

14. With the caselaw set out above, I find  that  it  is  evident  that  the
    appellant, without  an  attested  copy  of  her  passport  and  original
    educational certificates, or at least certified copies,  was  unable  to
    obtain, through no fault of her own a further  CAS.  She  was  given  no
    response, nor information as  to  the  status  of  her  application  and
    although she endeavoured  to  obtain  a  reply  or  documents  from  the
    Secretary of State, she failed to elicit either. That  is  a  procedural
    unfairness which rendered the treatment of her application unfair. It is
    known to the Secretary of State by virtue of the caselaw that appellants
    cannot obtain a CAS without the relevant documents. She had to her  mind
    produced a CAS with her application and twice they had  become  invalid.
    No doubt  colleges  have  become  more  wary  about  the  procedure  for
    enlisting  applicants  and  would  apply  increasingly   more   rigorous
    practices when enrolling students because of the risk  of  losing  their
    sponsorship licences.  The appellant could not provide  that  which  was
    with the respondent.

15. As the application was made prior to the 20th October 2014  through  the
    saving provisions effected by The Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement  No
    4 Transitional and Saving Provisions and Amendment) Order 2015 the  'old
    rights' of appeal apply as  do  the  former  provisions  in  respect  of
    Section 86 of the Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and,
    effectively, how the tribunal resolves the  appeal.   I  find  that  the
    inaction and failure of the Secretary of State to provide the appellant,
    despite repeated requests, with the necessary documentation prior to the
    refusal of her application unfair and thus not in  accordance  with  the
    law.

16. The  appellant  awaits  a  lawful  decision.   She  should  contact  the
    Secretary of State for  the  provision  of  the  relevant  documentation
    (certified/attested passport and original educational certificates)  and
    on receipt of such documentation should be given  a  60  day  period  in
    order to obtain the relevant CAS so she may vary her application.

Notice

Appeal Allowed to the limited extent outlined above.




Signed:                      Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

Date: 13th October 2016






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make a whole fee
award because the appellant was successful.
