
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30234/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th November 2016                        |On 22nd December 2016         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                              mr istiaque ahmad
                       (anonymity DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Harris, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild
& Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  EXTEMPORE
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals a decision of Judge Suffield-Thompson promulgated
    on 28th June 2016.  He is a Bangladeshi national  who  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  His leave was  curtailed
    on 22nd April 2014 and expired on 21st June 2014.  He applied for leave
    as a Tier 4 Student on 10th June 2014 and the application  was  refused
    on 14th July 2014.  He then applied for  leave  under  the  Family  and
    Private Life Provisions on 28th November 2014 and that was  refused  on
    3rd February 2015.  That refusal was the subject of the appeal  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. Judge Suffield-Thompson found that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules relevant to spousal and parental applications on  the
    basis that there were no insurmountable obstacles as to why his  family
    could not relocate with him to Bangladesh.  In reaching that conclusion
    the judge took into account the evidence that the difficulties that the
    Appellant's UK spouse asserted would  follow  in  the  event  that  the
    family relocated to  Bangladesh,  but  concluded  that  they  were  not
    sufficient to amount  to  insurmountable  obstacles.   The  judge  also
    considered  whether  the  Appellant,  despite  failing  to   meet   the
    substantive requirements of the Rules, should  nonetheless  be  granted
    leave to remain outside of the Rules on the basis of  the  strength  of
    the family life with his spouse.  On that question the judge noted that
    the Appellant could return to Bangladesh and make an application for  a
    spousal visa, in which context it was open to his wife to remain in the
    United Kingdom, the judge having rejected the evidence that  she  would
    be unable to manage in the United Kingdom without her husband.

 3. The grounds  upon  which  permission  were  granted  complain  that  in
    reaching her conclusions the judge failed to take into account that the
    Appellant met the status requirements of the relevant Immigration Rules
    and that if the judge had done so then  a  different  result  may  have
    obtained.  In addition, before me, Mr Harris  added  a  gloss  on  that
    ground  by  asserting  that  requiring  the  Appellant  to  return   to
    Bangladesh was no more than a requirement to meet a  formal  condition,
    so that it was in any event disproportionate in  light  of  his  wife's
    circumstances  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  the  nature   of   their
    relationship.

 4. I find that the judge did not make any material errors of  law  in  her
    decision.

 5. Firstly it is quite clear that in reaching her conclusion in respect of
    the Rules she took no adverse point in respect of the status issue  now
    set out.  At best the point relates to whether or not  the  gateway  to
    EX.1 was available to the Appellant and in that  context  it  is  quite
    clear from the judge's consideration of the matters  set  out  at  EX.1
    that the judge fully appreciated  that  the  avenue  was  open  to  the
    Appellant. In that context, it is incoherent to suggest  that  she  was
    not  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  met  the  gateway
    requirements of the suitability and immigration  status  provisions  of
    the Rule.

 6. Secondly so far as the judge's assessment of the proportionality of the
    removal decision, in the context of whether or not the Appellant  ought
    to return to Bangladesh in order to make an  application  from  abroad,
    the judge has correctly self-directed both in respect of the Rules  and
    in respect of Article 8, and the decision which  she  has  reached  was
    open to her on the evidence before her.   Nothing  in  the  grounds  or
    submissions before me reveals any perversity in her conclusion.

 7. For all those reasons I am satisfied that the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal reveals no error and it stands.

Notice of Decision

The appeal before the Upper Tribunal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal dismissing the Appellant's appeal stands.

Anonymity not having previously been ordered in the First-tier Tribunal  and
there being no application to do so now, I see no reason  to  make  such  an
order.


Signed        E Davidge                      Date 21 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
