
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 30877 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 May 2014                                 |On 26 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                           Chukwuemeka John Emordi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Ojukotola, legal representative from SLA
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Nigeria against  a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  decision  to
    refuse him a residence card confirming  his  right  to  reside  in  the
    United Kingdom as the husband of  an  EEA  national.   His  wife  is  a
    citizen of France.  The Secretary of State was not satisfied  that  the
    appellant and his purported wife were in fact married at all in  a  way
    recognised in relevant law.

 2. The appellant asked for the case to be dealt with on the  papers  which
    is a remarkable way of disposing of a case of this complexity and I  am
    not in the least surprised that the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  without
    the assistance of legal representation from either side, erred.

 3. The clear fault of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  to  take  points
    against the appellant about which  he  neither  had  notice  nor  could
    possibly have reasonably anticipated.  For example, he found  that  the
    evidence was not credible and that the marriage was not shown to be not
    one of convenience and he dismissed the appeal.  These  findings  might
    be an apt description of the alleged marriage but they are quite unfair
    in a case  where  the  only  point  of  contention  identified  by  the
    respondent was the actual validity of the marriage. If  the  judge  was
    considering making such findings  he  should  have  given  the  parties
    notice.

 4. If I was satisfied that the marriage could  not  possibly  be  valid  I
    would not be taking the course that I am but there is  evidence  before
    me which makes me think that it might be valid.  There is some evidence
    to show that proxy marriages by customary  law  are  valid  in  Nigeria
    provided that they are registered in a particular way and there is some
    evidence before me that registration has taken place here.

 5. It is a matter for the appellant to decide how to prove  his  case  but
    for my part it will be  altogether  more  satisfactory  if  a  properly
    qualified  person  learned  in  the    laws  of  Nigeria  and  suitably
    experienced prepared  a  statement  based  on  an  examination  of  the
    evidence including the documents and expressed  an  opinion  about  the
    validity of the marriage. If such a document  is  produced  and  served
    properly on the Secretary of State in advance of the hearing  it  would
    be very difficult to  go  behind  it  unless  the  Secretary  of  State
    produces good contrary evidence.  Conversely  if  such  a  document  is
    missing it is the kind  of  omission  that  might  be  of  considerable
    concern to a judge deciding the appeal.

 6. There is an  additional  difficulty  in  this  case  arising  from  the
    decision of this Tribunal in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU  law)  [2014]
    UKUT 00024 (IAC)  which  was  promulgated  about  the  time  that  this
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was made. In  Kareem  the  Tribunal
    decided that a  proxy  marriage  to  an  EEA  national  is  not  to  be
    recognised as a qualifying marriage unless it can be shown to be  valid
    not only in the country of origin of the non-EEA national but  also  in
    the country of nationality of the EEA national, in this case in France.

 7. Mr Ojukotola said that he is aware of the decision in Kareem. Indeed he
    was involved in the case at some  stage  when  he  was  working  for  a
    different firm of solicitors.  He  said  that  it  is  the  subject  of
    challenge but in anticipation that it would be raised  he  has  started
    the process of gathering necessary evidence to show that  the  marriage
    is recognised in France.

 8. Whether or not Kareem had actually been promulgated  by  the  time  the
    First-tier Tribunal decided the case I am satisfied it would  be  wrong
    to say that the appellant should have anticipated the decision when  he
    made his application. I am satisfied that it is right in this  case  to
    give the  appellant  an  opportunity  of  addressing  the  requirements
    identified in Kareem.

 9.  It follows that the First-tier Tribunal has erred in  law  and  I  set
    aside its decision.  This is not a case that could  be  properly  dealt
    with by me today.  It is one of those rare cases where I  am  satisfied
    it is right to give the appellant an opportunity to better his evidence
    although, as will be explained to him, it can only be evidence relating
    to facts that predated the decision.

10. I give no further directions.  It is for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    decide how it conducts its affairs but it seems to me that  this  is  a
    case where a Case Management Review hearing at an early stage would  be
    in everybody's interests.  It seems to me that this is more  likely  to
    be a case based on law and the correct interpretation of documents than
    on oral evidence but that is not necessarily the case, it may  be  oral
    evidence will be necessary too.

11. It follows therefore that I make a decision that the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is wrong in law.  I set it aside and  I  rule  that
    the case be decided again in the First-tier Tribunal.

12. I am very grateful to Mr Ojukotola who clearly is  well-informed  about
    matters relating to this case and some other cases and he has been most
    helpful.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 25 June 2014                   |









