
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30077/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|19 November 2015                     |26 January 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                            PIMSUTHAN CHAIYAMART
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   AN IMMIGRATION OFFICER, GLASGOW AIRPORT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Stevenson, instructed by McGill & Co Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Thailand.  She appealed  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal against a decision of the respondent on 12 September 2015
    cancelling her continuing leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appeal was dismissed by Judge Mozolowski in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to this Tribunal.

 2. The salient facts are as follows.  The  appellant  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on a Tier 4 (Student) Visa valid  from  3  January  2012  to  3
    October 2013.  On 26 August 2013 she married Mr Mark Wallace, a British
    national.  She than applied for and  obtained  leave  to  remain  as  a
    spouse, valid from 19 September 2013 until 19 March 2016.  On  about  1
    June 2014 the appellant left the United Kingdom.   At  about  the  same
    time Mr Wallace informed the Secretary of State that the  marriage  had
    broken down and that he  was  instigating  divorce  proceedings.   That
    information was passed to Immigration Officers.

 3. On 11 July 2014 the appellant returned to the United Kingdom.  She  was
    interviewed, and after consideration by an Immigration  Officer  and  a
    Chief Immigration Officer her leave was cancelled.  The grounds for the
    cancellation are stated in the notice of decision  as  being  that  the
    withdrawal of Mr Wallace's sponsorship of her was a significant  change
    in circumstances that remove the basis  of  her  entry  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

 4. The grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  essentially
    twofold.  Substantively, the appellant claimed that  the  decision  was
    based on an incorrect assessment of the facts.  She  claimed  that  she
    was taken by surprise and had thought that  her  relationship  with  Mr
    Wallace was subsisting; she also asserted that the impending birth of a
    child gave her a right to enter.  The  judge  heard  detailed  evidence
    from the appellant, the important parts of which she did  not  believe.
    She concluded that there had indeed been a significant  change  in  the
    circumstances of the appellant and that the  latter  had  no  right  to
    admission.  That part of the judge's  determination  is  not  contested
    before us.

 5. The appellant also, however,  raised  a  procedural  challenge  to  the
    decision, submitting that the way the decision was taken meant that the
    decision was "otherwise not in accordance  with  the  law"  within  the
    meaning of s 84(1)(e) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.  That submission was based on  reference  to  a  policy  document
    apparently indicating  that  in  circumstances  such  as  the  present,
    officers should consider whether to curtail the migrant's leave  to  60
    days and only  in  certain  specified  circumstances  curtail  it  with
    immediate effect.  It was argued  that  the  decision  that  was  made,
    cancelling the appellant's leave  rather  than  curtailing  it,  was  a
    decision which was  made  not  in  accordance  with  the  policy;  and,
    further, that if the appellant's leave had been curtailed  rather  than
    cancelled she would have had  the  opportunity  to  apply,  within  the
    curtailed  period  of  leave,  for  further  leave.   Judge  Mozolowski
    rejected that argument.

 6. The grounds on the basis of which permission to appeal to this Tribunal
    was granted are that in rejecting that  argument  the  judge  made  two
    errors.  She should have decided that the decision was an unlawful one,
    and so allowed the appeal, leaving no adverse decision in force against
    the appellant.  Further, having done that, she should  have  recognised
    that consideration of the merits of the appellant's case needed  to  be
    undertaken by the Secretary of State as part of any  new  decision;  it
    was not for the judge to investigate the merits of a decision which had
    not yet lawfully been taken.

 7. At the hearing, Mr Stevenson  presented  those  arguments  to  us.   We
    reject them for two reasons.  The first is that the policy  upon  which
    he relied does not apply to the circumstances of this case.  The second
    is that if the appellant's leave had been curtailed to  60  days,  that
    would have been a disadvantage rather than an advantage to her.

 8. The context of the appellant's status following her departure from  the
    United Kingdom is given by art 13 of the Immigration  (leave  to  enter
    and remain) Order 2000 (SI 2000/1161), the relevant paragraphs of which
    are as follows:
         "13(2) Subject to paragraph (3), where a person has leave which  is
         in force and which was:
             (a)  conferred by means of an entry clearance  (other  than  a
                  visit visa) under article 2; or
             (b)  given by an immigrant officer or the Secretary  of  State
                  for a period exceeding six months, such  leave  shall  not
                  lapse on his going to a country or territory  outside  the
                  common travel area.
         (3) Paragraph (2) shall not apply:
             (a)  where a limited leave has been varied by the Secretary of
                  State; and
             (b)  following the variation the period of leave remaining  is
                  six month or less."

    Subsequent paragraphs of art 13 enable leave which does not lapse to be
    curtailed or cancelled whilst the holder is abroad.

 9. Paragraph 2A of schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971 deals  with  the
    examination  of  persons  who  arrive   with   continuing   leave   and
    specifically provides in sub-paragraph 2(a) that such a person  may  be
    examined by an Immigration  Office  for  the  purpose  of  establishing
    "whether there has been such a change in the circumstances of his case,
    since that leave was given, that it should be cancelled".  At Paragraph
    321A of the Statement of Changes  in  Immigration  Rules,  HC  395  (as
    amended) is, so far as is relevant to this appeal, as follows:
         "Grounds on which leave to enter or remain which is in force is  to
         be cancelled at port or while the  holder  is  outside  the  United
         Kingdom
             321A. The following grounds for the cancellation of a person's
             leave to enter or remain which is in fore on his  arrival  in,
             or whilst he is outside, the United Kingdom apply;
             (1) there has been such a change in the circumstances of  that
             person's case since the leave was given,  that  it  should  be
             cancelled; or
         ... ."

    There is an assessment to be made, but once  the  assessment  has  been
    made, the wording of the rule (including its heading)  makes  it  clear
    that cancellation is mandatory.  The following paragraphs of the rules,
    322  -  323C,  make  different  provision  in  relation  to   different
    circumstances, and include a number of discretionary powers to  curtail
    leave.  One of them (in paragraph 323(ii)) arises if a  person  "ceases
    to meet the requirements of the rules under which his leave to enter or
    remain was granted", but there is no specific reference to a change  of
    circumstances in those terms, except in paragraph 321A; and it is  that
    paragraph  alone  which  gives  the  authority  for   cancellation   of
    continuing leave.  With that in mind, we  turn  to  the  guidance  upon
    which Mr Stevenson, on behalf of the appellant, relied.  It  is  headed
    as follows:
         "Immigration Rules, part 9
         323, 323A, 323B, 323C and part 6A
         245DE(c)-Entrepreneurs and 245EE(c) - Investors."

    The opening words of the guidance makes  it  clear  that  it  is  about
    curtailment.

10.  The  guidance  does  not  purport  to  lay  down  any  principles  for
    cancellation of leave; nor does it purport to undermine or  comment  on
    circumstances where cancellation of leave is mandatory under  paragraph
    321A.  In the present case the officer assessed the facts of  which  he
    was aware and concluded that there  had  been  such  a  change  in  the
    circumstances since it was given, that it should be cancelled.  At that
    point he  was  obliged  to  cancel  the  leave  under  paragraph  321A.
    Discretionary curtailment did not arise.  The decision is  one  clearly
    made under paragraph 321A and the guidance upon which  the  appellant's
    representatives have tried to put so much weight  was  not  applicable.
    That conclusion was reached, in similar terms,  by  the  judge  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The grounds of appeal  to  this  Tribunal  wholly
    fail to engage with it.  The First-tier Tribunal judge was correct.

11. It is, however, worth spending a moment on what the position  would  be
    if Mr Stevenson was right and that the leave should have been curtailed
    to 60 days.  If, whilst she was abroad, the appellant's leave had  been
    curtailed so as to have six months or less  remaining,  it  would  have
    fallen within art 13(3) of the Immigration (leave to enter and  remain)
    Order 2000.   Paragraph (2) of that article would therefore  not  apply
    to it, and on the appellant's return to the United Kingdom she would be
    treated as a person who required leave to enter.   As  she  is  a  visa
    national (Appendix 1 of the Immigration Rules),  refusal  of  leave  to
    enter would have been mandatory.  In those circumstances she would  not
    have had an  in-country  right  of  appeal,  whereas,  because  of  the
    provisions  of  paragraph  2A(9)  of  Schedule  2  to  the  1971   Act,
    cancellation of the appellant's leave gave her the in-country right  of
    appeal which she is exercising.   It is, we think, perfectly clear that
    for  that  reason  cancellation  is  more  advantageous  to  her   than
    curtailment to 60 days.

12. For the foregoing reasons we are entirely unpersuaded by Mr Stevenson's
    arguments.  The appellant's appeal stands as dismissed.


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 21 January 2016
