
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/30067/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 2 August 2016                              |On 9 August 2016             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                    M O I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Onipade, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Carlin ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 12 November 2015,  in
    which the FTTJ dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal  of
    a residence pursuant to the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.


 2. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal  but,  given
    the references in this decision  to  the  appellant's  and  his  wife's
    personal circumstances, an anonymity order is appropriate.


Background

 3. The appellant married his wife, an Irish citizen, on [ ] February 2015.
     He applied for a residence  card  on  the  basis  that  his  wife  was
    exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  UK.  The  respondent  refused  the
    application because, when a telephone call was made to her employer, it
    was found that the appellant's wife was no longer employed at the  date
    of decision. This was confirmed in a letter dated 1 September 2015 from
    the  appellant's  wife's  former  employer  to  the  effect  that   the
    appellant's wife had left their employ on 3 July 2015.  The FTTJ  found
    that the appellant's wife was not therefore employed  at  the  date  of
    hearing. The appeal was dismissed.


 4. The appellant appealed to this tribunal on the ground that the FTTJ had
    failed to take into account evidence submitted to the FTT to the effect
    that his wife had started alternative employment.   The  appellant  was
    granted permission to appeal to this tribunal.

Submissions

 5. At the outset of the hearing I pointed out to the parties that the  FTT
    file included  a  bundle  of  documents  apparently  submitted  by  the
    appellant. It was stamped as having been received by  the  FTT  hearing
    centre in Birmingham (where the appeal was listed to be  heard  on  the
    papers) on 21 October 2015, ie before the due date of 23 October  2015,
    as notified to the parties in the directions notice.


 6. Mr Kotas, for the Secretary of state, conceded that,  the  FTTJ  having
    failed to refer to the appellant's evidence in the decision, a material
    error of law had been made. That was an appropriate concession  in  the
    circumstances.

Discussion

 7. As the FTTJ had failed to take into account relevant evidence,  I  find
    the decision contains a material error of  law:  the  evidence  in  the
    appellant's bundle had a bearing on the outcome of the hearing.


 8. I set aside the FTTJ's decision and remake it as follows.

 9. The appellant produced to the FTT a letter from his wife's employer, UK
    Universal  Group,  dated  16  October  2015.  This  confirms  that  the
    appellant's wife had been employed by the UK Universal Group Ltd  since
    1 September 2015 upon completion of her training.  She was working full-
    time. The bundle also includes bank statements reflecting her earnings.

10. In addition, the appellant produced  before  me  a  further  bundle  of
    documents with up-to-date documentary  evidence  of  relevance  to  the
    issue of whether the appellant's wife is a qualified person pursuant to
    Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations.  That bundle  includes  a  further
    letter from UK Universal Group  Ltd  confirming  the  appellant's  wife
    still works for that company. There is also a letter from HMRC dated 11
    July 2016, obtained for these proceedings,  confirming  her  employment
    history. This includes her work for  UK  Universal  Group  Ltd  from  1
    September 2015 to date.  There are also various payslips issued by that
    company to the appellant's wife, a P60 issued by UK Universal Group Ltd
    and bank statements reflecting the appellant's wife's income  as  shown
    in her payslips.

11. Taking the evidence in the round I am satisfied  that  the  appellant's
    wife is a worker  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  UK  pursuant  to
    regulation 6.

Decision

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  an
    error of law, as set out above.


13. I set aside the decision.

14. I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.




Signed           A M Black
Deputy       Upper       Tribunal       Judge        A        M        Black
    Date 8 August 2016


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Fee Award
The appeal has been successful and I have considered making a fee  award.  I
do not make a fee award because there is no indication the appellant sent  a
copy of his bundle to the respondent prior to the hearing of his  appeal  on
the papers in the FTT. Had he done so, the respondent  would  have  had  the
opportunity to reconsider her decision and to avoid an appeal hearing.




Signed           A M Black
Deputy       Upper       Tribunal       Judge        A        M        Black
    Date 8 August 2016

