
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/30984/2013
     IA/30987/2013
     IA/30989/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28th April 2014                            |On 02nd June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                          Mrs Beverly June Goodwill
                         Mr Syed Waqar Hassan Zaidi
                              Miss Zakia Zaidi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nasim instructed by Crown & Mehria Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The first appellant is a citizen of  the  United  States  born  on  7th
    November 1987, the second appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan  born  on
    23rd June 1980 and the third appellant  is  a  citizen  of  the  United
    States and the child of the first and second appellant and born on 26th
    December 2011.  On 8th June 2013 they made an application to remain  in
    the UK as a Tier 1 Migrant and dependants of a Tier 1 Migrant under the
    points-based system and this application was refused on 3rd July  2013.
    The decision incorporated a refusal of leave to remain together with  a
    decision to remove the appellants by way of directions under Section 47
    of the Immigration and Asylum Act 2006.

 2. The reasons for refusal letter confirmed that on 7th January  2009  the
    first appellant was granted leave to enter the UK as a student and  her
    leave was extended until 8th June 2013.  She then made  an  application
    as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur but this was refused under paragraph 245DD  of
    the Immigration Rules as she did not meet the requirement of  paragraph
    245DD(b) under Appendix A.

 3. The respondent applied paragraph 41-SD of Appendix A of the Immigration
    Rules and stated that she had not provided sufficient evidence with her
    application as specified under Appendix A.

 4. She claimed points on the basis that she had registered as  a  director
    of a new company in the UK but she had not provided acceptable evidence
    as specified under Appendix A to establish that she had  registered  in
    an appropriate manner.  She stated in  her  application  that  she  was
    registered as a director of a new business and as proof she stated that
    she had submitted a Current Appointment Report  from  Companies  House.
    However the document she  submitted  was  in  fact  a  Companies  House
    Company Overview printout and this document did not show the date which
    she was appointed director and nor did  the  printout  of  the  company
    information she had submitted.

 5.  Thus  the  evidence  submitted  in  the  form   HMRC   self-assessment
    registration had not been taken into consideration.  If  this  evidence
    had been taken into consideration it would not have been acceptable  as
    it was  a  printout  of  her  submitting  her  registration  for  self-
    assessment and was not proof she was in fact registered.

 6. On the basis of the documents she provided the Secretary of  State  was
    not satisfied  she  met  the  requirements  under  paragraph  41-SD  of
    Appendix A.

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes  dismissed  their  appeals  under  the
    Immigration Rules and under Article 8 on 20th January 2014.

 8. The judge recorded that at the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that the first appellant submitted an online version of  her  Companies
    House report but this did not show her date of appointment and the date
    of incorporation may be different from her  date  of  appointment  [6].
    The report of 9th July was not before the decision maker. The full mail
    copy was requested after she had received the refusal letter.  The full
    report was at page 25 of her bundle.

 9. The first appellant agreed under cross-examination  that  the  date  of
    incorporation was 16th May 2013 and that at D1 a one page  online  copy
    did not show the date of her appointment as a director and it  did  not
    follow that the date of incorporation was the date of her  appointment.
    She also submitted the document at E1 which did not show  the  date  of
    her appointment.

10. The judge took note at paragraph 9 of his determination that  paragraph
    245AA was amended on 1st October 2010 and it  was  on  that  date  that
    subparagraph (b)(iv) was added such that there was a discretion for the
    respondent  to  apply  the  evidential  flexibility  policy  where  the
    document did not contain all the required information such as now.

11. The judge found at paragraph  10  that  the  first  appellant  did  not
    provide the documentation that met the requirements  of  the  specified
    documentation and information and that the Secretary of State  did  not
    fail to apply the policy of  evidential  flexibility.   The  appellants
    were not assisted by the applicable terms of paragraph 245AA.

12. There was an application for permission to appeal.   It  was  submitted
    that the judge misunderstood the requirements for paragraph  245AA  and
    the application of the evidential flexibility policy.  It followed that
    the Secretary of State's  representatives  should  have  contacted  the
    Appellant  and  requested  the   specified   information   through   an
    alternative but suitable document.  The judge did not  take  this  into
    account.

13. The judge should have considered paragraph 245AA(d)(iii) as  it  was  a
    document which was missing and which could have been verified from  the
    other documents, and further the Secretary of State could have obtained
    the necessary information directly from the website at Companies  House
    and the appellant's application could have been granted exceptionally.

14. Application for permission to appeal was granted  by  Designated  Judge
    Shaerf on 14th February 2014 on the basis that the grounds disclose the
    judge made an arguable error of law in his  construction  of  paragraph
    245AA of the Immigration Rules  especially  subparagraph  (d)(iii)  and
    permission to appeal was granted.  At the initial hearing on 17th March
    2014 the matter was adjourned  as  the  appellants  had  changed  their
    solicitors.

15. At the resumed hearing before me Mr Nasim submitted that the appellants
    could comply with paragraph  245DD(b)  with  reference  to  Appendix  A
    paragraphs 35 to 53.  He submitted that paragraph 46-SD did  not  apply
    to the new business and this Section of the Immigration  Rules  applied
    to those who had already commenced a business and invested  funds.   He
    submitted that  Table  5  dealt  with  an  extension  of  applications.
    Paragraph 46 related to those who had leave as a  Tier  1  Migrant  and
    were extending that leave.  He submitted as  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter suggested that all that was needed to  be  shown  was  that  the
    appellant complied with paragraph 41(SD).  The  appellant  had  applied
    under Table 4.

16. In the event the fallback position  was  that  the  documents  provided
    showed the first appellant as  a  director  although  no  date  of  her
    appointment  had  been  given  and  at  sections  D1  and  E1  of   the
    respondent's bundle it was evident  that  the  appellant  had  provided
    evidence and this had been printed off the day before  the  application
    to Companies House.

17. As indicated at paragraph 10 of his skeleton argument where, further to
    paragraph 245AA(b)(ii) a document is in the wrong  format  or  (iii)  a
    document is a copy and not an original document, the UK  Border  Agency
    may contact the applicant or his representative in writing and  request
    the correct documents.  The requested documents must be received by the
    UK Border Agency at the address specified in the request  within  seven
    working days of the date of the request.

18. Further he submitted that Article 8 had not been properly assessed  and
    the whole family could not return to the USA.

19. Mr Wilding submitted that the Rules were difficult to  follow  in  this
    context but paragraph 46-SD did apply.  The application was made on 8th
    June 2013 and the decision was made on 3rd July  2013.   Applicable  to
    both of these dates was paragraph 46-SD(f) which was introduced  by  HC
    760 on 13th December 2012.  In particular paragraph (f)  applied  which
    states,

         "Where Table 5 applies and the  applicant's  last  grant  of  entry
         clearance, leave to enter or leave  to  remain  was  as  a  Tier  1
         (Entrepreneur) Migrant, or where (d) in Table  4  applies  he  must
         provide the  following  specified  documents  as  evidence  of  his
         registration as self-employed or as a director within the 6  months
         after the specified date in the relevant table:

         (i)  If the applicant was self-employed, he must provide one of the
             following:

             (1)  an original, dated  welcome  letter  from  HM  Revenue  &
                  Customs  containing  the   applicant's   unique   taxpayer
                  reference number, dated no more than  8  months  from  the
                  specified date in the relevant table,

             ...

         (ii) If the applicant was a director of a new or existing  company,
             he must provide a Current Appointment  Report  from  Companies
             House, listing the applicant as the Director  of  the  company
             and the date of his appointment, which must be no more than  8
             months after the specified date in the relevant table."

20. Mr Wilding accurately observed that Table 4 had  been  deleted  on  1st
    October 2013 by HC 628 and inserted in paragraph  41-SD(v)(ii)  and  he
    stated therefore there was a requirement for  the  Current  Appointment
    Report as at the date of the decision and continues to be a requirement
    now.  I accept that paragraph 46-SD is not exclusively  for  those  who
    wish for leave to remain as specifically  paragraph  46-SD  applies  to
    Table 4.

21. This is not a case of a  document  being  in  the  wrong  format  or  a
    document that is a copy or not an original because it  did  not  appear
    that this document was in existence as at the date of  the  application
    and therefore I do not accept that Judge Parkes was  incorrect  in  his
    assessment  within  his  determination.   The  document  is   specified
    precisely and the information it should contain was also  specified  as
    being Current Appointment Report  from  Companies  House,  listing  the
    applicant  as  the  Director  of  the  company  and  the  date  of  his
    appointment. The document produced was an overview not a report.  There
    was no reason for the respondent  to  suppose  a  full  report  was  in
    existence at the time.

22. I do not consider there is any  unfairness  to  the  appellant  in  the
    respondent's approach to the  evidential  flexibility  policy.  SSHD  v
    Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2 confirmed the proposition that 'there is no
    unfairness in the requirement in the PBS that an applicant must  submit
    with his application all  of  the  evidence  necessary  to  demonstrate
    compliance with the rule under which  he  seeks  leave'.    Further  to
    Rodriguez and as specified in  Paragraph  245  AA  the  respondent  may
    request further evidence and further to  245AAd  (iii)  may  grant  the
    application  exceptionally  if  all  the  other  requirements  are  met
    (identified in the refusal letter was that the  tax  documentation  was
    not provided) but in this case, as I state, the report document was not
    in existence until after  the  respondent's  decision  was  made.   The
    actual report was dated 9th July 2014.

23. I note that the refusal letter quoted  only  paragraph  41-SD  and  not
    paragraph 46-SD but I do not think that the decision substantively  was
    not in accordance with the law because the refusal letter  clearly  set
    out the requirement for the Companies Report.

24. At the first hearing I allowed Mr Nasim to amend his grounds of  appeal
    to include an application with regards to Article 8 and note that Judge
    Parkes made reference to Article 8 but made  no  reference  to  Gulshan
    (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 .

25. The appellants cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules  with  regard
    their family or private lives.  Neither parent had lived in the UK  for
    a continuous period of 20 years and the child was only 3 years old  and
    has not lived in the UK for a continuous period of 7 years.  The  rules
    reflect how under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention the  balance
    will be struck.

26. I carefully read the supplementary statement by  the  first  appellant.
    She arrived in the UK on 7th January 2009 with a valid visa certificate
    and her husband and daughter were dependants on this  application.   As
    she stated, her solicitors initially did not put forward her  case  and
    that the best interests principle had not been considered.

27. I find that the best interests of the child  are  to  remain  with  the
    parents and there is no suggestion that either child, and indeed I note
    that their subsequent child has been born since the couple have been in
    the UK, will  be  separated  from  one  of  the  parents.   Both  adult
    appellants came to the UK in order to study and this they have both  no
    doubt undertaken. Judge Parkes confirmed and noted at paragraph 12 that
    the family would be returned as a unit.

28. Article 8 does not guarantee the right of the parties to  choose  where
    to establish their lives and they  can  either  return  to  the  United
    States or to Pakistan as they choose.  I take  into  account  the  fact
    that both have been here lawfully, the husband since 2005 as a  student
    and she since 2009.   Both  of  them  understood  that  they  only  had
    temporary  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  whilst  they  forged   their
    relationship and had their children here.

29. I take into account that they have both worked.   The  first  appellant
    would have known that her family were against her marrying her  husband
    because he was from Pakistan and  that  his  family  were  against  her
    marrying the second appellant.  They must have known this at  the  date
    of their marriage.

30. There was no information put before me to the  effect  that  they  were
    precluded from relocating for security reasons either  in  Pakistan  or
    for visa reasons in the USA.  The fact that the first appellant did not
    like her experience in Pakistan where she visited for  a  short  period
    was unfortunate but the second appellant has lived for most of his life
    in Pakistan and can no doubt  relocate  there  particularly  after  the
    advantages gained from his education in the UK.

31. As the first appellant  stated  she  obtained  a  masters  in  business
    management from the University of Wales and  has  registered  with  the
    Health and Care Professions Council as a qualified  social  worker  and
    worked with a community mental  health  team.   I  find  that  she  has
    transferrable skills which she can use either in Pakistan or the United
    States.  The fact that she has not relied on public funds does not lend
    itself to enhancing her Article 8 rights.

32. As stated in Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC)

    Where an area of the rules does not have such an express mechanism, the
    approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) ([29]-[31] in particular) and Gulshan  (Article
    8 - new Rules - correct approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC)  should  be
    followed: i.e. after applying the requirements of the  rules,  only  if
    there may be arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside
    them is it necessary for Article  8  purposes  to  go  on  to  consider
    whether there are compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised
    under them.

33. I am not persuaded that there are any arguably good grounds as  to  why
    this  matter  should  be  considered  outside  the  Immigration   Rules
    (including Paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM) and as Judge Parkes pointed
    out the family would be returned together.  The  judge  may  have  only
    given very brief reasons with reference to  the  human  rights  grounds
    which may have been an error but in view of my findings  not  one  that
    would make a material difference.

34. I find that his decision shall stand.


Signed                                  Date 30th May 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
