
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/30209/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 August 2015                    |On 2 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                             OLAROTIMI OGUNLEYE
                        (ANONYMITY DIRCTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Khan of Pantiles Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Williams promulgated on 24 November 2014 which dismissed
    the Appellant's application for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    on the basis of his private life under  paragraph  276ADE1(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 7 June 1994 and is a national of Nigeria.

 4. The Appellant arrived in the UK on 31 July 2005 on a visit visa at  the
    age of 11 years and 2 months. He went to live with  half  siblings  and
    has never left the UK since that date. At the date of hearing he was 20
    years old. In 2005 he started  at  Wembley  High  School,  in  2010  he
    entered Salford Academy and in September 2012 he started  a  Degree  at
    Birmingham City University.

 5. On 8 April 2014 the Appellant applied for leave to remain.

 6. On  9  July  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application by reference to  Appendix  FM  and  Paragraph  276ADE.  The
    refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

      a) The Appellant did not have a partner or child in the United Kingdom
         and therefore did not meet Appendix FM.

      b) The Appellant did not meet the private life requirements as he  had
         not been in the UK over 20 years (276ADE1iii), was  not  under  the
         age of 18 (276ADE1iv) , had not spent at least half his life in the
         United Kingdom (276ADE v) . It was not accepted that  he  had  lost
         all ties with Nigeria as he had spent the first  11  years  of  his
         life there and he had maintained contact with his  father  and  had
         been visited by him in the United Kingdom.

      c) There were no exceptional circumstances.

The Judge's Decision

 7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Williams  ("the  Judge")  allowed   the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision under paragraph 276ADE(vi). The Judge found :

      a) The Judge found the Appellant to be a credible witness.

      b) The Appellant was abandoned in the United Kingdom  aged  11  having
         expected to be here for a short holiday.

      c) The Appellant had had no contact with his parents in Nigeria  since
         2005 or visited Nigeria since then.

      d) His parents have visited the United Kingdom twice since  2005:  the
         first time he was 14/15 and they chose not to see him  and  on  the
         second occasion he was 18 he saw his parents they argued and he has
         not seen them. They have never written or phoned him since  he  has
         been in the United Kingdom.

      e) His half siblings had a relationship with their father but that was
         too remote to constitute ties with them.

      f) His half brothers evidence did not contradict that of the Appellant
         in that he stated their relationship was good  because  he  defined
         that as one where they could say hello.

      g) The father's letter suggesting that the Appellant chose to come  to
         the United Kingdom aged 11 was one that  the  Judge  placed  little
         weight on finding that his parents had abandoned him.

      h) He found that Nigeria would be an alien environment to him.

      i) The Appellant has grown up with half siblings he regards as  family
         and he is fully integrated into United Kingdom society.

      j) The Appellant has completed schooling in the United Kingdom and his
         United Kingdom family have paid for his University education.

 8. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the Judge had failed to take
    into account section 117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 and failed to give adequate reasons  for  his  findings  that  the
    Appellant had no ties in Nigeria. On 14 July 2015  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Astle gave permission to appeal.

 9. I heard submissions from Mr McVitie and Mr Khan  and  took  those  into
    account.

Finding on Material Error

10. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

11. Mr McVitie properly conceded that the first ground had no merit as  the
    Judge allowed the matter under the Immigration Rules and therefore  was
    not required to take into account those factors under section  117B  as
    they would only have been applicable had he considered the matter under
    Article 8 outside the Rules.

12. In a well reasoned and concise decision the Judge clearly set  out  the
    relevant law at paragraph 5- 6 of his decision including  the  guidance
    given in Ogundimu (Article 8 -new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60  (IAC).
    Against that background I am satisfied that he set out a  well  rounded
    assessment of all  of  the  relevant  circumstances  underpinned  by  a
    finding that  the  Appellant  was  a  credible  witness  who  had  been
    abandoned by his parents in the United Kingdom when he was 12 years old
    and had had contact with them on only one occasion since  then  in  the
    United Kingdom when they argued bitterly and had not had contact  since
    (paragraph 11)

13. The Judge made findings in relation to how well he was integrated  into
    his family in the United Kingdom  and  into  the  society  having  gone
    through education here up to and including University. Given the age at
    which he came to the United Kingdom and the fact that he  had  been  in
    the United Kingdom for 9 years and the lack of contact with his parents
    I am satisfied that it was open to the Judge to conclude that there was
    in essence nothing more than a remote connection to Nigeria. The Judges
    conclusion that he accepted the Appellant's evidence that he  had  been
    'brought up as any British kid would be' was one that was open to  him.
    The decision to give it weight was a matter for him.

14. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set
    aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
    sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1): "Although
    there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the conclusions on
    the central issue on which an appeal is determined, those reasons  need
    not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having  regard
    to the material accepted by the judge."

15. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

16. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

17. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 30.8.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
