
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/30500/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 December 2016                  |On 13 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR MD AHEYA HUSSAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Alim, Counsel instructed by Yaqub & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   On 19 August  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Rourke  allowed  the
    appeal of  the  respondent  (hereafter  the  claimant),  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh, against a decision made by  the  appellant  (hereafter  the
    SSHD) on 27 August 2015 refusing him leave to  remain  on  the  grounds
    that removal would not place the UK in breach of its obligations  under
    the Human Rights Act 1998.

2.   The  SSHD's  grounds  were  essentially  two-pronged.   It  was  argued
    firstly that the judge had erred in contending that the SSHD had failed
    to prove her allegation of deception.  Secondly, it was submitted  that
    the judge's conduct of the Article 8 balancing exercise failed to  take
    account  of  all  relevant  factors  when  assessing  whether  it   was
    reasonable to expect the oldest child to return to Bangladesh  as  part
    of the family unit.

3.   I am  grateful  for  the  concise  submissions  I  received  from  both
    representatives.

4.   I have no doubt that the FtT judge  materially  erred  in  law  in  his
    treatment of the issue of  deception.   By  virtue  of  the  principles
    established in Majumder and Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167  the  judge  was
    required to firstly  consider  whether  the  SSHD  had  discharged  the
    initial evidential burden of proof and secondly,  (assuming  she  had),
    whether the claimant had been able to discharge the  evidential  burden
    then falling on him to provide an innocent explanation.   It  is  clear
    that in undertaking this two-stage exercise a judge is required to have
    regard not just to what the SSHD has been able to  produce  by  way  of
    generic evidence, but also whether she has been able to produce by  way
    of evidence relating specifically to an individual appellant/applicant.
     In the claimant's case, there was both generic and  specific  evidence
    and the latter comprised a spreadsheet identifying  that  the  claimant
    had used a proxy on two separate occasions: one in  2011  at  Elizabeth
    College and another in 2012 at Sevenoaks College.

5.   In relation to the generic evidence, the  judge  cannot  be  criticised
    for attaching significant weight to the report of Dr Harrison,  as  his
    evidence had been found compelling by the Court of Appeal.  However, in
    the  instant  appeal  there  was  also  a  report,  reaching  different
    conclusions, from Professor French and the judge  was  required  to  at
    least explain why he did not consider  it  displaced  or  modified  the
    weight he attached to the evidence of Dr Harrison.  His stated  reasons
    for not even considering it (that "it  is  generic  and  therefore  not
    specific to this appellant: secondly it was not before the  UT  [in  SM
    and Qadir [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC)] and, thirdly, there is  no  evidence
    to counter it from Dr Harrison"), were erroneous.   Dr  Harrison's  was
    generic yet that did not stop him or the UT/Court of Appeal considering
    it.  Generic evidence was relevant and to accept it  from  Dr  Harrison
    and not also Professor French was inconsistent. The fact that Professor
    French's report was not before the UT in SM & Qadir was  not  a  reason
    for failing to consider it in this (later) appeal.  If the  judge  felt
    he needed evidence  in  response  from  Dr  Harrison,  he  should  have
    adjourned.

6.   In relation to the specific evidence,  it  does  not  appear  that  the
    judge had any  or  sufficient  regard  to  it  at  all.   Further,  the
    reasoning for his statement at [16(iii)]  that  he  was  satisfied  the
    claimant had not used deception is extremely difficult to fathom -

    (i)  because the claimant  himself  had  nowhere  provided  a  specific
         statement of why he considered he could  not have used a  proxy  on
         those two occasions; and

    (ii) because at the hearing the claimant said no more about the  matter
         than that he had taken the tests.  He said  nothing,  for  example,
         regarding his studies and their contents.

7.   In light of the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in  Majumder  and
    Qadir, I consider that the judge's treatment of the issue of  deception
    was seriously flawed and vitiated by legal error.

8.   Given the nature of the judge's error  in  relation  to  the  issue  of
    deception, I consider that his treatment of the  claimant's  Article  8
    circumstances under the Rules must also be regarded as unsafe, since it
    is clear that his view that the claimant had not used deception heavily
    coloured his approach to his assessment  of  reasonableness  under  the
    Rules and outside the Rules.  His assessment at [16(iii)]  contains  no
    reference to public interest considerations which,  if  the  judge  was
    wrong about the deception issue, should have loomed large.  It is clear
    from the Court of Appeal decision in  MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705
    that when considering reasonableness a judge must have  regard  to  the
    public interest in the  maintenance  of  immigration  control  and  the
    immigration history of  a  qualifying  child's  parent  is  a  relevant
    consideration in this context.

9.   For the above reasons I conclude that the FtT judge erred  in  law  and
    his decision is set aside.

10.  On the hypothesis that I found the FtT judge  had  erred  in  law  both
    parties were in agreement that the proper course would be to  remit  it
    to the FtT.  I agree.  As regards the issue of deception, it is clearly
    necessary for there to be further  examination  at  a  hearing  of  the
    claimant's claim not to have used proxies on two occasions.  It is also
    apparent  that  in  order  to  decide  whether  the  claimant  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, the FtT will need to examine the
    question of reasonableness in the light of the criteria set out by  the
    Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines) [2011] (approved by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at [48]).  Further, it will
    be of particular importance for the FtT  to  have  the  opportunity  of
    hearing evidence from the claimant's  wife  as  to  the  nature  of  is
    contact with her child.



Notice of Decision

The appeal against the FtT decision is allowed. The case is remitted to  the
First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a judge other than Judge O'Rourke.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]    Date

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

