
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/30622/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London          |             Decision and Reasons    |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 30 September 2015                  |             On 16 October 2015      |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                mr salim mbye
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms Julie Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:   Ms S Bassiri-Dezfouli, Counsel, instructed by Stuart
Karatas Sols
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Khan)   allowing   the
    respondent's appeal against a decision taken on 11 July 2014 to  refuse
    to issue a residence card  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 ("the Regulations") as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national.

Introduction

 3. The respondent is a citizen of Gambia  born  on  31  October  1983.  He
    claims to be married to Eva Morena Angel who is a citizen of Spain born
    on 14 April 1990 ("the EEA sponsor"). The parties claim that they  were
    married by proxy in Gambia on 21 November 2013.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  respondent's  identity   and
    nationality but concluded that the relationship was not genuine and the
    marriage was one of convenience.

The Appeal

 5. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Hatton Cross on  1  May  2013.  He  was  represented  by  Ms
    McCarthy, Counsel. The First-tier Tribunal found  that  the  respondent
    had not proved that the proxy marriage was valid under Gambian  law  or
    that it was recognised under Spanish law. However, the judge also found
    that the parties had been living together in a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship for two years and that the  respondent  was  therefore  an
    extended family member. The appeal was allowed under regulation 8(5) of
    the Regulations.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  in
    finding that the  relationship  was  genuine  and  had  also  erred  in
    allowing the appeal outright,  failing  to  consider  regulation  17(4)
    which only entitles the respondent to have his  application  considered
    by the Secretary of State.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly  on
    5 July 2015. Permission to appeal against the finding that the  parties
    were in a genuine relationship  was  refused.  However,  permission  to
    appeal was granted on the basis  that  the  judge  had  not  considered
    regulation 17(4). It was arguable that extended family  membership  did
    not simply entitle the respondent to a residence card.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 9. Ms Isherwood submitted that there  is  a  material  error  of  law  but
    permission was granted in  relation  to  regulation  17(4)  only.   She
    relied upon Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 003400  (IAC).
    Where the  Secretary  of  State  has  not  exercised  discretion  under
    regulation 17(4) the most a judge is entitled to do  is  to  allow  the
    appeal as not being in accordance with the law leaving  the  matter  of
    whether to exercise this discretion in the appellant's favour or not to
    the Secretary of State.

10. Ms Bassiri-Dezfouli agreed and indicated that  she  had  explained  the
    case law to the respondent. The durable relationship is  accepted.  The
    decision should be expedited because the respondent has  problems  with
    accessing medical care at present because the Secretary  of  State  has
    retained his passport.

11. The material error of law is set out at paragraph 9 above and is agreed
    by the parties. The judge correctly allowed the appeal under regulation
    8(5) but incorrectly allowed the appeal outright. Thus, the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to allow the respondent's appeal outright under the
    Regulations involved the making of an error of  law  and  its  decision
    cannot stand.

Decision

12. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    remake the decision by allowing the appeal to the limited  extent  that
    the decision of the Secretary of State was not in accordance  with  the
    law because the respondent is an extended  family  member  of  the  EEA
    sponsor and the Secretary of  State  should  now  consider  whether  to
    exercise discretion under regulation 17(4).

13. I encourage the Secretary of State to expedite the decision.



Signed   [pic]                      Date 15 October 2015


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


