
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30640/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th November 2018                          |On 30th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                  WAQAS ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Iqbal, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Garbett promulgated on 22nd June 2018 dismissing his  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds and under the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant appealed
    against that decision and was granted permission to  appeal  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Blundell in the following terms:

         "2.  This is an ETS case involving a  Pakistani  appellant  who  is
             married to a British citizen who  continues  to  have  regular
             contact  with   her   teenage   children   from   a   previous
             relationship.   The  judge  found  that  the  respondent   had
             discharged the burden of proving that  the  appellant  used  a
             proxy in his TOEIC test.  The judge went on to find that there
             were no insurmountable obstacles to the sponsor relocating  to
             Pakistan with the appellant and that the respondent's decision
             was proportionate.

         3.   In substance, there are four grounds of appeal:

             (i)   The  judge  misunderstood  the  ETS  evidence  and   the
                  distinction between  an  'invalid'  and  a  'questionable'
                  designation;

             (ii) The conduct of the hearing was  procedurally  unfair,  in
                  that the appellant was not offered an interpreter when his
                  answers became  confused  and  the  judge  had  difficulty
                  understanding him;

             (iii)    The judge erred in law and failed  to  take  material
                  matters into account in assessing paragraph EX1(b);

             (iv) The judge erred  in  law  and  failed  to  take  material
                  matters into account in assessing the  best  interests  of
                  the sponsor's children.

         4.   I consider the third of these points to be  arguable.   It  is
             arguable, in particular, that  the  judge's  finding  at  [37]
             (regarding the absence  of  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
             sponsor relocating to Pakistan) were reached  by  adopting  an
             impermissibly literal approach to  paragraph  EX1(b).   It  is
             arguable that the judge failed to consider the question  posed
             by paragraph EX2, of whether the  sponsor,  who  suffers  from
             epilepsy and other conditions, would be  caused  very  serious
             hardship by relocating to Pakistan and not seeing her  teenage
             children every month as she presently does.  I  also  consider
             there to be merit in the fourth of the grounds, as  summarised
             above.

         5.   For my part, I consider there to be considerably less merit in
             the first of the two points summarised above.  It is far  from
             clear that the judge erred in his  understanding  of  the  ETS
             evidence.  Nevertheless, I note the guidance given  in  Ferrer
             [2012] UKUT 304 (IAC) and I do not limit the grounds which may
             be argued.

         6.   Permission to appeal is granted on all grounds".

 2. I was not provided with a Rule 24 response from the Respondent but  was
    given the indication that the appeal was resisted.

Error of Law

 3. At  the  outset  of  the  hearing  I  canvassed  with  the  parties  my
    preliminary view which was that there was in fact a material  error  of
    law in the decision, however not quite  on  the  basis  framed  in  the
    grounds, but on the basis  that  the  judge  had  reached  findings  in
    respect of the Article 8 assessment which were  inconsistent  with  the
    structure and content of the Immigration Rules under Appendix  FM.   To
    put the point succinctly, in respect of Ground  3  of  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal, the assessment of Appendix FM under EX.1(b) at paragraph 37  of
    the decision would not avail the Appellant  in  an  assessment  of  his
    appeal under the rules because the primary issue  on  this  appeal  was
    that the Appellant had been refused leave to remain as the spouse of  a
    British person under paragraph S-LTR.1.6. in respect of his having used
    a proxy in an ETS English language test as a consequence of  which  the
    Appellant's presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  was  considered  to  be
    undesirable.  The reason why paragraph EX.1(b) or EX.2 is of  no  avail
    to  the  Appellant  is  because  he  must  first  meet   paragraph   R-
    LTRP.1.1(d)(i) which is the key paragraph governing the requirements to
    be met for limited leave to remain as a  partner.   These  requirements
    include that an applicant must not fall for refusal  under  Section  S-
    LTR: suitability leave to remain, which of course  includes  S-LTR.1.6.
    Thus, in that light given the findings against the Appellant in respect
    of his ETS test the third ground concerning EX.1(b) could only have any
    merit  if  there  were  also  merit  in  the  first  Ground  of  Appeal
    challenging the assessment of the ETS evidence (which I shall  turn  to
    in a moment).  Thus, in that light Ground 3 would stand and  fall  with
    Ground 1 and there would need to be an error of law in respect of  both
    in order for there to be any merit in Ground 3.

 4. Turning to Ground 1, upon which  Ground  3  is  entirely  dependent  in
    demonstrating any materiality of error, the complaint made  in  essence
    by Mr Iqbal is that the judge  failed  to  appreciate  the  distinction
    between when an ETS test is categorised as invalid or questionable.  Mr
    Iqbal turned my attention to paragraph 25 of the decision, however that
    paragraph merely reflects  the  generic  evidence  as  it  was  put  in
    previous authority, that there are two categories of where tests can be
    cancelled which are either invalid  or  questionable.   I  drew  to  Mr
    Iqbal's attention that the supplementary Respondent's bundle before the
    First-tier Tribunal contained a table showing the SELT source data  and
    the designation that the Appellant's test  at  South  Quay  College  in
    Stratford High Street was deemed to be invalid.  Given  that  the  test
    was deemed to be invalid (as opposed to questionable) in my view  there
    can be no materiality  or  even  any  relevance  in  the  dichotomy  or
    distinction between the two categories of test result as the  test  was
    expressly stated to be "invalid" due to the use of a proxy test  taker,
    and not that it was a "questionable" result which was rendered  invalid
    as a consequence of other test results at that test centre  also  being
    rendered invalid.  Thus, there is  no  merit  in  Ground  1  and  as  a
    consequence, Ground 3 would also fail as it cannot stand alone.

 5. Turning to Ground 2  and  whether  the  judge  should  have  asked  the
    Appellant if he wanted  an  interpreter  or  not  when  he  was  having
    difficulty with his evidence, I find that there is no merit  whatsoever
    in this ground and no appearance of bias or unfairness in  the  judge's
    approach in this appeal.  I remind myself that if this were  an  appeal
    involving a litigant in person, they may not necessarily know that they
    could request an interpreter if they were having difficulty  during  an
    appeal, nor would  they  be  in  a  position  to  have  a  professional
    representative assist them in knowing  that  one  should  be  requested
    having observed  them  having  difficulty  with  their  oral  evidence.
    However, in this appeal Mr Iqbal was of course  present  as  the  legal
    representative before the First-tier Tribunal and  any  criticism  that
    could be levelled against the judge in  not  thinking  to  ask  for  an
    interpreter could equally be laid at his door.  Mr Iqbal could give  no
    reason why he equally did not think of asking for an  interpreter  when
    the Appellant  was  struggling  to  give  his  evidence,  nor  was  one
    requested  before  the  hearing  taking  a  cautious  approach  to  the
    evidence.  Mr Iqbal conversely specified that the Appellant was  intent
    on giving evidence in English according to  his  instructions,  and  in
    that light, there is also a tension in a judge altering the  manner  in
    which an appellant may wish to give their evidence if an interpreter is
    insisted upon.  Those instructions also make this ground of appeal  all
    the more bizarre.  In any event, it is  for  an  appellant  to  present
    their evidence as best they can and in the manner which they  see  fit,
    which would also involve a certain degree of intuition as to whether an
    interpreter  is  required  or  not.   Regardless  of  the   appellant's
    instructions to Mr Iqbal in this appeal, it seems  to  me  that  if  an
    appellant  is  unrepresented,  then  the  Tribunal   should   certainly
    volunteer  that  an  interpreter  be  provided  if  the  appellant   is
    ostensibly struggling to testify or be understood, but  where  a  legal
    representative is instructed and they are not blind to such events, the
    best interests of the appellant should  also  be  safeguarded  by  that
    professional, given the capacity in which they are present in the first
    place, particularly as they will be more familiar with  their  client's
    ability to speak English, over and above a  Tribunal  judge  whom  will
    have not met the appellant before the hearing.  Thus,  given  that  the
    Appellant was represented and could have also asked for an  interpreter
    through his representative at any time, I do not see any unfairness  in
    the judge not offering one to the Appellant of his own  volition  where
    no one has stated  that  the  appellant  was  struggling  to  give  his
    evidence.

 6. Turning finally to Ground 4 and whether the judge  has  considered  the
    best  interests  of  the  children,  I  do  not  consider  this  ground
    substantively as there is a further error of law in the decision  which
    I raised with the parties and  which  was  agreed  before  the  hearing
    began, to which I shall now turn.  Given the  judge's  findings  on  S-
    LTR.1.6., the later findings made by the judge in respect of Article  8
    outside the Rules at paragraphs 38 through to 45, and paragraph  44  in
    particular, plainly suffer from material error.  This is  because  once
    the judge found against the Appellant in terms of his  suitability,  in
    light of the above analysis of R-LTRP.1.1(d)(i) and Section S-LTR, when
    then considering the proportionality of the outcome of that  rule-based
    assessment under Article 8 ECHR, there would  be  no  question  of  the
    separation  between  the  Appellant  and  his  British   spouse   being
    "temporary" and the judge was wrong to assess the matter on that basis.
     Indeed the separation of the couple may well be  permanent  or  for  a
    specific period of time as the Appellant would not be able  to  qualify
    for entry clearance after a 'short separation' because the Secretary of
    State would no doubt refuse such an entry clearance  application  under
    paragraph S-EC.1.5. on the basis that the exclusion  of  the  applicant
    from the UK is conducive to the public good as  a  consequence  of  the
    judge's findings against the Appellant under S-LTR.1.6.   Although  not
    raised as a Ground of Appeal, Ms  Everett  pragmatically  and  sensibly
    accepted that this was an error that  infected  the  entire  Article  8
    proportionality assessment outside the rules.  As a consequence  I  set
    aside  specific  paragraphs  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,
    namely, paragraphs 38 to 45 in their entirety.

 7. As agreed between the parties, this matter therefore calls for  further
    evidence and a de novo assessment of the Article 8 ECHR aspect  of  the
    appeal outside the Rules in  respect  of  the  proportionality  of  two
    possible scenarios:

      a) either the permanent separation (or at least long term  separation)
         of the couple with the Appellant remaining in Pakistan and Mrs  Ali
         in the United Kingdom as a British citizen choosing to remain here,
         and/or

      b) on the basis that Mrs Ali would need to  relocate  permanently  (or
         for the long term) to Pakistan with the Appellant as  he  does  not
         qualify under the Immigration Rules under Appendix FM solely due to
         his falling foul of S-LTR.1.6, and the impact this matter may  have
         upon Mrs Ali owing to her particular circumstances including having
         not travelled to or lived in Pakistan and not being able  to  speak
         Urdu etc. etc..

 8. These are questions  that  will  likely  call  for  further  up-to-date
    evidence from Mrs  Ali,  particularly  in  respect  of  her  up-to-date
    healthcare difficulties, given that she has suffered from cancer in the
    past and  also  suffers  from  epilepsy  and  bouts  of  dizziness  and
    fainting, I am told.  It also raises the question of the best interests
    of  Mrs  Ali's  three  minor  British  children   from   her   previous
    relationship and the extent to which they will be  affected  by  either
    the removal of the Appellant or Mrs Ali with him as she would  need  to
    relocate to Pakistan in the second scenario for the  long  term  or  be
    permanently separated from her spouse in the first scenario.

 9. In light of the above findings, the decision under the rules is  hereby
    affirmed in respect of S-LTR.1.6. (which is  the  sole  basis  for  the
    Appellant's failure  to  meet  Appendix  FM);  however,  regarding  the
    Article 8 assessment outside the rules, I set aside paragraphs 38 to 45
    of the First-tier Tribunal's decision in their entirety as well as  the
    notice of decision  that  the  appeal  is  dismissed  on  human  rights
    grounds.

Notice of Decision

10. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed only in part and in respect
    of the Appellant's Article 8 family life, given that the appeal against
    the  outcome   under   the   Immigration   Rules   remains   dismissed.



11. The appeal is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  by
    a differently constituted bench.



Directions

12. I make the further following directions for the  remitted  hearing  and
    continuation of this appeal in the First-tier Tribunal:

      1) The appeal is to be  remitted  to  IAC  Birmingham,  that  Tribunal
         apparently being closer to the Appellant's address in Cambridge.

      2) An Urdu interpreter is to be provided.

      3) The Appellant and Mrs Ali are to be called as witnesses at  present
         (notwithstanding that Mrs Ali may also wish to call her children to
         testify).

      4) The time estimate given is three hours, although this may  increase
         if further witnesses are called for.

      5) No special directions are given.

      6) I do not make any anonymity direction.

      7) This matter is to be brought to the attention of the Resident Judge
         at IAC Birmingham to facilitate the listing of  this  matter  given
         that the matter is being remitted solely on the  basis  that  fresh
         findings are needed in respect of Article 8 ECHR in  light  of  the
         decision under the Immigration Rules being affirmed.








Signed                                  Date 25 November 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

