
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30650/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 July 2014                               |On 6 August 2014             |
|Determination given orally                    |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            AHMAD G EHMADI BARKA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Jack, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Vassiliou, solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison  who  allowed  the  appeal  by  the
    respondent ("the claimant") on human rights grounds against a  decision
    refusing to vary the claimant's leave to remain and to remove him dated
    August 2013.

 2. The claimant is a national of Libya where he  was  born  on  5  October
    1981.  He first entered the United Kingdom with entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor in May 2010 and he remained until November that year.   He  re-
    entered the United Kingdom in January 2012 again with  entry  clearance
    as a visitor with leave to remain until 9 July 2012.  In June  2012  he
    made an application for leave to remain under Article 8  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention.  The basis  of  that  application  was  family  life
    between Susan McKenzie, a British national.   The  couple  had  met  in
    Tunisia in February 2010 having previously  communicated  by  internet.
    During the claimant's visit in 2010 Miss McKenzie became  pregnant  and
    the couple's child Y was born on 6 May 2011.   A second child was  born
    on 21 December 2012.   Miss  McKenzie  also  has  three  children  from
    another relationship.

 3. In her decision dated 15 August 2013 the Secretary  of  State  accepted
    that the claimant had a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  his
    partner and child but the parties were  unable  to  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules because he had entered as a visitor  and  because  he
    did not have sole parental responsibility for the child then born.

 4. The case was also  considered  under  paragraph  276ADE  based  on  the
    claimant's private life.  The respondent did not  accept  the  claimant
    met the criteria in that provision.  She concluded that the application
    did not raise or contain any exceptional circumstances and thus refused
    it.

 5. The judge heard evidence from the claimant through an interpreter,  his
    partner and her father.

 6. The judge directed himself  with  regard  to  the  authorities  in  the
    petition of MS v SSHD [2013] CSIH 52 P1053/12 and MF (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192.   He  applied  the  Razgar  approach  and  also
    considered ZH (Tanzania)  v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2011] UKSC 4. Having reviewed the  evidence  he  considered  that  the
    claimant had a good arguable  case.   Part  of  the  judge's  reasoning
    included the finding that were the claimant to be returned to Libya  he
    would be at some risk. He would find it difficult  to  gain  access  to
    embassy officials and would find it difficult to  raise  the  necessary
    finances for a new application.  His partner and their two children who
    are British citizens could not reasonably be expected  to  return  with
    him to Libya for the "indefinite time it may take for him  to  make  an
    out of country application".

 7. The Secretary of State argues that the judge failed to provide adequate
    reasons for why the claimant's circumstances were either compelling  or
    exceptional and had failed to  provide  reasons  as  to  what  evidence
    regarding difficulty of access to embassy officials the  findings  were
    based on.  The judge had failed to provide any reasons why the claimant
    would not be able to go to Tunisia as he said he  would  to  apply  for
    entry clearance.  The couple had begun their relationship in Tunisia in
    the full knowledge the claimant may not be able  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom to continue their relationship and had attempted to  circumvent
    the Immigration Rules by doing so.  The best interests of the  children
    could be maintained by remaining with their mother who is their primary
    carer.

 8. I heard submissions from Mr Jack and Mr Vassiliou which  I  have  taken
    into account in reaching my conclusion.  Mr Vassiliou accepted that the
    claimant could not have succeeded under the Rules because of his status
    as a visitor although he observed that it would have been open  to  him
    to have applied if he had waited for two more  weeks  until  his  leave
    expired and made application within 28 days as an overstayer.  That was
    not however the case and it is not of particular relevance.

 9. The challenge by the  Secretary  of  State  is  in  essence  a  reasons
    challenge on the basis that the judge had failed to provide reasons for
    the finding regarding the risk on return to Libya or why  the  claimant
    would be unable to go to Tunisia.

10. Mr Vassiliou  accepted  that  the  judge's  reasoning  was  sparse  but
    sufficient  when  the  determination  was  read  as  a  whole.    After
    concluding that the best interests of the children in this case were to
    remain with Ms McKenzie in the United Kingdom the  judge  proceeded  at
    paragraph 21 to find in the circumstances of the case that the claimant
    had a good arguable case. I quote from paragraph 22 which sets out  the
    essence of his reasoning:

         "The Appellant and the Sponsor were aware  of  each  other's  legal
         status when they entered into a relationship.   The  Respondent  is
         correct to state that the  public  interest  is  reflected  in  the
         legislative framework.  Nonetheless having heard the evidence I  do
         not accept that  the  Appellant  or  the  Sponsor  acted  with  any
         deliberate intent to circumvent the rules.  The Appellant genuinely
         intended to come to this country for a visit and  then  experienced
         certain difficulties.  He became  uncertain  about  his  safety  in
         Libya.  No  doubt  he  should  have  considered  making  an  asylum
         application.  However the fact remains if the Appellant were to  be
         returned to Libya he would be at  some  risk.   He  would  find  it
         difficult to gain access to Embassy officials.  He  would  find  it
         difficult to raise the necessary finances for  a  new  application.
         His partner and his two children  who  are  both  British  citizens
         cannot reasonably be expected to return with him to Libya  for  the
         indefinite time it may take to make an out of country  application.
         This is particularly true in that this would be destructive of  the
         Article 8  rights  of  the  other  children  in  the  family  unit.
         Although the other requirements of Razgar are met it would  not  be
         proportionate for the Appellant to return."

11. There was evidence before  the  judge  of  the  difficulties  that  the
    claimant would face in Libya.  That  was  the  oral  testimony  of  the
    claimant.  Mr Vassiliou and  Mr  Jack  accepted  that  there  was  also
    evidence before the judge of advice from  the  Foreign  &  Commonwealth
    Office advising against westerners travelling to Libya.

12. I agree with Mr Vassiliou that the reasoning by the judge is brief  but
    having  regard  to  the  care  with  which  he  set  out  the  evidence
    particularly relating to the claimant's concerns I am satisfied that he
    gave adequate and sustainable reasons for his conclusion that were  the
    claimant to be returned to Libya he would be at some risk.  I find also
    that there was evidential support for the concern  expressed  regarding
    the option of applying in Tunisia, particularly as the reality would be
    that the claimant would need first to travel to Libya.

13. The further complaint made in the grounds  of  challenge  is  that  the
    claimant and Ms McKenzie had begun their relationship in Tunisia in the
    full knowledge the claimant might  to  be  able  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom to continue that relationship and  that  he  had  attempted  to
    circumvent the Immigration Rules by entering as a visitor.   The  judge
    however reached a conclusion on this aspect in paragraph 22 and it  was
    one that was reasonably open to him on the evidence.

14. Mr Jack submitted that any consideration of whether an application  for
    entry clearance would succeed or not was impermissible and referred  me
    to the decision of the Court of Appeal in SB (Bangladesh)  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 28 and the decision of
    the Upper Tribunal in Sabir  (Appendix  FM  -  EX.1  not  freestanding)
    [2014] UKUT 63 (IAC).  This is not a ground on which the  Secretary  of
    State relies by way of challenge except in the most  oblique  terms  by
    reference  to  doubts  about  the  claimant's  intentions  which   were
    addressed by the judge.

15. In deciding whether a judge erred in law the answer is not to be  found
    in deciding whether another judge would have dismissed the  appeal.   I
    accept that another judge on the evidence may have lawfully come  to  a
    different conclusion, nevertheless I am just satisfied that  the  judge
    has given adequate reasons for his conclusions  on  Article  8  grounds
    which were clearly driven by  his  finding  with  regard  to  the  best
    interests of the children having  regard  to  their  nationality  as  a
    primary consideration.  For these reasons the appeal by  the  Secretary
    of State is dismissed and  the  decision  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    stands.



Signed                                  Date 5 August 2014
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


