
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30937/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 November 2016                   |On 16 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                            sukhbir singh saroya
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. E. Wilford, Counsel instructed by ATM Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Nicholls, promulgated  on  18  May  2016,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse further leave to remain.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "The grounds argue that, although the Appellant initially requested his
    appeal be determined on the papers, on the day that  the  deadline  for
    submission of papers to the Tribunal  expired,  he  requested  an  oral
    hearing.  A copy of the email is provided.  In  the  circumstances  the
    Judge should not have determined the appeal on the papers.


    It appears that this request never came to the attention of  the  Judge
    and that a  procedural  unfairness  may  have  arisen.   Permission  is
    therefore granted."


 3. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I heard oral representations  from
    both representatives following which I reserved my decision.


 4. The Rule 24 response states that the copy of the request for  the  oral
    hearing and fax transmissions had not been seen by the Respondent.   At
    the outset of the hearing Ms Fijiwala was provided with copies  of  the
    email and fax transmissions.


Submissions


 5. Mr. Wilford submitted that the request for an  oral  hearing  had  been
    both emailed and faxed to the Tribunal.  He referred me to the case  of
    MM (unfairness - E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105  (IAC),  in  particular
    paragraph 15 and the reference to the case of R v  Chief  Constable  of
    Thames Valley Police ex parte Cotton [1990]  IRLR  344.   He  submitted
    that, in the case of a defect, it was incorrect to adopt  a  two  stage
    process but that they were two elements of a  single  question,  namely
    whether there was procedural unfairness.  If a procedural  irregularity
    or impropriety was identified which made no difference to  the  outcome
    then there was no unfairness caused.


 6. He submitted that, if the Appellant could establish a  case  where  the
    outcome would have been different, there was unfairness.   It  had  not
    been advanced that the Appellant could succeed  under  the  immigration
    rules but that the decision was a breach of his rights under Article 8.
     The Appellant had been granted 60 days to find a new college  but  had
    been unable to do so.  The  judge  had  concluded  that  there  was  no
    unfairness because he  had  been  granted  60  days,  and  it  was  not
    disproportionate to expect him to return home and seek entry  clearance
    from abroad.  It was not purely a minimal possibility  that  the  judge
    could have concluded, having heard from  the  Appellant,  that  in  his
    circumstances the decision to refuse to grant further leave constituted
    an  interference  in  his  Article  8   rights.    For   that   reason,
    determination on the papers in ignorance of the oral evidence  had  led
    to a procedural impropriety.


 7. Ms Fijiwala relied on the Rule 24 response.  She submitted  that  there
    was no material error.  The judge had considered the case as  had  been
    put forward by Mr. Wilford.   There  had  been  no  unfairness  to  the
    Appellant as he had been granted 60 days to find a  new  college.   The
    judge had considered Article 8.  She submitted  that  the  judge  could
    have gone further and found that the right to education was not covered
    by Article 8, with reference to the cases of Patel [2013] UKSC  72  and
    Nasim and Others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC).  The judge had found
    that the Appellant could return to the United Kingdom to study further.
     He had considered section 117B.  She submitted that there was no other
    outcome that the judge could have reached on the case put forward.


 8. In response Mr. Wilford submitted that it was  inappropriate  to  argue
    that there was no right protected by  Article  8  regarding  education.
    The question was  whether  or  not  any  judge  would  inevitably  have
    dismissed the appeal.  The decision failed to  take  into  account  the
    amount of time that the  Appellant  had  been  present  in  the  United
    Kingdom, which was since October 2009.  The judge  had  found  that  he
    would have developed a private life.  He submitted that,  in  order  to
    find unfairness, the Tribunal did not have to  be  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant would probably have been successful, but only that there  was
    a possibility that he would have been.


Error of Law


 9. I have carefully considered the evidence before me of  the  Appellant's
    decision to elect an oral hearing in place of the  paper  consideration
    initially requested.  I  find  that  on  5  May  2016  the  Appellant's
    representatives  emailed  the  Tribunal  asking  for  the  case  to  be
    converted to an oral case.  I find that they also faxed the Tribunal on
    the same date with  the  same  request.   A  transmission  verification
    report was received from the Tribunal.  I therefore find that there  is
    evidence before me that, within time, the Appellant requested  an  oral
    hearing but that the evidence of this request was not  put  before  the
    judge prior to him making his decision on the papers.


10. I have considered the case of MM.  In paragraph 15 it states


    "We distill the following principles from Cotton:


         1.   The defect or impropriety must be procedural in nature.  Cases
             of this kind are not concerned with the merits of the decision
             under review or appeal.  Rather, the superior court's  enquiry
             focuses on the process, or  procedure,  whereby  the  impugned
             decision was reached.


         2.   It is doctrinally incorrect to adopt the two stage process  of
             asking  whether  there  was  a  procedural   irregularity   or
             impropriety giving rise to unfairness and, if so, whether this
             had any material bearing on the outcome.  These  are,  rather,
             two elements of a single question, namely  whether  there  was
             procedural unfairness.


         3.   Thus,  if  the  reviewing  or  appellate  Court  identifies  a
             procedural irregularity or impropriety  which,  in  its  view,
             made no difference to the outcome, the appropriate  conclusion
             is that there was no unfairness to the party concerned.

         4.   The reviewing or appellate Court should  exercise  caution  in
             concluding that the outcome would have been the  same  if  the
             diagnosed  procedural  irregularity  or  impropriety  had  not
             occurred."


11. There is evidence before me that there was a procedural defect  in  the
    way in which the Appellant's case was handled as it was dealt  with  on
    the papers, whereas the Appellant had asked for an  oral  hearing.   In
    order to establish whether there was  unfairness  resulting  from  this
    procedural irregularity, following the case of MM, I need  to  consider
    whether this had any material bearing on the outcome of the case.


12. It is accepted that the Appellant could not meet  the  requirements  of
    the immigration rules.  In paragraph 7 of the decision the judge stated
    that it was not a case where it was argued  that  the  Appellant  could
    meet the requirements of the immigration rules, and this was  confirmed
    at the hearing before me.  Therefore the  procedural  irregularity  can
    make no difference to the decision that the Appellant did not meet  the
    requirements of the immigration rules.


13. Having accepted that this was not a case where  the  immigration  rules
    could be met, it fell to the judge to consider whether the decision was
    a breach of the Appellant's rights under Article 8,  which  he  did  in
    paragraphs 8 and 9.


14. Paragraph 8 states:


    "The only ground of appeal now available to the Appellant is  that  the
    decision to refuse him further leave to remain is unlawful  because  it
    is in breach of his human rights, presumably under  article  8  of  the
    ECHR.  There is no evidence of any substantial problem in him returning
    to India and then submitting an application for entry clearance once he
    has arranged a course of study.  He argued in his statement that he  is
    partway through his studies and should be  allowed  to  complete  them.
    That can hardly be the case because his  own  evidence  shows  that  he
    began  by  studying  for  a  diploma  in  business,  moved  on  to  the
    examinations of the ACCA and then switched to a diploma in tourism  and
    hospitality management.  This is not a consistent line of  studies  and
    there is no evidence to show  that  the  Appellant  has  completed  the
    majority of his course and only requires  a  short  time  before  final
    completion.  He has submitted no evidence of the  expenditure  that  he
    has made, nor how he has been supported during this time."


15. The judge sets out the evidence relating to  the  Appellant's  studies.
    He puts no weight on the statement of the Appellant that he is  partway
    through his studies and should be allowed to complete them, given  that
    the evidence shows that  he  has  swapped  courses  from  business,  to
    accountancy, and finally to tourism and  hospitality  management.   The
    judge is aware of the argument made by the Appellant that he should  be
    given a short amount of time to complete his studies, but he  dismisses
    this argument because of the inconsistent line of study.


16. In paragraph 9 he states:


    "It is likely that the Appellant will have developed a private life  in
    the UK because of the time that he has been here but I have no  details
    of any particular or individual features other  than  those  associated
    with the courses of study.  Even the places where the Appellant  wished
    to study are substantially different, varying from London to Newcastle.
     I consider the five questions posed by the House of  Lords  in  Razgar
    and find that the decision by the Respondent will interfere  with  such
    private life as the Appellant has developed in the UK  but  I  have  no
    evidence to show that it is of even the limited seriousness required to
    engage article 8 in this appeal.  If article 8 is  engaged,  I  confirm
    that I would answer the first four questions  in  the  affirmative  but
    that I also find that the interference with the Appellant's  article  8
    rights is justified and proportionate having regard to the  substantial
    weight of  the  control  of  immigration.   That  public  interest  was
    confirmed by the provisions of section 117B(1) NIAA 2002."


17. It was not submitted at the hearing before me that at, an oral hearing,
    the Appellant would have given evidence as to any other aspects of  his
    private life apart from that of education.  It was  submitted  that  it
    was wrong of the judge to have found that it was  not  disproportionate
    to expect him to return to India  and  seek  entry  clearance  for  the
    purposes of further study, and that there  was  not  a  purely  minimal
    possibility that the judge could have concluded that  the  decision  to
    refuse to grant further leave was an  interference  in  his  Article  8
    rights with reference to his need to find  a  further  college  and  to
    complete his education.   These  issues  are  all  concerned  with  the
    Appellant's education.  It has not been suggested there are  any  other
    issues relevant to consideration of the Appellant's Article  8  rights.
    Reference was made to the length of time that the Appellant has been in
    the UK, but this is not enough in and of  itself  to  make  a  material
    difference to the outcome as he has only been here since 2009.


18. I have considered the cases provided by Ms Fijiwala.  Paragraph  57  of
    Patel states:


    "However, such considerations do not by themselves provide  grounds  of
    appeal under article 8, which is concerned with private or family life,
    not education as such. The  opportunity  for  a  promising  student  to
    complete his course in  this  country,  however  desirable  in  general
    terms, is not in itself a right protected under article 8."

19. There was no challenge to the judge's finding that  the  Appellant  was
    not partway through a consistent course of study given the evidence  of
    the different  areas  of  study  undertaken.   There  is  therefore  no
    suggestion that the decision of the Respondent interferes with  a  long
    and consistent course of study such that  the  money  invested  by  the
    Appellant on such a course of study will be wasted,  but  for  a  short
    grant of leave.  Neither has it  been  submitted  that  there  are  any
    substantial difficulties for the Appellant in  returning  to  India  in
    order to seek entry clearance from there.  Even had the Appellant  been
    following a consistent course of study,  Patel  makes  clear  that  the
    opportunity to complete this course of study is not in and of itself is
    right protected under Article 8.


20. The head note to Nasim and others (Article 8) states:


    "The judgments of the Supreme Court in Patel and Others v Secretary  of
    State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]  UKSC  72  serve  to  re-focus
    attention on the nature and purpose of Article 8 of the  ECHR  and,  in
    particular, to recognise that Article's limited utility in private life
    cases that are far removed from the protection of an individual's moral
    and physical integrity."


21. The grounds of appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  in  very
    general terms.  There is no reference to any  compelling  or  otherwise
    exceptional circumstances in the Appellant's case, such as  to  suggest
    that this was a case which concerned the "protection of an individual's
    moral and physical integrity".  There was  no  reference  to  any  such
    circumstances at the hearing  before  me.   In  the  witness  statement
    provided by the Appellant for the appeal, which it  can  reasonably  be
    assumed would have been adopted by him as his evidence in chief  at  an
    oral hearing, there is no reference to any such  issues.   I  therefore
    find that, even had the Appellant's appeal been determined with an oral
    hearing, rather than on the papers, he would not have  succeeded  under
    Article 8.


22. Taking into account the Appellant's circumstances,  and  the  case  law
    relating to private life under Article 8, I find  that  the  procedural
    irregularity caused by the failure to convert  the  Appellant's  appeal
    from a  determination  on  the  papers  to  an  oral  hearing  made  no
    difference to the outcome, and I therefore conclude that there  was  no
    unfairness to the Appellant.


Notice of Decision

The decision does not involve the making of a material error of  law  and  I
do not set it aside.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 14 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
