
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30358/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19 June 2014                                 | On 14 July 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES

                                   Between

                             Mr Syed Waseem Syed
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Syed-Ali, a Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by an Indian national who came to this  country  with
    leave to study and who subsequently gained leave to remain as  a  post-
    study work migrant.  Ultimately he made an application on 17 June  2013
    for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the points-
    based system.  That application was refused on 5 July 2013 and  in  the
    course of the decision-making process consequent to it  the  Respondent
    went on to make a Section 47 removal decision.

 2. The Appellant duly appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  his  appeal
    was heard by Judge Zahed  on  27  February  2014  and  dismissed  in  a
    determination promulgated on 3 April 2014 on both failure to  meet  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8 grounds.

 3. The Appellant was not represented by Mr Syed-Ali at that hearing but by
    an earlier representative, Mr Chohan.  Mr Chohan made a  concession  to
    the Tribunal which is recorded at paragraph 7 of the determination, and
    that concession was in terms that  the  documents  submitted  with  the
    application did not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  as
    they were at the date of the application and at the  date  of  decision
    because they failed to include one of  the  specified  documents  under
    paragraph 41-SD of  Appendix  A.   That  concession  must  stand  today
    because Mr Syed-Ali fairly accepts ultimately  that  it  was  correctly
    made.  The documents specified in that paragraph do not exist and never
    existed.

 4. In those circumstances  the  arguments  made  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal in relation to the evidential  flexibility  policy
    or paragraph 245AA of the Immigration  Rules  fall  away  as  does  any
    complaint about whether the lawyers' letters that were  submitted  with
    the  application  were  properly  and   fairly   read   or   mistakenly
    misunderstood.

 5. In those circumstances, although reference is made in  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal that were before the First-tier Judge to Article 8 it  is  clear
    that the Article 8 appeal was properly dealt with by him.  In paragraph
    11 of the determination he records that the reference to Article  8  in
    the Grounds of Appeal is a single line, unparticularised  and  that  he
    heard no submissions from Mr Chohan upon it.

 6. Although the Appellant arrived as a student and had been in the  UK  at
    the date of the hearing for some four and a half years  he  had  always
    been here on a temporary basis.  There was no suggestion  that  he  had
    acquired or created any family life in  the  UK  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8 and  it  was  not  suggested  that  he  could  succeed  under
    paragraph 276ADE in relation to any private life.

 7. There appears to have been scant evidence as to what the  private  life
    of the Appellant actually consisted of and there is  no  error  in  our
    judgment as to the way in which the Immigration Judge  dealt  with  the
    evidence of the Appellant's "private life",  and  thus  the  Article  8
    appeal,  in  paragraph  12  of  the  determination.   That  being   so,
    notwithstanding the grant of permission which failed  to  identify  any
    arguable error of law, there is in our judgment no  arguable  error  of
    law in this determination, and as a result we confirm the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and dismiss this appeal.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
