
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/30010/2015
                                                               ia/30014/2015
                                                               ia/30016/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 November 2016                          |On 2 December 2016            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                        Carlos [P] (first Appellant)
                      Marangelly [A] (second Appellant)
                           [V A] (third Appellant)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Murphy (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller (Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Davey
    promulgated on 27 June 2016, permission having been granted  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Martins.  There  are  three  appellants  who  comprise  a
    family unit, but the focus is on the third appellant, [VA] who  is  the
    daughter of the first and second appellants.

2.   It was conceded in the Rule 24 response, and affirmed  in  the  helpful
    oral submissions by Ms Brockelsby-Weller on behalf  of  the  respondent
    that there was an error in law in  the  Judge's  decision.  The  matter
    should not have been remitted to the Secretary  of  State.  Rather  the
    appeal should  have  been  determined  on  the  merits.  See  Greenwood
    (Automatic Deportation Order of Events) [2014] UKUT 00342.

3.   In these circumstances, and with the concurrence  of  both  Counsel,  I
    therefore set aside the Judge's decision  and  proceed  to  remake  the
    decision.

4.   There is a lengthy history to this matter. The first appellant  entered
    the United Kingdom in December 2003, his wife and daughter joining  him
    the following year. Their applications for leave to remain were made on
    2 April 2012, by which time the third appellant  had  already  'clocked
    up' 7 years  residence.  This  was  refused  on  23  April  2014;  then
    reconsidered and refused again on 9 June 2015.

5.   The Judge recognised the strength of the appellant's case. Indeed in  a
    partial decision promulgated on 16 March 2016 (headed "Directions") the
    Judge stated that "the Secretary of State's decision was likely to fail
    on appeal" (para 9).

6.   Having set aside the Judge's decision, I now  look  at  the  matter  de
    novo on the basis of all the available material.  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller
    accepts that the parental claims are parasitic upon that of  the  third
    appellant.

7.    Put  shortly,  the  matter  turns  on  paragraph  276ADE(1)   of   the
    Immigration Rules, the requirements of which are

         "(iv)    the applicant is under the age of 18 years and  has  lived
             continuously in the United Kingdom for at  least  seven  years
             ... and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant  to
             leave the United Kingdom."

8.   It is not disputed that the third appellant is under  the  age  of  18.
    She came to the United Kingdom at the age of 4 and has  been  here  for
    some twelve years.  The sole issue for me to determine  is  whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect the third appellant to leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

9.   The  respondent's  submissions  on  this  are  that  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable  because  the  third  appellant  would  be  returning   to
    Venezuela with her parents as part of a cohesive family unit, and would
    be reintegrated into the country of her birth where  she  has  cultural
    links. She would have  full  access  to  education  in  Venezuela.  Her
    parents are over-stayers and effective immigration  control  calls  for
    them to leave the United Kingdom.

10.  Mr Murphy, for the appellants, submits that  the  third  appellant  has
    spent her formative years in the United  Kingdom  from  the  age  of  4
    onwards.  She has been integrated in her  school  environment;  in  her
    social environment and elsewhere such as  to  have  reached  the  stage
    where she is now studying for A levels.  It is  unnecessary  to  recite
    the extensive evidence upon which he relies, all of which  consistently
    supports the contention that the best interests of the third  appellant
    militate in favour of her remaining in the United Kingdom.

11.  Both representatives made reference to The Queen  (on  the  application
    of MA (Pakistan) and others v Upper Tribunal and  another  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 705, which addressed how  the  test  of  reasonableness  should  be
    applied when determining whether or not it is reasonable  to  remove  a
    child from the United Kingdom once he or she has been resident here for
    seven  years.  The  Court  of  Appeal  restated  at  [23]  the   firmly
    established jurisprudence that the best interests of  the  child  is  a
    primary consideration which has to be taken into account in  all  cases
    where the child's interests are affected.

12.  The following passages of the judgment of Elias LJ (with whom the  rest
    of the Court agreed) are of particular relevance:

        [40] ... It will generally be in the child's best interests to live
        with his or her parents and siblings as part of a family. [...] Had
        Parliament intended to  require  considerations  bearing  upon  the
        conduct and immigration history of the applicant parent to be taken
        into consideration, I would have expected it to say  so  expressly,
        not for the matter to have to be inferred  from  a  test  which  in
        terms focuses on an assessment of what is reasonable for the child.
        This does not in my view mean that the wider public interests  have
        been ignored; it is simply  that  Parliament  has  determined  that
        where the seven year rule is satisfied and the other conditions  in
        the section have been met,  those  potentially  conflicting  public
        interests will not suffice to justify refusal of leave if, focusing
        on the position of the child, it is not reasonable  to  expect  the
        child to leave the UK. [...]


        [47] [...] If Parliament had wanted the child's best  interests  to
        dictate the outcome of the leave application, it  would  have  said
        so. The concept of "best interests" is after all a well established
        one. Even where the child's best interests  are  to  stay,  it  may
        still be not unreasonable to require the child to leave. That  will
        depend upon a careful analysis of the  nature  and  extent  of  the
        links in the UK and in the country where it is proposed  he  should
        return. What could not be considered, however, would be the conduct
        and immigration history of the parents.


        [48] In EV (Phillipines) Lord Justice Christopher Clarke  explained
        how a tribunal should apply the proportionality  test  where  wider
        public interest considerations are in play, in circumstances  where
        the best interests of the child dictate that he  should  remain  in
        the UK (paras. 34-37):


            "35. A decision as to what is in the best interests of  children
            will depend on a number of factors such as:
            (a) their age;
            (b) the length of time that they have been here;
            (c) how long they have been in education;
            (d) what stage their education has reached;
            (e) to what extent they have become distanced from  the  country
            to which it is proposed that they return;
            (f) how renewable their connection with it may be;
            (g) to what extent they will have linguistic, medical  or  other
            difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and
            (h) the extent to which the course proposed will interfere  with
            their family life or their rights (if they have any) as  British
            citizens." [...]
         [49] Although this was not in fact a seven year case, on the  wider
         construction of section 117B(6), the same principles would apply in
         such a case. However, the fact that the child has been  in  the  UK
         for seven years would need to be given significant  weight  in  the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because of
         its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
         point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary.
13.  Regard must also be had to section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 which establishes an overriding obligation to have
    regard to the welfare of children in the Secretary of State's functions
    including those of immigration. This applies to all children present in
    the United Kingdom, whether or not they are citizens and whether or not
    they are lawfully present.
14.  The overwhelming weight of evidence is that it  would  be  unreasonable
    for the third appellant to return to Venezuela in  circumstances  where
    she is so strongly integrated, socially  and  educationally,  into  the
    United Kingdom. Are the daughter's best  interests  are  outweighed  by
    public interest considerations? The following passage from the judgment
    of Elias LJ in MA (Pakistan) gives some  assistance  in  assessing  the
    relevance and weight to be afforded to the fact that a child's  parents
    are be illegal overstayers.

         [103]    [...] The purpose underlying the seven year rule  is  that
         this kind of reasoning ought not to be adopted in their case.  They
         are not to be blamed for the fact  that  their  parents  overstayed
         illegally, and the starting point is that their  status  should  be
         legitimized unless there is good reason not to do so. I accept that
         the position might have been otherwise  without  the  seven  years'
         residence, but that is a factor which must weigh  heavily  in  this
         case. The fact that the parents are overstayers and have  no  right
         to remain in their own right  can  thereafter  be  weighed  in  the
         proportionality balance against allowing the child to  remain,  but
         that is after  a  recognition  that  the  child's  seven  years  of
         residence is a significant factor pointing the other way.

15.  It follows in all the circumstances that the third  appellant's  appeal
    succeeds under the Immigration Rules, and this is not displaced by  any
    proportionality analysis. Since it is conceded by the  Respondent  that
    the parents' appeals are parasitic  upon  those  of  the  daughter,  it
    follows  that  notwithstanding  that  the  mother  and  father  may  be
    overstayers, they too should have leave  to  remain  during  the  third
    appellant's minority.



Notice of Decision

Having set the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  basis  of  a
material error of law, it is remade as follows:
(1)  The Third Appellant's appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.
(2)  The First and  Second  Appellants  are  entitled  to  such  immigration
    status as the Secretary of State may deem fit until such  time  as  the
    Third Appellant obtains her majority.



No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Mark Hill                  Date         1 December 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
