
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30160/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Oral decision given following hearing  |                                     |
|On 26 September 2017                   |On 10 October 2017                   |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          musa Rokeya Sultana Rima
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office
Presenting
     Officer
For the Respondent (Mrs Rima):  Mr N Ahmed, Solicitor, of Lincoln's
Chambers
     Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Beach who in a Decision and Reasons promulgated  on
    12 December 2016 following a hearing at  Taylor  House  a  little  over
    three months earlier, on 30 August 2016, had allowed Mrs Rima's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision refusing to grant  her  leave
    to remain as a spouse of a person who is settled in the UK.   For  ease
    of reference, throughout this decision I shall refer to  the  Secretary
    of State, who was the original respondent, as "the Secretary of  State"
    and to Mrs Rima, who was the original appellant, as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant is a national of Bangladesh who was born in May 1990.  She
    entered the UK in February 2010 with leave to enter as a Tier 4 Migrant
    and then subsequently in July 2014 she applied for leave to  remain  as
    the spouse of a person who was settled in  the  UK.   Her  husband  has
    indefinite leave to remain.

 3. In August 2015 a decision was  made  refusing  to  grant  the  claimant
    further leave to remain.  The reason for refusal was that she was not a
    suitable person because she had used a proxy in order to obtain her ETS
    test certificate.

 4. The claimant's appeal against this  decision  was,  as  already  noted,
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach in a  Decision  and  Reasons
    which was not promulgated until 12 December 2016, which was over  three
    months after the appeal had been heard at Taylor  House  on  30  August
    2016.

 5. The Secretary of State's grounds are contained within the file.  At the
    very last moment, the Secretary of  State  applied  for  permission  to
    amend her grounds to include a challenge to the decision on  the  basis
    that over three months had passed between the date of the  hearing  and
    the decision, such that in reliance on the decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in RK (Algeria) [2007] EWCA Civ 868 which itself followed  cases
    such as Sambasivam v SSHD [2000] Imm AR 85,  the  decision  should  not
    stand because the  credibility  findings  could  not  be  relied  upon.
    Without making  any  finding  as  to  the  merits  of  this  particular
    submission, I allowed the point to be argued.  However, for the reasons
    which follow, it is  not  necessary  for  me  to  make  any  conclusive
    decision on this and indeed other arguments  which  had  been  advanced
    within the grounds.

 6. Essentially, the Secretary of State's appeal is advanced on  the  basis
    that the judge's findings with regard to whether or not  deception  had
    been used in the taking and passing of the ETS test are  unsustainable.
    It is said that at the very least the judge's decision that it had  not
    is inadequately reasoned.  Had this been a live  issue,  I  might  well
    have so found; Judge Andrew granted permission to appeal on  10  August
    2017, and I too I would certainly have granted permission to appeal had
    the only issue been whether or not the Judge's decision that  deception
    had not been used in the  taking  and  passing  of  the  ETS  test  was
    sustainable.  However, for the reasons which follow,  in  my  judgement
    this is not an issue I now need to determine.

 7. It is a fact in this case that the claimant and her husband have a son,
    who is now 3 years old.  Because this young boy is a child of a settled
    migrant he is  a  British  citizen.   Accordingly,  the  provisions  of
    Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    (inserted by Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014) will apply.   This
    provides as follows:

         "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
         cases:

         ...

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

               (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

              (b)      it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom".

 8. A "qualifying child" is defined within  Section  117D  as  including  a
    child who is a British citizen.  It is not in dispute that the claimant
    has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with this child, who
    is a qualifying child.

 9. At the outset of this  hearing  I  told  Mr  Jarvis,  representing  the
    claimant, that my provisional view was that any error in Judge  Beach's
    decision was not material because in light of  the  claimant's  current
    guidance (which was that it would never be "reasonable" to insist  that
    a British citizen child leave the UK), the  claimant's  appeal  had  to
    succeed in any event on Article 8 grounds.  Mr Jarvis, having heard the
    provisional view of this Tribunal then advanced an  argument  that  the
    provisions of 117B(6) did not apply in this particular case.  In  order
    to be fair to Mr Jarvis, I will not summarise his arguments,  but  will
    set out his submission as he made it to this Tribunal, as follows:

         "Section 117B(6) does not apply because  there  is  no  expectation
         that this child will leave the UK.  He will remain with the settled
         parent.  It is not like MA (Pakistan) - all of those cases  involve
         non-settled people, in which the  parent  applicants  were  relying
         upon the strength of the private life of the qualifying child  with
         seven years residence or more, because in those cases, all of these
         applicants would have had to leave as a family  unit.   This  is  a
         case in which a British child remains in  the  UK  with  a  settled
         parent.

         That is a reality.  If the approach  this  Tribunal  has  suggested
         today is correct,  then  Parliament  should  be  presumed  to  have
         intended to prevent the Secretary of State from removing  a  person
         even with what in this case we  say  is  serious  deception,  where
         colleges have been involved  on  the  face  of  it,  and  sometimes
         proven, in criminal practices, or in a case with a particularly bad
         immigration history.

         The guidance which the Tribunal has mentioned,  which  I  think  is
         still correct guidance, as quoted by the Tribunal in  SF  (Albania)
         [2017] also says - which is often missed - that  the  Secretary  of
         State will not grant leave to remain  if  she  considers  that  the
         personal conduct of the applicant is adverse  enough.   That  would
         mean that the Secretary of State  would  consider  whether  it  was
         appropriate to separate  the  parent  applicant  from  the  British
         child.

         The Secretary of State's guidance  does  not  say  that  separation
         could never be a reasonable argument or assessment in a case with a
         British  child.   We  say   that   is   a   consequence   of   your
         misinterpretation  of  Section  117B(6).   If  you  take  the  word
         'expect' out of Section 117B(6) it would have no bearing whatsoever
         on the meaning of the Section.

         A child with seven years has to go, but in that case there  had  to
         be an expectation the child would leave.  In practical reality this
         child resides with his father".

10. Although Mr Jarvis informed the Tribunal that an argument  along  these
    lines was shortly to be made before the Court  of  Appeal,  I  consider
    this submission to be completely contrary to what  is  provided  within
    Section 117B(6).  It is an argument which has been advanced before this
    Tribunal by other Presenting Officers, but it has never, so far as I am
    aware, been successful.  In my judgement, it would be  non-sensical  to
    give effect to Section 117B(6) where  a  British  citizen  child  might
    otherwise leave the UK  with  the  departing  parent,  but  ignore  the
    provision in circumstances where it was so  obviously  unreasonable  to
    expect that child to leave that there was no question of his doing  so.
    That would seem to be the effect of what Mr Jarvis is suggesting.   The
    Secretary of State may or may not wish to consider  whether  separation
    was appropriate in a case such as this, but she is currently  prevented
    from so considering by the provision of Section 117B(6) which states in
    terms that where it would not be reasonable to expect a child to  leave
    the United Kingdom (as in her guidance she accepts would always be  the
    case where a British citizen child is involved)  "the  public  interest
    does not require" the removal of  the  parent.   The  reason  why  this
    provision was enacted is because Parliament has recognised that ideally
    a child should be entitled  to  be  brought  up  by  both  parents  (as
    recognised for example in the European Charter of Fundamental Rights at
    Article 24(3)) and that it is only where the conduct of  a  parent  has
    been sufficiently serious as to render him or her liable to deportation
    that the public interest still requires the removal of that parent.

11. Unless and until the Court of Appeal decides that the interpretation of
    this Tribunal is wrong, this Tribunal will continue to give  effect  to
    what it regards as the clear and obvious purpose of this provision.

12. As, in accordance with what  is  stated  within  Section  117B(6),  the
    public interest does not require the removal of this claimant, it  must
    follow that whether or  not  Judge  Beach's  findings  with  regard  to
    whether deception was used in the obtaining of the ETS test certificate
    is sustainable (which as I have already indicated it may very well  not
    be), any error with regards to this finding is immaterial,  because  it
    would not be proportionate  for  Article  8  purposes  to  remove  this
    claimant in any event.

13. Accordingly, there being no material error  of  law  in  Judge  Beach's
    decision, the Secretary of State's appeal must be dismissed and I  will
    so order.

Notice of Decision

There being no material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed, and the decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal, allowing the claimant's appeal, is affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
               Dated: 9 October 2017


