
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/30368/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14th March 2016                       |  On 26th April 2016                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                mr sadek miah
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mold instructed by Schneider Goldstein Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 26th August  1983  and
    on 18th July 2014 a decision was made by  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom under Section 10 of the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999.  He appealed that decision and First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Rothwell dismissed his appeal under paragraph 276ADE and on human
    rights grounds.

 2. The challenge, with permission, to the decision of Judge  Rothwell  was
    made  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  had  established  a   close
    relationship with his brother's children in the United Kingdom and  his
    relationship with them went beyond normal ties and constituted a family
    life.  He played a primary role in  the  upbringing  of  his  brother's
    children.  At paragraph 27 of the determination, it was asserted,  that
    the judge stated the appellant did not have  a  family  life  with  his
    nephews and nieces as the children had their parents here in the UK but
    had failed to take into consideration that the appellant's relationship
    with his nephews and nieces went beyond normal ties.  The children were
    according to the application for permission  to  appeal  "dependent  on
    their  uncle  for  their  day-to-day  activities  and  had   grown   up
    considering their uncle to be a core member of their family".   It  was
    asserted that the judge had not asked the correct question  and  should
    have asked whether or how the children's lives would be affected if the
    appellant were to leave the United Kingdom.  The judge did not consider
    the emotional loss  to  the  British  citizen  children  if  they  were
    separated from their uncle.  She also failed to consider that they  had
    never lived without the  appellant  and  therefore  they  would  suffer
    immensely.

 3. Mr Mold at the hearing before me  submitted  Pawandeep  Singh  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer New Delhi [2004] EWCA Civ 1075.  At paragraph 21 this
    decision cites Marckx v Belgium [1979] 2 EHRR 330 whereby the  European
    Court recognised that family life "includes at least the  ties  between
    near  relatives,  for  instance,   those   between   grandparents   and
    grandchildren, since such relatives play a considerable part and family
    life".

 4. Pawandeep at paragraph 58 acknowledges  that  there  are  relationships
    within  the  wider  family  for  example   the   relationship   between
    grandparent and grandchild,  nephew  and  uncle  and  between  cousins.
    Thereby it was acknowledged that that family life within the meaning of
    Article 8 included ties at least between near relatives and that family
    life was not confined to relationships based on marriage or blood.

 5. Mr Whitwell submitted that the grounds amounted to a mere  disagreement
    and it was accepted that the appellant could not meet  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The judge did assess the family life referring  to  Kugathas  v
    SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31  and  did  make  the  appropriate  findings  at
    paragraphs 26 and 27.

 6. I am not persuaded that the judge made an  error  in  her  approach  to
    family life and protection afforded by Article 8. The appellant had  no
    claim under Appendix FM   (he  could  not  switch  to  being  an  adult
    dependent relative from a working holiday visa) and under the Paragraph
    276ADE, which sets out  the Secretary of State's position  in  relation
    to private life, the judge found that the appellant had not  been  here
    for twenty years and that there were no very significant  obstacles  to
    him reintegrating to a life in Bangladesh.  She stated that his parents
    were in Bangladesh and he had lived there until he was 24 and was  able
    to run his own business there.  As Mr Motin one of  the  witnesses  had
    been speaking to both his brothers and did not mention  any  threat  to
    the appellant, the judge did not accept that there was  any  threat  to
    his life from his brother.

 7. The judge found at paragraph 23 of her decision that  on  the  evidence
    before her he had mainly lived amongst the  Bengali  community  in  the
    United Kingdom and he spoke Sylheti before  her.  The  judge  correctly
    cited SS Congo v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 317 but  nonetheless,  generously
    in my view, went on to consider the  factors  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules applying the Razgar test but dismissed the  application  both  in
    respect of the Immigration Rules and under Article 8.

 8. She specifically considered the matter of family life at paragraph  26,
    and stated that she accepted that the  appellant  and  his  nieces  and
    nephews were close but that the appellant was 'now aged  32  years  old
    and had spent all his life until he was aged 24 living in  Bangladesh',
    his parents were in Bangladesh and the children's  parents  were  here.
    She found the case was more in line with Kugathas but  did  not  accept
    that there was protected family life.   That  was  a  finding,  on  the
    evidence which she considered, that was open to her. What was  required
    a factual finding as to whether the applicant enjoyed a family life and
    the  judge  approached  the  appeal  in  that  way  making  a   careful
    consideration of the relevant facts.   It may be the case that  various
    relatives can be included in the scope of assessing whether there is  a
    protected Article 8 case but the judge found not so in this appeal.  At
    paragraph 27 she specifically  considered  his  relationship  with  his
    nieces and nephews and did not consider that  that  constituted  family
    life as they had their own parents in the United  Kingdom.   She  found
    the appellant was an uncle but clearly because the appellant had  lived
    himself in Bangladesh for many years independently and the children had
    their own parents present in the UK, the judge did not accept  that  in
    these particular circumstances and on the facts that the appellant  had
    a family life.

 9. Even if that were incorrect, which I do not accept, it  is  clear  that
    the judge proceeded to accept that they had a  close  relationship  and
    that the appellant provided a large portion of care for the children as
    the  parents  worked  [34].   The   judge   made   an   assessment   of
    proportionality and factored in the various issues in  her  assessment.
    Article 8 is not an absolute right and she was  obliged  to  take  into
    account that the appellant cannot succeed under the  Immigration  Rules
    further to SS (Congo)  which  she  did.   The  best  interests  of  the
    children is a factor within the proportionality assessment  not  as  to
    whether there is indeed a family life and  she  acknowledged  that  the
    best interests of the children were to remain living with their parents
    who were she still found the key people  in  their  lives.   The  judge
    found at [34]

         "There is no evidence before me that these children would suffer by
         the absence of the appellant.  Their  mother  said  they  would  be
         unsettled if the appellant leaves.  I accept they would miss him as
         they would miss a grandparent or other close  family  relative  and
         that their parents will have to explain the situation to  them  and
         make other child  care  arrangements,  but  given  the  appellant's
         precarious position I do not find that it would be disproportionate
         to return him to Bangladesh".

10. At paragraph 35 the judge makes a finding overall in  relation  to  the
    appellant that he is a man  of independence at 32 years, and he ran his
    own car business, is a welder and he has own skills.  He has  developed
    skills as a  chef  and  that  he  could  open  a  further  business  in
    Bangladesh where his parents are located.  The judge  acknowledged  the
    disturbance that would be caused.  She took into account Section 117 of
    the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. In essence she weighed
    the appellant's family and private life and found the decision was  not
    disproportionate.

11.  I do not accept that this decision reflects any material error of  law
    and the decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date 21st April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington








