

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal nos: ia 30898, 99-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   31.07.2014|
|on    30.07.2014                              |sent out:    04.08.2014      |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                             DC patel & another
                                                                   appellant
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  Mr Vemal Makol, (working under the supervision of
Maalik & Co)
For the respondent: Miss Julie Isherwood


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Nicholas Easterman),  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  6
    December 2013 and 20 February 2014, to  a student appeal by  a  citizen
    of India, born 1 April 1988, and his dependent wife. The result depends
    solely on the answer to the  question  of  whether  the  appellant  was
    required to show  funding  to  the  level  needed  for  an  established
    student, or as a new one.





 2. The answer under the terms of the Rules depends on the wording of  note
    14 to appendix C:

       14. An applicant will have an established presence studying in the UK
       if the applicant has current entry clearance, leave to enter or leave
       to remain as a Tier 4 migrant, Student or as a Postgraduate Doctor or
       Dentist and at the date of application:

       (i) has finished a single course that was at least  six  months  long
       within the applicant's last period of entry clearance, leave to enter
       or leave to remain, or

       (ii) is applying for continued study on a  single  course  where  the
       applicant has completed at least six months of that course, or

       (iii) is applying for leave to remain as a Tier 4  (General)  Student
       on the doctorate extension scheme.

 3. This appellant's immigration history included a  post-graduate  diploma
    course in business administration at Quinton College, which he said  he
    had followed from 5 November 2012 to 5  June  2013.  The  judge  didn't
    accept that he had  finished  it,  though  the  appellant's  attendance
    letter, saying he was attending all his classes regularly, at  a  ratio
    of 89.50% is, perhaps rather curiously, dated after it had ended, on 27
    June. However I shall start where the  judge  ended,  by  assuming  the
    appellant did finish his course.

 4. As the judge pointed out, the appellant didn't qualify to be treated as
    an established student under  (i),  because  he  hadn't  finished  that
    course within his last period of leave to remain. This had been from 12
    March till 6 September 2014; but on 4 April it was 'curtailed',  so  as
    to expire on 9 June. The reason  was  that  Quinton  College's  sponsor
    licence had been withdrawn.

 5. The  question  is  whether  the  appellant  qualifies  under  (ii).  At
    paragraph 23, the judge seems to have read (ii) as if it  included  the
    'within last period of leave' condition; but, as will be clear, it does
    not. The judge's only stricture on the attendance letter  was  that  it
    did not say in terms whether the appellant  had  finished  his  course,
    which is right as far as it goes. However, the letter does show that he
    had been attending it for over  six  months;  and  'has  completed  six
    months of ...' cannot in context mean that  the  person  concerned  has
    completed the course as a whole.

 6. The appellant's real difficulty with (ii), however, was  that,  because
    of the withdrawal of Quinton College's licence, he wasn't applying  for
    continued study on the course he had been on for six  months  or  more,
    but on another one, at FLR Vista Business College. That ruled  him  out
    under (ii), and note 14 generally.

 7. This cannot be a rare  situation,  where  someone  has  had  to  change
    colleges, when one  lost  its  sponsor  licence.  Not  surprisingly,  a
    student  organization  called  UKCISA  [UK  Council  for  International
    Student Affairs] had taken it up with the Home  Office,  and  they  had
    replied on 8 December 2011, in the  terms  set  out  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph 17. The judge declined to take it into account, as its  terms
    seemed contrary to those of the Rules, and he hadn't heard of UKCISA.



 8. Neither had I heard of them before; but this was clearly a genuine Home
    Office letter, intended  for  general  consumption,  and  not  just  an
    exercise of discretion in favour of a small group  of  applicants;  and
    there would have been no point in its being written, if it  had  simply
    repeated the Rules. In my view, the judge should have taken account  of
    it; and, unless he decided that it enabled a clear answer to  be  given
    to the questions posed by this case  (as  to  which  see  AG  &  others
    (Policies; executive  discretions;  Tribunal's  powers)  Kosovo  [2007]
    UKAIT 00082), required the Home Office to consider it for themselves.

 9. The first point in the letter is by  way  of  re-iterating  the  60-day
    period allowed students to change their  sponsoring  college,  starting
    from when their  leave  is  curtailed  because  the  licence  has  been
    revoked. The second one gives this assurance:

       ... where the student has studied for at least six months they  would
       be considered to have had an "established presence" in the UK.

10. Miss Isherwood argued that I should read that assurance as  subject  to
    the qualification that the student must have studied for the  whole  of
    that six months with leave to be here on that course, under the general
    scheme of the student rules. Mr Makol suggested that it should be taken
    at face value.

11. If the assurance in question were part of the rules, then I should have
    to decide what was meant by it; but it is not. I will simply point  out
    that, almost by definition, a student who was  affected  by  the  first
    point in the letter would, like this appellant, not have had  leave  to
    remain for the whole six months of his studies, since his  leave  would
    have come to an end when 'curtailed'.

12. However, the judicial head-note of AG & others  includes this:

       (4)  If the policy was taken into account and the claimant  can  show
       that the terms of the policy and the facts of his case are such  that
       there was no option open to the decision-maker other  than  to  grant
       him the remedy  he  seeks,  his  appeal  should  be  allowed  with  a
       direction.
       (5) But where within the terms of  the  policy  the  benefit  to  the
       appellant depends  on  the  exercise  of  a  discretion  outside  the
       Immigration Rules, the Tribunal has no power to  substitute  its  own
       decision for that of the decision-maker.

13. Here, the Home Office did not take into account the policy set  out  in
    the UKCISA letter, and it is still for them to do so. I have said  what
    I have at 11 in the hope  it  may  be  helpful  to  them,  and  to  the
    appellant; however I remain concerned that his English  was  apparently
    bad enough for him to have to  give  evidence  through  an  interpreter
    before the judge, and that this appears to  have  been  his  second  60
    days' grace period.

Appeal
Home Office directed to reconsider application in terms of policy
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
