
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/30121/2014
                                                               ia/30123/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Centre City Tower |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 20th October 2015                  |On 27th October 2015                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Cathrine Chikuvanyanga
                            Chelsea Chikuvanyanga
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mrs K Obayelu of Goshen, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  Cathrine  Chikuvanyanga  and  Chelsea  Chikuvanyanga  are  mother  and
    daughter. They come from Zimbabwe.   The  daughter  was  born  in  this
    country  on  30th  November  2001.   I  will  refer  to  them  as  "the
    Claimant(s)".  Their appeals against the Secretary of  State's  refusal
    to grant leave to remain and to remove them to Zimbabwe, which had been
    made on 10th July  2014,  were  allowed  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal C M Mather following a hearing  on  21st  October  2014.   The
    appeal of the second Claimant was allowed under paragraph 276ADE(iv) of
    the Immigration Rules and that of the first Claimant  under  Article  8
    ECHR.

 2. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  against  those
    decisions.  The Grounds of Appeal  contend  that  the  judge  erred  in
    considering whether there were  compelling  circumstances  which  would
    make it appropriate to disrupt the second Claimant's life in the United
    Kingdom, rather than  considering  the  correct  test  under  paragraph
    276ADE(iv), which was whether it would or would not  be  reasonable  to
    expect her to leave the UK.  With regard to the first Claimant  it  was
    said that the reasoning was inadequate.

 3. At the hearing before me Mr Smart relied on the Grounds of Appeal.   He
    said that the thrust of the appeal was that the judge had relied on the
    guidance in Azimi-Moayed and Others (decisions affecting children;  and
    onward  appeals)  [2013]  UKUT  197  (IAC)  in  considering  compelling
    circumstances but he accepted that at paragraph 26 of her decision  the
    judge had stated that it would not be reasonable to expect  the  second
    Claimant to leave  the  United  Kingdom.   Mrs  Obayelu  for  her  part
    submitted that there was no error in the decision.  Although the  judge
    had referred to compelling circumstances she did address the  issue  of
    reasonableness and there was therefore no material error of law.   With
    regard to the  first  Claimant  Section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (which was in force as at the  date  of
    hearing before the judge at first instance) applied the  same  test  in
    respect of the first Claimant.  Mr  Smart  for  his  part  very  fairly
    accepted that the section in question would work against  the  argument
    of the Secretary of State.

 4. Having considered those submissions I came to the view that  there  was
    no material error of law in the decision of Judge Mather.  Although she
    had referred to whether there were compelling circumstances which would
    make it appropriate to disrupt the  social,  cultural  and  educational
    ties of the second Claimant, who was as at the date of hearing 13 years
    of age and had been born in this country, it is the case  that  in  the
    penultimate  sentence  of  paragraph  26  of  her  decision  the  judge
    expressly found that it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  second
    Claimant to leave the United Kingdom and that  she  therefore  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the Rules.  A finding  in  that
    regard was open to  the  judge  on  the  evidence  and  was  adequately
    reasoned.  In the light of the duty to consider the best  interests  of
    children it was also appropriate for her then to consider the  case  of
    the first Claimant under Article 8 ECHR and to allow her appeal on that
    basis.  Again that decision was open to her on the evidence.   Had  she
    made a specific reference to Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act the  issue
    might have been clearer to a reader but nonetheless  I  find  that  the
    decision was adequately reasoned and there was  no  material  error  in
    this respect either.



Notice of Decision

 5. There was no material error of law in the decisions made by  the  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal and  her  decision  that  these  appeals  be
    allowed therefore stands.  There  was  no  request  for  an  order  for
    anonymity and no such order is made.


Signed   Date 26 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French
