
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30021/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 16 January 2017                   |On 18 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                 RAHUL NAIR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr S Bellara, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

      1. In a decision dated 2 August 2016 the First-tier Tribunal dismissed
         the appellant's appeal against a  decision  dated  21  August  2015
         refusing his application for further leave to remain as a  student.
          An appeal was lodged based upon wide-ranging matters but including
         Article 8 of the  ECHR.   At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal the appellant conceded that the  Immigration  Rules  could
         not be met because he did not have a  valid  CAS.   The  First-tier
         Tribunal however accepted the invitation  to  nonetheless  consider
         whether or not the appellant used deception during  the  course  of
         the application by providing a false ETS result (para 2).

      2. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Bellana clarified  that  he  did
         not wish to rely  upon  the  grounds  of  appeal  as  drafted.   He
         accepted that the respondent had displaced the evidential burden of
         proof initially upon her and the First-tier Tribunal  was  entitled
         to consider whether or not the appellant  was  able  to  provide  a
         plausible  and  innocent  explanation.   Mr  Bellana   focused   in
         particular upon the First-tier Tribunal's failure to give  adequate
         reasons to support its  conclusion  that  the  appellant's  use  of
         English at the hearing was at a 'poor level' (para 26).  The First-
         tier Tribunal explicitly took this "as an indicator as  whether  he
         would need a proxy to take his test" and found his "poor  grasp  of
         English" at the hearing to be "further indicative of the fact  that
         the appellant needed a proxy test taker".   Mr Singh accepted  that
         this finding is not adequately reasoned.   It is  not  reasoned  at
         all.  The conclusion rests uncomfortably with the detailed  recital
         of the appellant's evidence at the hearing (paras  12-17).   At  no
         point in the summary of this evidence did the  First-tier  Tribunal
         identify any difficulties in understanding what the  appellant  was
         saying.  The  summary  of  the  appellant's  evidence  prima  facie
         indicates that he was  able  to  provide  detailed  evidence  in  a
         sufficiently clear manner.

      3. Mr Singh submitted that the lack of reasoning is not material.   He
         argued that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  have  focused  upon
         deception at time of the test and not on ability to  speak  English
         at the date of hearing, which did not  assist  in  determining  the
         issue in dispute, namely deception at the test.  He relied upon the
         First-tier  Tribunal's  other  factual  findings  to  support   the
         conclusion that the appellant failed to offer a  credible  innocent
         explanation.

      4. The difficulty with this submission is that it fails to  take  into
         account the Tribunal's observations in SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence
         -  Burden  of  Proof)  [2016]  UKUT  229  (IAC)  at  [69]  that  in
         considering an allegation of dishonesty in  this  context  relevant
         factors include inter alia what the person concerned  had  to  gain
         from being dishonest  and  whether  the  Tribunal's  assessment  of
         English language proficiency is commensurate with  TOIEC  scores  -
         see the Court of Appeal in Qadir v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 1167 at [18-
         25].

      5. The First-tier Tribunal clearly considered the appellant's  English
         abilities to be a relevant consideration and "further indicative of
         the fact" that he needed a proxy test taker, i.e. that he exercised
         deception.  This demonstrates that the First-tier Tribunal's  error
         was a material one  and  clearly  influenced  the  outcome  of  the
         appeal.

      6. Both representatives agreed that the decision should be  remade  by
         the First-tier Tribunal.  I have had regard  to  para  7.2  of  the
         relevant Senior President's Practice Statement and the  nature  and
         extent of the factual findings required in remaking  the  decision,
         and I have decided that this is an appropriate case to remit to the
         First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

      7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  a
         material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

      8. The appeal shall be remade by First-tier Tribunal de novo.



Directions

      1) The appeal shall be reheard de  novo  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         sitting at Hatton Cross (TE: 1.5 hrs) on the first date available.

      2) Within 14 days of the sending of this decision the appellant  shall
         file and serve a skeleton argument and witness statement, that take
         into account the relevant updated legal framework.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
17 January 2017

