
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/30273/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 June 2017                          | On 28 June 2017                    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                             hafiza madiha hamid
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:


For the Appellant:     Mr Sarwar, instructed M A Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Hafiza Madiha Hamid, was born on 20 September  1987  and
    is a female citizen of Pakistan.  She entered the United Kingdom  on  4
    August 2010 as a student.  She subsequently applied to extend her leave
    to remain.

 2. The outcome of this appeal turns on the application of the respondent's
    relevant policy, namely an Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  (IDI)
    entitled "Appendix FM, Section 1.0(B) 'Family  life  as  a  Partner  or
    Parent and Private Life, Ten Year Routes'".  This guidance  instruction
    at paragraph 11.2.3 ("Would it be  unreasonable  to  expect  a  British
    citizen child to leave the UK?") states:

         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside  the  EU  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.

 3. In his decision at [45], Judge Row wrote:

         Mr Sarwar on behalf of the appellant argues  that  the  appellant's
         guidance ... indicates that  a  decision  maker  must  not  make  a
         decision in relation to a parent of an EU citizen child  where  the
         effect of that decision would be to force a child to leave the  EU.
         The guidance does say that.  It is not however guidance which is in
         accordance  with  the  case  law  117B(6)   of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. Judge Row has touched upon a tension which clearly exists  between  the
    policy document of the Secretary of State and the statutory  provisions
    of   Section   117B(6).    The   statutory   provision   introduces   a
    reasonableness test which would be entirely nugatory if,  according  to
    the respondent's guidance, no British  citizen  child  should  ever  be
    expected to leave the EU.  However, the dim view which the  judge  took
    of the respondent's guidance unfortunately has led him into error.   Mr
    Sarwar  relied  on  the  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in  SF  and  Others
    (Guidance, post-2014  Act)  Albania  [2017]  UKUT  00120  (IAC).   This
    decision was promulgated in January 2017, some months after Judge Row's
    decision.  The head note reads as follows:

         Even in the absence of a "not in accordance with the law" ground of
         appeal, the  Tribunal  ought  to  take  the  Secretary  of  State's
         guidance into account if it points clearly to a particular  outcome
         in the instant case. Only in that way can consistency  be  obtained
         between those cases that do, and those  cases  that  do  not,  come
         before the Tribunal.

   The guidance note to which the Tribunal refers in SF is the same note as
   that put  before Judge Row in the instant appeal.  In SF  at  [12],  the
   Tribunal concluded

         On occasion,  perhaps  where  it  has  more  information  than  the
         Secretary of State had or might have had, or perhaps if a  case  is
         exceptional, the Tribunal may find a reason for departing from such
         guidance. But where there is clear guidance  which  covers  a  case
         where an assessment has to be made, and where the guidance  clearly
         demonstrates what the outcome of the  assessment  would  have  been
         made by the Secretary of State, it would, we think, be  the  normal
         practice for the Tribunal to take such guidance into account and to
         apply it in assessing the same consideration in a  case  that  came
         before it.

  Notwithstanding the tension between  the  statutory  provisions  and  the
  respondent's policy, this is a case  where  the  outcome  of  the  appeal
  should have been different given the existence of the policy.  I am  very
  grateful to both Mr Sarwar for the  appellant  and  also  Mr  Mills,  who
  appeared for the respondent who acknowledged that the judge's failure  to
  apply the policy has led him into error in this  instance  and  that  the
  appeal against the immigration decision should have been allowed.





Notice of Decision

The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  12
September 2016 is set aside.  I have remade the  decision.   The  appeal  of
the appellant against the decision of the respondent dated  21  August  2015
is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 23 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
























