
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/30785/2015
                                                               IA/11624/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 December 2016                   |On 1 February 2017                   |
|Prepared 8 December 2016             |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                  mr Jude Clement Ofenor (first Appellant)
             miss Helen Omachile Ilemi Kanwei (second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms K Parker, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellants, nationals of Nigeria, dates  of  birth  respectively  6
    December 1979 and 11 November 1981 appealed  against  the  Respondent's
    decision in respect of the first Appellant on 3 September 2015 and  the
    second Appellant against the Respondent's decision of 11 March 2015.

2.   Before First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien (the judge) on  1  March  2016
    their appeals were dismissed on immigration and human  rights  grounds.
    No anonymity order was made.  The matter was given permission to appeal
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro on 1 August 2016.  Leave was granted
    to the Appellants on the basis that  whilst  the  judge  had  correctly
    directed himself on the law but that his conclusions  and  reasons  are
    relatively  brief.  The  grounds  raised  arguable   errors   of   law;
    particularly addressing the consideration of Article 8, ECHR outside of
    the Rules, of the circumstances and best  interests  of  the  children.
    The Appellants have two children who  are  dependants,  Malcolm  Ofenor
    (date of birth 24 May 2013) and Michael Ofenor (date of birth 25 August
    2015).  Both children were born in the United Kingdom.

3.   Having heard the submissions  of  the  parties  it  seemed  to  me  the
    following points arose from the brevity of the judge's decision on  the
    key issues.  First although addressed on the matter the judge does  not
    really deal with the issue of whether the first  Appellant  could  have
    met the requirements of  Tier  1  requirements  under  the  Immigration
    Rules; certainly in respect of its relevance to the proportionality  of
    the decision to remove the Appellants.  Secondly if the first Appellant
    met the requirements of the rules but by reason of his overstaying  was
    excluded that was relevant to the proportionality assessment, SS  Congo
    reference to be added.  Thirdly the judge, having considered that there
    were reasons to consider Article 8, ECHR  outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, not only should have considered the first Appellant's fulfilment
    of the Tier 1 requirements as being  relevant  to  proportionality  but
    also he gave insufficient consideration to the effect of removal of the
    eldest child from his support network in  the  UK.   The  eldest  child
    Malcolm has a range of support, medical and  otherwise  educational  in
    relation to his development for he  is on the autism spectrum.   Though
    it appears that there is possibly little merit in the point this matter
    was not considered sufficiently by the judge.

4.   Mr Richards urged the view that effectively the judge's failings,  even
    if he had addressed the matter, would not materially alter the  outcome
    of the appeals and therefore no other Tribunal would have reached the a
    different view had the matter been  properly  considered  and  adequate
    reasons given.  Whatever sympathy one might have with that view  as  to
    the general outcome it is trite law that the parties  are  entitled  to
    receive sufficient and adequate reasons for the decision.

DECISION.

5.   I am satisfied in this case the  Original  Tribunal's  decision  cannot
    stand, that there are errors of law and the  matter  will  have  to  be
    reconsidered in the First-tier Tribunal.

DIRECTIONS

6.   Relist for hearing two hours.

    No interpreter required unless the parties inform the Tribunal not less
    than seven days in advance of the further hearing.

    Any updated bundle dealing with Article 8 ECHR issues and in particular
    health issues to be served not later than seven days by the  Appellants
    on the First tier Tribunal and the Presenting Officers' Unit.

7.   No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Dated 30 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey






TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal to a limited extent but it has yet  to  be  remade
so there should be no fee award at present.



Signed                                  Dated 30 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



P.S. I regret promulgation has been seriously delayed because the  file  has
    been mislocated.


