
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30219/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre    |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 13th October 2016                     |On 23rd January 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS



                                   Between

                             MISS RUPINDER KAUR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Azmi (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills (HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of India, who  was  born  on  10th
    December 1988.  She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal Judge against a
    decision of  the  Respondent  dated  20th  August  2015,  refusing  her
    application for further leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General)
    Student Migrant under  the  points-based  system.   The  basis  of  the
    Respondent's decision was that the  Appellant  had  submitted  a  TOEIC
    certificate from Educational Testing Service (ETS) to the Home  Office.
    According to information provided to the Home Office  by  ETS  she  had
    obtained the TOEIC certificate as a result of a test that she  took  at
    Premier Language Training Centre on 21st August 2012, but the ETS has a
    record of the Appellant's speaking test and  using  voice  verification
    software, ETS was able to detect that the Appellant had  not  sat  this
    test.

 2. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade on
    9th December 2015.  At paragraph  3  of  the  determination  the  judge
    stated as follows:

         "I have carefully read the statements of Rebecca Collings and Peter
         Millington  that  pertain  to  the  way  in  which  fraudsters  are
         identified by means of sophisticated voice  biometrics  technology.
         I am satisfied from the statements that such  voice  technology  is
         reliable and that there are proper safeguards against  there  being
         more than a relatively small number of false positives.   Therefore
         I appreciate that the Home Office ETS  has  not  been  specific  in
         relation to the Appellant's wrongdoing realistically it  cannot  be
         anything other than using a proxy test taker as this was a test  of
         spoken English."

 3. The judge went on to conclude that, "I hold that the Home Office had  a
    good and sufficient reason, namely evidence  of  fraud,  such  that  it
    would have been inappropriate to allow the Appellant any flexibility by
    way of making further application" (paragraph 3).

 4. The appeal was dismissed.

 5. At the hearing before me on 13th October 2016, Mr  Azmi,  appearing  as
    Counsel on behalf of the Appellant submitted that,  whereas  the  judge
    could have regard to the evidence from ETS,  in  the  form  of  witness
    statements of Peter Millington and Rebecca Collings, the fact was  that
    the Appellant had furnished other evidence in her bundle, which  simply
    was not referred to.  This is important in one particular respect.  The
    judge had gone on to say (at paragraph 3) that,

         "Although  not  determinative  I  do  raise  my  eyebrows  at   the
         Appellant's apparent improvement from the first test to his second,
         which was only three weeks apart.  This score rose  from  140  (160
         being the pass mark) to 200.  Although it is possible that this was
         because of the Appellant's further study in the interim I hold,  in
         all the circumstances, that it was probable (to the higher standard
         of probability) that the test score was a result of the  fact  that
         the Appellant did not sit it at all" (paragraph 3).

 6. Mr Azmi went on to say that the Appellant could not conclude  that  the
    probability here was that the Appellant did not sit the test at all, if
    he did not have regard to  the  Appellant's  evidence,  which  evidence
    included the fact that the Appellant had passed  the  IELTS  test  from
    2009 to 2012, had a bachelor's degree, and had a  Diploma  in  Computer
    Engineering, such that it  could  not  necessarily  be  said  that  the
    Appellant would not be able to secure a high mark  three  weeks  later.
    The evidence had to be looked at.

 7. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that the case of Qadir [2016] UKUT 229
    only stood for the  proposition  that,  by  referring  to  the  witness
    statements of Peter Millington and Rebecca Collings,  the  Home  Office
    had discharged the evidential burden, and thereafter, it was up to  the
    Appellant to demonstrate, on the basis of the legal  burden,  that  she
    had sat the tests.  In this case the Appellant had taken two ETS tests.
     In the first of these, she secured 140 out of  200,  and  then  twenty
    days later she secured a far higher mark, and it was for the  Appellant
    to explain how this was possible, if she had indeed sat both tests.

My Consideration of Appeal

 8. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    [2007]) such that I should set aside the decision.  What the judge  had
    before him was generic evidence from the statements of Rebecca Collings
    and Peter Millington, whereby the judge had  himself  stated  that,  "I
    appreciate that the Home Office ETS has not been specific  in  relation
    to the Appellant's wrongdoing" (paragraph 3).  I note that in the  case
    of Shahzad [2016] EWCA Civ 615, the Court of  Appeal  stated  that  the
    evidence of Mr Millington and Miss  Collings,  "suffice  to  shift  the
    evidential burden onto the person whose leave had been  curtailed"  and
    that "in that case, there was no submission that their evidence did not
    discharge the evidential burden lying on the Secretary of State at  the
    initial stage."  The threshold upon  the  Secretary  of  State  for  an
    evidential burden being one that was described as "comparatively modest
    threshold" (see  paragraph  21).   In  this  case,  however,  once  the
    evidential burden had shifted, there  was  evidence,  as  Mr  Azmi  has
    submitted before me, for the judge to  consider  in  relation  to  this
    particular Appellant.  This evidence has not been referred  to  in  the
    determination.

Re-making the Decision

 9. I have re-made the decision  on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before him, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.  I note from the  submissions  today  that  Mr  Mills
    reminds this Tribunal that the case of Qadir [2016] UKUT 229 is  to  be
    heard by the Court of Appeal next week.  I also note that what  was  at
    stake in the Tribunal before was  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  in
    relation to her claim that he had sat the test.  It is  important  that
    this matter returns back to the First-tier Tribunal in accordance  with
    Practice Statement 7.2(b) after the  Court  of  Appeal  has  given  its
    ruling in Qadir, so that it is determined by a judge other  than  Judge
    McDade, in the full light of all the evidence before the Tribunal.







Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.   I  re-make  the  decision  as  follows.   This  appeal  is
remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be decided  by  a  judge  other
than Judge McDade.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd January 2017

