
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)       Appeal Numbers: Ia/30184/2014

                                                            IA/30195/2014

                                                            IA/30203/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                Decision and Reasons    |
|                                      |Promulgated                             |
|On 12 October 2015                    |                On 2 November 2015      |
|                                      |                                        |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between

                        shitalkumar dasukhal ghadiali
                       kaminiben shitALkumar ghadiali
                         mansi shitALkumar ghadiali
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SecretARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms S Ali, Counsel, instructed by MA Consultants
(London)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tom Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellants appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellants' appeal against a decision taken on  14  July
    2014 to refuse leave to remain.

Introduction

 3. The appellants are all citizens of India comprising a family unit.  The
    third appellant was born in 2003. The appellants arrived in the  UK  on
    13 March 2007 with entry clearance as visitors. They overstayed in  the
    UK and on 26 May 2011 they made an  application  for  leave  to  remain
    under Article 8. That application was refused with no right of  appeal.
    The appellants twice requested that a formal decision be made to remove
    them before commencing  judicial  review  proceedings  in  2013.  Those
    proceedings resulted in a consent order on  24  January  2014  and  the
    respondent then reconsidered the application for leave to remain.

 4. The Secretary of State concluded that the requirements of  Appendix  FM
    of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") were not met and that there were
    no grounds to grant leave to remain outside  the  Rules.  India  has  a
    functional educational system and it was in the best interests  of  the
    third appellant to remain with both her parents. Any interference  with
    private life was proportionate. The applications were refused.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Taylor House on 12 March 2015. The First-tier Tribunal found
    that the first and second appellants were both overstayers and did  not
    meet the requirements of Appendix FM. They had a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with the third appellant. She had lived in the UK  for  at
    least seven years immediately preceding the date of application but  it
    was reasonable to expect her to leave the UK. She had schooled  in  the
    UK educational system  for  approximately  seven  years  and  was  well
    integrated. Her return to India would not be an easy transition for her
    and she would encounter difficulties  in  adjusting  to  a  new  school
    environment and curriculum. Her teachers took the view that it would be
    detrimental to her education if she were to leave the UK. However,  the
    educational  system  in  India  is  not  such  that  she  would  suffer
    irreversible harm. The support of her parents  and  family  members  in
    India would be of significant assistance in helping her to  adjust.  It
    is not uncommon for young children to change schools  and  her  parents
    had shown themselves to  be  resourceful.  They  had  the  capacity  to
    minimise the degree of disruption that the third appellant  would  have
    to endure.

 6. The judge found that the best interests of the children were a  primary
    consideration but not the primary consideration. The interference  with
    the  private  and  family  life  of  the  appellants  would  not   have
    consequences of such severity as  to  outweigh  the  compelling  public
    interest considerations in the case. The adult appellants had  remained
    in the UK in deliberate breach of the  Rules  and  their  legal  action
    taken to regularise their stay had  not  been  bona  fides  and  lacked
    merit. Any private life developed in the UK was in the  full  knowledge
    that they did not have any legitimate grounds to remain in the UK.  The
    appeals were dismissed.



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law by failing to  give
    proper consideration to the proportionality test and failed to consider
    the relevant case law. Further issues were raised in  relation  to  the
    version of the Rules in force at the date of application but they  were
    not pursued at the oral hearing.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Simpson
    on 7 August 2015. It was arguable that the  judge  failed  to  properly
    consider the case law and the decision was silent as to proportionality
    and the fact that the third  appellant  was  a  qualified  child  under
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

 9. In a rule 24 response dated 21 August 2015

10. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

11.  Ms Ali submitted that the judge has failed to follow the case law  and
    principles. The lengthy residence of the third appellant in the UK  was
    not considered. It would be wrong to disrupt her education. Section  55
    was not addressed properly in the decision. It is  not  reasonable  for
    the child to leave the UK. She is in the middle of  her  education  and
    her education has been affected by the ongoing proceedings.  She  would
    have to learn Hindi and Gujarati if she returns. There  is  a  material
    error  of  law.  There  is  new  evidence  in  relation  to  the  third
    appellant's health and therefore a de novo hearing is appropriate.

12. Mr Wilding submitted that the challenge is no more than a disagreement.
    It is not an error of law to refer to case law. The  appellants  cannot
    succeed under the Rules. Paragraphs 9-12 of  the  decision  set  out  a
    holistic history of the evidence. Removal would not involve  separating
    the  family.  Reasonableness  is  far  more  than  a   best   interests
    assessment. A proper Article 8 assessment considers best interests  and
    then proportionality. The failure to  mention  section  117B(6)  was  a
    matter of form rather than substance. Education is  not  a  determining
    factor. If there is further evidence then there  would  have  to  be  a
    rehearing if a material error of law is identified.

13. Ms Ali submitted in reply  that  the  third  appellant  has  spent  her
    formative years in the UK and the public interest test has  not  become
    such a high threshold. There are legal mechanisms  for  the  family  to
    remain but the judge has ignored them.



14.  The  key  legal  issues  in  relation  to  these   appeals   are   not
    straightforward. The provisions of paragraph 276ADE of the  Rules  that
    was in force at the relevant time are as follows;


    "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on the
    grounds of private life

276ADE. The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on
the
grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of application, the
applicant:

(i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-LTR 1.2
to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and

(ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the grounds of
private life in the UK; and

(iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years (discounting
any period of imprisonment); or

(iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the UK for
at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) and it would not
be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK; or

(v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at least
half of his life living continuously in the UK (discounting any period of
imprisonment); or

(vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK for less
than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but has no ties
(including social, cultural or family) with the country to which he would
have to go if required to leave the UK."

The relevant provisions of section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and
Asylum Act 2002 are as follows;

      "117A Application of this Part
      (1)  This Part applies where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
      determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
      (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and family  life
      under Article 8, and
      (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights
      Act 1998.
      (2)  In  considering  the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
      tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
      (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and
      (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,  to  the
      considerations listed in section 117C.
      (3)  In subsection (2),  "the  public  interest  question"  means  the
      question of whether an interference with a person's right  to  respect
      for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).
      117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases
      (1)The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the  public
      interest.


      (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
      of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that  persons  who
      seek to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
      English, because persons who can speak English-
      (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
      (b) are better able to integrate into society.


      (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
      of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that  persons  who
      seek to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
      independent, because such persons-
      (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
      (b) are better able to integrate into society.


      (4) Little weight should be given to-
      (a) a private life, or
      (b)  a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  that   is
      established by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the  United
      Kingdom unlawfully.
      (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by  a
      person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.


      (6) In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
      public interest does not require the person's removal where-
      (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
      a qualifying child, and
      (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
      Kingdom.
      117D Interpretation of this Part
      (1)  In this Part-


      "Article 8" means Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
      Rights;
      "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and who-
      (a) is a British citizen, or
      (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period  of  seven
      years or more;


      "qualifying partner" means a partner who-
      (a) is a British citizen, or
      (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the meaning of the
      Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act). "


15. The issue of proportionality involves striking a fair  balance  between
    the rights of the appellants and  the  public  interest.  In  assessing
    proportionality, the "best interests" of any children must be a primary
    consideration (see ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD (2011) UKSC 4 and section 55 of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009).  Whilst  the  best
    interests of the child are not  necessarily  determinative,  a  child's
    best interests are a weighty consideration,  albeit  one  that  can  be
    outweighed by sufficient weight of public  interest  concerns  (see  ZH
    (Tanzania) per Lady Hale at [33]).


16. A significant issue in this appeal is the fact that the third appellant
    is a qualifying child, as defined in section 117D and  therefore  falls
    within section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act.  The  judge  had  to  consider
    whether it was reasonable to expect her to leave  the  United  Kingdom.
    The recent case law remains relevant, whilst taking into  account  that
    the case law effectively pre-dates the commencement of sections 117A  -
    D (28 July 2014).

17. In  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
    appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197(IAC),  Mr  Justice  Blake  held  that  as  a
    starting point, it is in the best interests of children to be with both
    their parents and if both parents are being removed from  the  UK  then
    the starting point suggests that so should dependent children who  form
    part of their household unless there are reasons to the contrary. It is
    generally in the interests of  children  to  have  both  stability  and
    continuity of social and  educational  provision  and  the  benefit  of
    growing up in the cultural norms of the society to which  they  belong.
    Lengthy residence in a country other than the state of origin can  lead
    to development of social, cultural and educational ties that  it  would
    be inappropriate to disrupt in the absence of compelling reasons to the
    contrary. What amounts to lengthy residence is not clear cut  but  past
    and present policies have identified seven years as a relevant  period.
    Seven years from age four is likely to be more significant to  a  child
    than the first seven years of life. Very young children are focussed on
    their parents rather than their peers and are adaptable.


18. In EV (Philippines) and others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874, Lord Justice
    Clarke held that  in  determining  whether  the  need  for  immigration
    control outweighs the best interests of the children, it  is  necessary
    to determine the relative strength of the  factors  which  make  it  in
    their best interests to remain here and also to  take  account  of  any
    factors that point the other way. A decision will depend on a number of
    factors such as the children's age, the length of time  in  the  United
    Kingdom, how long  they  have  been  in  education,  what  stage  their
    education has reached, the extent to which they have  become  distanced
    from the country  to  which  it  is  proposed  that  they  return,  how
    renewable their connection may  be,  to  what  extent  they  will  have
    linguistic, medical or other difficulties in adapting to life  in  that
    country and the extent to which the course proposed will interfere with
    their family life or  their  rights  (if  they  have  any)  as  British
    citizens.

19. I find that the  judge  gave  some  consideration  to  whether  it  was
    reasonable to  expect  the  third  appellant  to  leave  the  UK  under
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules but failed to  mention  section  117B  at
    all. No consideration was given to relevant factors such as ability  to
    speak English and financial independence. The relevant case law was not
    mentioned and there is nothing to suggest that the judge considered the
    principles set out in the case law. There is no  finding  on  the  best
    interests  of  the  third   appellant   and   no   clear   finding   on
    proportionality. Paragraph 27 of the decision appears to import a  test
    of irreversible harm in relation to the third  appellant's  educational
    progress. Mr Wilding sought to explain that reference as just a turn of
    phrase but given the general  absence  of  a  legal  framework  in  the
    decision I find that the judge was unclear  as  to  the  correct  legal
    tests that were applicable to the facts. I therefore  find  that  there
    are a number of material errors of law.

20. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellants'
    appeals under the Rules and Article 8 involved the making of  an  error
    of law and its decision cannot stand.



Decision

21. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

22. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.


Signed                          Date 30 October 2015

[pic]

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


