
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/30234/2013
                                                               IA/30243/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15 October 2014                         |On 24 October 2014         |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between
                            COMFORT OMOLOLA OYOWE
                              EMMANUEL EYITEMI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms A Nizami Counsel instructed by AA & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr P Nath Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of these Appellants. Having considered all the circumstances  and
   evidence I do not deem it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
   order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
   First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against
   a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Newberry,  promulgated  on  12
   August 2014 which allowed the Appellants appeals and  held  that  it  was
   disproportionate and unlawful under Article 8 of the European  Convention
   on Human Rights to remove them to Nigeria.
3. The second Appellant is a dependent of the  first  Appellant  so  in  the
   remainder of the decision I will refer to 'the Appellant.'
Background
4. The Appellant was born on 8 July 1977 and is a citizen of Nigeria.
5. The Appellant had leave to remain as a Tier  4  student  valid  until  23
   April 2012.
6. On 23 April 2012 the Appellant applied for leave to remain in the  United
   Kingdom.
7.  On  1  July  2013  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the   Appellant's
   application and made directions  for  her  removal  under  s  47  of  the
   Immigration, Asylum and nationality Act 2006. The decision  was  made  by
   reference to Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  which  govern  Article  8
   claims under the Rules and found that she did not  meet  the  Rules.  The
   Appellant's account of her dispute with the London College of Accountancy
   and their refusal to grant her a CAS was also taken into account but  was
   not considered to be exceptional circumstances  to  warrant  a  grant  of
   leave outside the Rules.


The Judge's Decision
8.  The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Newberry (hereinafter  called  "the  Judge")  allowed  the
   appeal against the Respondent's decision under Article 8. The Judge found
   that the Appellant had had an emergency caesarean on 27  March  2012  and
   was therefore unable to take her college examinations which  resulted  in
   her not being able to provide a CAS  in  support  of  a  further  Tier  4
   application. He found that her private life was intrinsically linked with
   the purpose of her admission to the United Kingdom namely for  education.
   He allowed the appeal 'to facilitate the completion of the purpose of the
   original visa.'
9. Grounds of appeal were lodged on the basis that the Judge  had  erred  in
   law by allowing the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds because he failed to
   have regard to the Supreme Court's judgement in Patel and others  v  SSHD
   [2013] UKSC 72. On 29 August 2014 First tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mc  Carthy
   gave permission to appeal stating ;
   "The grounds have merit as it is clear from the  determination  that  the
   judge has not had regard to the authority  indicated,  having  relied  on
   earlier authorities which are set aside by the authority of  the  Supreme
   Court."

10. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr  on behalf of the  Respondent
   that:

   a) He relied on the grounds of appeal.

   b) He relied on the authorities of Patel and others v Secretary of  State
      for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72  which was upheld in Nasim  and
      others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC)

11. On behalf of the Appellant Ms Nizami submitted that ;

   a) Patel and Nasim did not overturn CDS  (PBS:  "available":  Article  8)
      Brazil [2010] UKUT 00305 (IAC) which the Judge had relied on to  find
      that there was a breach of the Appellant's Article 8 private  life  in
      the decision.

   b) She submitted that Nasim related to applicants who had completed their
      studies and wished to remain not those  like  the  Appellant  and  the
      applicant in CDS who were, by virtue of the decision,  prevented  from
      completing the course.

   c) The Judge found that there were exceptional circumstances to warrant a
      grant of leave outside the Rules.

   d) The Respondent was appealing all decisions were allowed under  Article
      8.

12. In reply Mr Nath on behalf of the Respondent  submitted :

   a) The Respondent did not appeal all appeals allowed under Article 8.

   b) The Judge relied on old caselaw and failed to take into account  Patel
      that was clearly relevant.



The Law

13.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible  alternative
   inference consistent  with  truthfulness  because  an  Immigration  judge
   concludes that the story told is  untrue.  If  a  point  of  evidence  of
   significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that is a failure to take
   into account a material consideration.

Finding on Material Error

15. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.

16. The failure of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  address  Patel,  the  most
   recent and binding authority in relation to the issue  of  education  and
   students wishing to complete that education as the basis of an Article  8
   claim  constitutes a clear error of law. This  error  I  consider  to  be
   material since had the Tribunal conducted this exercise the outcome could
   have been different. That in my view is the correct test to apply.

17. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that  the
   Judge's determination cannot stand and must be set aside in its entirety

18. Ms Nizami submitted that the case should be remitted to the  First  Tier
   Tribunal for a re hearing.

19. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
   of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted to the First  Tier
   Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

20. I indicated that I  was  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  been
   deprived of a fair hearing given that her appeal had been allowed. I  was
   satisfied that the factual findings in the case could  be  preserved  the
   only matter in issue was how the Judge  had  applied  the  law  to  those
   findings. I confirmed that Ms Nizami adn Mr Nath were in  a  position  to
   make submissions in respect  of  that  issue  before  me  and  they  both
   confirmed that they were.

Submissions in respect of rehearing

21. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Nath made the following submissions

   a) In paragraph 30 of the determination the Judge had found that the sole
      basis for the Appellant  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  was  to
      complete her studies no other evidence  was  advanced  to  support  an
      Article 8 claim.

   b) The Appellant cannot meet the requirements of the Rules.

   c) There were no exceptional circumstances to warrant a  grant  of  leave
      outside the Rules.

   d) I am bound by the provisions of s 117B of  the  Immigration  Act  2014
      that provides that little weight should be given to a private life.

22. On behalf of the Appellant Ms Nizami made the following submissions:

   a) There were exceptional circumstances in  this  case  and  the  unusual
      factual matrix warranted consideration of the Appellant's  case  under
      Article 8 outside the Rules.

   b) The Appellant had an impeccable immigration History  and  therefore  s
      117B did not apply as it only applied to those who were in the  United
      Kingdom unlawfully.

   c) If the Appellant was prevented  from  completing  her  course  by  the
      decision the interference was disproportionate.

   d) There was still room for the exercise of discretion and a case  to  be
      allowed under Article 8 and education  was  part  of  a  private  life
      claim.

Law

23. In relation to claims  under  Article  8  these  are  now  addressed  by
   Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Rules  and  the  Secretary  of
   State's Guidance. As  the  refusal  letter  refers  to  consideration  of
   'exceptional circumstances' I have taken into account Section FM  1.0  of
   the October 2013 Immigration Directorate Instructions ("Partner and  ECHR
   Article 8 guidance") which is about family members applying after 9  July
   2012 under Chapter 8 Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  It  sets  out
   the guidance for caseworkers in their approach to  decision-making  under
   the new rules. The Guidance states that it:

   "reflects a two-stage approach  to  considering  applications  under  the
   family and private life rules in Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE-DH.
   First,  caseworkers  must  consider  whether  the  applicant  meets   the
   requirements of the rules, and if they do, leave under the  rules  should
   be granted. If the applicant does not meet the requirements of the rules,
   the caseworker must move on to a  second  stage:  whether,  based  on  an
   overall consideration of the facts of the  case,  there  are  exceptional
   circumstances which mean refusal  of  the  application  would  result  in
   unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual or their family  such
   that refusal would not be proportionate under Article  8.  If  there  are
   such  exceptional  circumstances,  leave  outside  the  rules  should  be
   granted. If not, the application should be refused".

24. The Guidance  continues  that  exceptional  does  not  mean  unusual  or
   unique. While all cases are to some extent unique, those  unique  factors
   do not generally render them exceptional. A case is not exceptional  just
   because the criteria set out in EX.1 of Appendix FM have been missed by a
   small  margin.   Rather,   the   Guidance   reads,   exceptional   "means
   circumstances in  which  refusal  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
   consequences for the individual or their family such that refusal of  the
   application would not be proportionate. That is likely  to  be  the  case
   only very rarely." The paragraph continues that  in  determining  whether
   there are exceptional circumstances, the decision-maker must consider all
   relevant factors, such as:
    "a) The circumstances around the applicant's entry to the  UK  and  the
    proportion of the time they have been in the UK legally as  opposed  to
    illegally. Did they form their relationship with  their  partner  at  a
    time when they had no immigration status or this was precarious? Family
    life which involves the applicant putting down roots in the UK  in  the
    full knowledge that their stay here is unlawful or  precarious,  should
    be given less weight, when balanced against  the  factors  weighing  in
    favour of removal, than family life formed by a person lawfully present
    in the UK.
    b) Cumulative factors should be considered.  For  example,  where  the
    applicant has family members in the UK but their family life does  not
    provide a basis for stay and they have a significant private  life  in
    the UK. Although under the rules family  life  and  private  life  are
    considered separately, when considering whether there are  exceptional
    circumstances private and family life can be taken into account."
25. Application of the Rules and guidance ordinarily  mean  that  article  8
   considerations have been catered for taking into  account  the  cases  of
   Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules -  correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  00640
   (IAC)  and Haleemudeen 2014 EWCA  Civ  558  which  make  clear  that  the
   Immigration Rules are Article 8 compliant  and  as  such  if  a  claimant
   cannot meet the requirements of Article 8 under the rules there  have  to
   be circumstances in the  case  to  warrant  consideration  of  Article  8
   outside the Rules:
   "after applying the requirements of the  Rules,  only  if  there  may  be
   arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain  outside  them  is  it
   necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether  there  are
   compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under  them:  R  (on
   the application of) Nagre v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
   [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin);"(Gulshan)
26. Although case law continues to develop in relation to Article 8 and  the
   Rules the current  position  is  expressed  in  paragraph  135  of   R(MM
   (Lebanon)) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985:
         "135.  Where the relevant group of IRs  [immigration  rules],  upon
         their proper construction provide a  "complete  code"  for  dealing
         with a person's Convention rights in the context of a particular IR
         or statutory provision, such as in the case of "foreign criminals",
         then the balancing exercise and the way the various factors are  to
         be taken into account  in  an  individual  case  must  be  done  in
         accordance with  that  code,  although  reference  to  "exceptional
         circumstances"   in   the   code   will   nonetheless   entail    a
         proportionality exercise.  But if the relevant group of IRs is  not
         such a "complete code" then the proportionality test will  be  more
         at large, albeit guided by the Huang tests and  UK  and  Strasbourg
         case law."


27. I am also obliged if making a 'free standing' Article 8 assessment  that
   from 28 July 2014 section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 is brought  into
   force: article  3  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014  (Commencement  No  1,
   Transitory and Saving Provisions) Order 2014 (SI 2014/1820). This  amends
   the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  by  introducing  a  new
   Part 5A  which  contains  sections  117A,  117B,  117D  and  117D.  These
   statutory provisions apply to all appeals heard on or after 28 July  2014
   irrespective of when the application or immigration decision was made.


28. Section 117A provides that in considering the public  interest  question
   I must have regard to the considerations listed in section 117B which, in
   so far as they are relevant to this application , are:

   117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases
   (1)      The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
       public interest.
   (2)      ....
   (3)      It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
       of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that  persons  who
       seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
       independent, because such persons-
       (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
       (b) are better able to integrate into society.
   (4)      Little weight should be given to-
       (a) a private life, or
       (b) a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  that  is
       established by a person at a time when the person is in  the  United
       Kingdom unlawfully.
   (5)      Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
       person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.
   (6)      ..."

Findings

29. I am required to look at all the evidence in the round  before  reaching
   any findings.  I  have  done  so.   Although,  for  convenience,  I  have
   compartmentalised my findings in some respects below,  I  must  emphasise
   the findings have only been made having taken account of the evidence  as
   a whole.

30. The Appellant and her husband are Nigerian  citizens  whose  application
   dated 23 April 2012 for further leave to remain in the United was refused
   in a letter dated 5 July 2013.

31. The Appellant's most recent period  of  leave  had  been  as  a  Tier  4
   student as she was studying at the London School of Accountancy and  that
   leave on 23 April 2012. It is undisputed that the Appellant was unable to
   make a renewed application as a student because she did not have a  valid
   CAS. She did not have a valid CAS because the College would not issue one
   to her because as they stated in their letter of 16 May 2012 that she had
   not achieved  an  'acceptable  level  of  attendance  and  good  academic
   progress' and they dismissed her from the college on 16 March 2012.  This
   decision following  a  series  of  written  warnings  following  absences
   arising out of the birth of her first child on 2010 and  her  failure  to
   sit examinations in April 2012 following an  emergency  caesarean  on  27
   March 2012.That decision was one for the college to make  and  they  have
   not rescaled from it.

32. The decision in the  Appellant's  case  was  therefore  in  essence  for
   further leave to remain in order to try and  complete  her  studies  with
   another educational provider given the decision of the London  School  of
   Accountancy. There is no evidence before me to suggest that  either  they
   or indeed any other educational establishment are willing to offer her  a
   place even if she had leave.

33. It was not argued that the Appellant could meet  either  the  family  or
   private life requirements of the Rules found in Appendix FM or  paragraph
   276ADE.

34. The refusal letter stated that the fact that the  Appellant  was  unable
   to produce a valid CAS arising out of her dispute with  the  College  did
   not amount to exceptional circumstances. I have  considered  whether  the
   refusal  of leave would result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for
   the Appellant and her husband such that refusal of the application  would
   not be proportionate reminding myself that given that the Rules have been
   found to be Article 8 compliant this is likely  to  be   case  only  very
   rarely.

35. I am satisfied  that  the  Respondent  took  into  account  all  of  the
   relevant circumstances underpinning the Appellant's application  and  the
   reasons for the absence of a CAS and were entitled to conclude that  this
   did not amount to exceptional circumstances. They had the history of  the
   Appellant's difficulties before them and were aware that this was not the
   first occasion that the Appellant had fallen behind in her studies as she
   had previously been given term breaks and exam mitigations. They no doubt
   also took into account that this was followed by written  warnings  about
   her progress after which her attendance continued to be poor and she then
   failed to attend a progress meeting with the Postgraduate Course Director
   on 24 November 2011. Against this background the decision by the  College
   was made to refuse her CAS and I am satisfied that  taking  all  of  that
   into account the Respondent was entitled to conclude that  this  did  not
   amount to exceptional circumstances.

36.  However  even  if  I  were  wrong  about  this  and   the   Appellant's
   circumstances warranted consideration of a grant of leave under Article 8
   outside the Rules


37. If I am considering Article 8 at large  do  so   on  the  basis  of  the
   questions posed by Lord Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27


Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with  the
exercise of the applicant's right to respect for  his  private  (or  as  the
case may be) family life?


38. I remind myself that the only basis on which the  Appellant's  case  has
   been argued has been that the decision breaches her private life  in  the
   form of her opportunity to complete her studies and  there  is  no  other
   evidence of any other private life  enjoyed  by  the  Appellant  and  her
   husband in the United Kingdom. While Ms Nizami sought to rely on what was
   said in CDS about Article 8 I remind myself those remarks were obiter.  I
   remind myself that the removal decision in this case does not prevent the
   Appellant from completing a course for which she  had  leave  :  she  was
   unable to obtain further student leave as she had no CAS. I  also  remind
   myself that even  so  the  court  expressly  acknowledged  that  it  weas
   unlikely that a person would be able to show an Article 8 right by coming
   to the United Kingdom for a temporary purpose.

39. I note finally what was said by Carnwath LJ at paragraph 57 of  Patel  a
   decision of the Supreme Court which post dates CDS:

   "One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call in Pankina for  "common  sense"
   in the application of the rules to graduates who have  been  studying  in
   the UK for some years (see para 47 above). However,  such  considerations
   do not by themselves provide grounds of appeal under article 8, which  is
   concerned with private  or  family  life,  not  education  as  such.  The
   opportunity for a promising  student  to  complete  his  course  in  this
   country, however desirable in general terms, is not  in  itself  a  right
   protected under article 8".

40. I would therefore come to the conclusion that  the  desire  to  complete
   her education of itself does not engage Article 8.


41. Even I I were wrong about that and had gone on to accept that Article  8
   was engaged and that the decision was in accordance with the law I  would
   have to take into account that the interference does have legitimate aims
   since it is in pursuit of one of the legitimate aims set out in Article 8
   (2) necessary in pursuit of  the  economic  well  being  of  the  country
   through the maintenance of the requirements of a  policy  of  immigration
   control and the Appellant had been unable to meet those  requirements  as
   she did not have the benefit of a valid CAS required for further leave.


42. I am obliged by s 117 B 4(a) of the Immigration Act 2014 to give  little
   weight to that private life. I am satisfied  that  as  117B  (4)  (a)  is
   followed by the word 'or' which  is  disjunctive  I  must  attach  little
   weight to private life or a relationship formed when the applicant is  in
   the United Kingdom  unlawfully  or  private  life  established  when  the
   applicants status is precarious.

43. Therefore in making  the  assessment  of  proportionality  against  this
   background I find that the removal  of  the  Appellant  and  her  husband
   pursuant to the decision to refuse to vary leave would  be  proportionate
   to the legitimate public end namely the operation of a coherent and  fair
   system of immigration control.

44. I have considered the  issue  of  anonymity  in  the  present  instance.
   Neither party has sought a direction. The Appellant is an adult and not a
   vulnerable person. I see no reason to make any direction in this regard.


Decision

45. There was an error on a point of law in the decision of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal with regard to Article 8 such that the decision is set aside

46. I remake the appeal.

47. I dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.

Signed                                                              Date
22.10.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

