
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30048/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 March 2017                              |On 30 August 2017             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                 surjeet [s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Singh of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, a senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 2 April 2017 I found an error of law in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. I set that decision aside and decided that I  could  re-
    make the decision myself on the papers.  I  invited  the  appellant  to
    serve relevant further evidence in respect  of  the  appellant's  step-
    children as requested the  hearing.  I  also  gave  the  respondent  an
    opportunity to make any observations on that evidence.

 2. On 14th April the appellant filed a letter from  the  appellant's  wife
    and letters from his 3 stepchildren - [JH], aged 15, [BH] aged  12  and
    [EH] aged 10. There was no response from the respondent.

 3. The background to this case is set out in the error of law decision. As
    found by the First-tier Tribunal the appellant  is  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a British Citizen, a  daughter  who  is  a
    British Citizen and 2 stepchildren who are British Citizens. The  judge
    considered  EX.1(b)  and  found  that  there  were  not  insurmountable
    obstacles to the appellant  and  his  partner  continuing  family  life
    outside the UK.  There was no appeal against that finding.  The  appeal
    centred around the  relationship  with  the  appellant's  daughter  and
    stepchildren and the reasonableness of return to make an out of country
    application as a partner

 4. My findings in respect of the error of law were:

         "29. It is clear from the decision that the judge accepted that the
         appellant had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  the
         appellant's partner's children.  Indeed at paragraph 37  the  judge
         implicitly acknowledges that in terms of Section 117B(6) she  would
         be required to consider, in addition to the  appellant's  daughter,
         his stepchildren. However, the respondent did not consider the best
         interests of the  appellant's  stepchildren  and  neither  did  the
         judge.   Having  accepted  implicitly  that  the  appellant  has  a
         subsisting parental  relationship  with  his  stepchildren  it  was
         incumbent upon the judge to consider their best interests.

         30.  I find that the failure to consider  and  make  a  finding  in
         respect  of  whether  or  not  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the
         appellant's daughter and stepchildren to leave the UK  as  required
         by EX.1(a) and Section 117B(6) amounted to a material error of law.
         It was also a material error  of  law  not  to  consider  the  best
         interests of the appellant's step children. ..."

 5. The issues to be considered are, the best interests  of  the  children,
    whether it would be reasonable for them to be expected to leave the  UK
    and if it is whether or  not  removal  of  the  appellant  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with his Article 8 right to family life.

 6. Essentially this case concerns Article 8  outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. The approach  to  be  adopted  is  as  set  out  in  R  v.  SSHD
    (Appellant) ex parte Razgar (FC) (Respondent) [2004] UKHL 27. It is not
    is dispute that the first  4  of  the  tests  set  out  in  Razgar  are
    satisfied. The issue in this case is proportionality. Consideration  of
    children's' best interests are part of the proportionality  assessment.
    In MA (Pakistan) at [57]the court held:

         "... It is vital for the court to have  made  a  full  and  careful
         assessment of the best interests of the child before any  balancing
         exercise can be undertaken.

 7. The wider public interest and actions of the parents are  not  relevant
    to the assessment of a child's best interests.

 8. In this case there are  four  children  to  consider.  The  appellant's
    daughter is now aged almost 3 (she was born in June 2014). There are no
    specific concerns with regard to her such as health  problems.  She  is
    very young and is focussed on her parents. She has a relationship  with
    her grandparents in the UK. She will not  have  begun  to  develop  any
    significant ties outside her family.  Her  best  interests  are  to  be
    brought up by both of her parents.

 9. The appellant's step children are [JH], aged 15, [BH] aged 12 and  [EH]
    aged 10. They have each provided a letter setting out their wishes. The
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal which was accepted by the judge
    and has not been challenged was that they all see their step father  on
    a fairly regular basis. Ms [W] in her letter to the Upper Tribunal says
    that the children speak to their father on the phone regularly and that
    he has them every other weekend. [BH] in his letter says that he speaks
    to his father on the phone every other day and that he  comes  to  pick
    him up sometimes when he is not busy working.  All 3 children say  that
    the appellant has been involved in their lives and that  he  helps  and
    supports them and is part of their family. [BH] and [EH] say that  they
    love the appellant like a dad. Ms [W] says that the appellant is like a
    father figure to them and that he looks after the  children  while  she
    goes out to work and undertakes the school runs, activities and cooking
    etc.

10. [JH] is a British Citizen and has lived in the UK all his life.  He  is
    15. He is 12. He has no ties  to  India  and  no  awareness  of  Indian
    culture. He has not been part of a family where any other  language  is
    spoken. He is currently revising for his GCSEs which he  will  take  in
    the next academic year. He plays football for  a  local  team  training
    with them and playing matches. He says he has friends and  family  that
    he would not want to leave. At 15 it is clear that [JH] has started  to
    develop significant relationships with friends and interests outside of
    the family. He is integrated into life in the UK. He is at  a  critical
    stage in his education as he is in the middle of his course  of  GCSEs.
    His best interest lie in living with and being brought up by his mother
    the appellant, in having a continuing relationship with his father  and
    in completing his CGSE course. His interests are to remain in the UK in
    order to finish his course of studies and in order to have a continuing
    relationship with his father.

11. [BH] is a British Citizen and has lived in the UK all his life.  He  is
    12. He has no ties to India and no awareness of Indian culture. He  has
    not been part of a family where any other language is  spoken.  He  has
    commenced his secondary education. He also has made lots of friends and
    plays football for a local football team. He  has  started  to  develop
    some relationships outside of the family. His education  is  not  at  a
    critical stage. His integration into the UK is not as  fully  developed
    as [JH]'s is. He speaks to his father very regularly (every other  day)
    and sees him regularly. His best interests lie in living with and being
    brought up by his mother and the appellant and in having  a  continuing
    relationship with his father. His interests are to remain in the UK  to
    have a continuing relationship with his father.

12. [EH] is a British Citizen and has lived in the UK all her life. She  is
    10. She has no ties to India and no awareness of  Indian  culture.  She
    has not been part of a family where any other language is  spoken.  She
    will be moving to a new school in  September  (she  was  successful  in
    getting into the school that  she  wanted)  as  she  will  be  starting
    secondary school. She says she has wonderful  friends  and  would  miss
    them very much is she were to leave the UK.  Her  development  of  life
    outside her family is starting to develop. Her integration into the  UK
    is not as fully developed as [JH]'s or [BH]'s are. Her  best  interests
    lie in living with and being brought up by her mother and the appellant
    and in having a continuing relationship with her father. Her  interests
    are to remain in the UK to have  a  continuing  relationship  with  her
    father.

13. The next issue is to consider, factoring in the best interests  of  the
    children,  is  whether  removal  of  the  appellant   would   interfere
    disproportionately with his and the children's Article 8 rights. As the
    decision in Ali v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department [2016]
    UKSC 60 makes clear,  the  task  for  tribunals  in  appeals  involving
    recourse to Article 8 of the  Convention  is  to  identify  the  public
    interest engaged, to correctly measure its strength and, ultimately, to
    determine whether the private and family life factors advanced  by  the
    appellant outweigh the public interest to the extent that the  decision
    is disproportionate. The 2002 Act requires me to  have  regard  to  the
    factors set out in s117B.  As it has been accepted that  the  appellant
    is in a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his  daughter
    and his 3 step children who are all qualifying children for the purpose
    of s117B(6) of the 2002 Act the real issue to be decided is whether  or
    not it would be reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.

14. In EV (Phillipines) the court considered how a tribunal should  apply
    the proportionality test where wider public interest considerations are
    in play, in circumstances where the best  interests  of  child  dictate
    that he/she should remain in the UK (paras. 34-37):

         "34. In determining whether or not, in a case such as the  present,
         the need for immigration control outweighs the  best  interests  of
         the children, it is necessary to determine the relative strength of
         the factors which make it in their best interests to  remain  here;
         and also to take account of any factors that point the other way.

         ...

         36.  In a sense the tribunal is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
         answer falls to be given  to  the  question:  is  it  in  the  best
         interests of the child to remain? The longer  the  child  has  been
         here, the more advanced (or critical) the stage of  his  education,
         the looser his ties with the country  in  question,  and  the  more
         deleterious the consequences of his return, the greater the  weight
         that falls into one side of the scales. If it is overwhelmingly  in
         the child's best interests that he should not return, the  need  to
         maintain immigration control may  well  not  tip  the  balance.  By
         contrast if it is in the child's best interests to remain, but only
         on balance (with some factors pointing the other way),  the  result
         may be the opposite.

         37.  In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken  into
         account the strong weight to be  given  to  the  need  to  maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of  the
         country and the fact that, ex hypothesi,  the  applicants  have  no
         entitlement to remain. The immigration history of the  parents  may
         also be relevant e.g.  if  they  are  overstayers,  or  have  acted
         deceitfully."

15. In MA (Pakistan) the court of appeal  considered  how  a  court  should
    approach the reasonableness test. The court held:

         "45.     However, the approach I favour is  inconsistent  with  the
         very recent decision of the Court of Appeal in MM  (Uganda) where
         the court came down firmly in favour of the approach urged upon  us
         by Ms Giovannetti, and I do not think that we ought to depart  from
         it. In my judgment, if the court should have regard to the  conduct
         of the applicant and any  other  matters  relevant  to  the  public
         interest when applying the "unduly  harsh"  concept  under  section
         117C(5),  so  should  it   when   considering   the   question   of
         reasonableness  under  section  117B(6).  I  recognise   that   the
         provisions in section 117C  are  directed  towards  the  particular
         considerations which have to be  borne  in  mind  in  the  case  of
         foreign criminals, and it is true that the court placed some weight
         on section 117C(2) which states that the more serious the  offence,
         the greater is the interest in deportation of the prisoner. But the
         critical point is that section 117C(5)  is  in  substance  a  free-
         standing provision in the same way as section 117B(6), and even  so
         the  court  in MM  (Uganda) held  that  wider  public  interest
         considerations must be taken into account when applying the "unduly
         harsh" criterion. It seems to me that it must be  equally  so  with
         respect to the reasonableness  criterion  in  section  117B(6).  It
         would not  be  appropriate  to  distinguish  that  decision  simply
         because I have reservations whether it is correct. Accordingly,  in
         line with the approach in that case, I will analyse the appeals  on
         the basis that the Secretary of State's submission on this point is
         correct and that the only significance of section 117B(6)  is  that
         where the seven year rule is satisfied, it  is  a  factor  of  some
         weight leaning  in  favour  of  leave  to  remain  being  granted."
         [emphasis added]

16. It is clear that when  assessing  reasonableness  the  conduct  of  the
    appellant and matters relevant to the public interest should  be  taken
    into consideration.

17. With regard to the best interests assessment the court held:

         "47.     ... Even where the child's best interests are to stay,  it
         may still be not unreasonable to require the child to  leave.  That
         will depend upon a careful analysis of the nature and extent of the
         links in the UK and in the country where it is proposed  he  should
         return. What could not be considered, however, would be the conduct
         and immigration history of the parents...

         ...

         ... There is nothing intrinsically illogical  in  the  notion  that
         whilst the child's best interests are for him or her to stay, it is
         not unreasonable to expect him or her to go. ..."

18. With regard to the appellant's daughter her best interests are to  live
    with and be brought up by her mother and father. If the appellant  were
    to be removed to India the  couple  could  relocate  there  with  their
    daughter. At such a young age she could readily integrate into life  in
    India. The appellant had limited leave to remain  in  the  UK  when  he
    entered into his relationship with Ms  [W]  and  when  they  had  their
    daughter. He had no  expectation  that  he  would  be  able  to  remain
    permanently in the UK. The appellant is  not  financially  independent.
    The public interest in the maintenance of effective immigration control
    is a significant factor weighing against the appellant. In the  absence
    of the fact that she is part of a  wider  family  as  she  has  3  step
    siblings I would find  that  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant's daughter to leave the UK. However,  the  reasonableness  of
    her leaving the UK must be considered in light of their situation.

19. In respect of [JH], Bradon and [EH] I consider that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect them to leave the UK. They would have considerable
    difficulties integrating into a country that they have no awareness  of
    in terms of culture or language. [JH] is at a  critical  stage  in  his
    education. All children have a continuing relationship with their  step
    father who is  a  British  Citizen.  They  have  all  started  to  form
    relationships outside the family particularly [JH] who at 15 is already
    considering his next stage in  education  as  he  wants  to  go  on  to
    college. All four children enjoy a family life with the  appellant  and
    their mother and with each other as minor siblings. I do weigh  heavily
    in the balance the public interest in effective immigration control and
    weigh against the appellant the limited leave he had  at  the  time  he
    commenced his relationship and  his  lack  of  financial  independence.
    However, weighing all the factors for and against I find that it  would
    be unreasonable to expect the children to leave the UK. It would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with their Article 8 rights and with  the
    appellant's and his partner's Article 8 rights for the appellant to  be
    removed to India.

20. The appellant's appeal is therefore allowed on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


Signed                     P                    M                    Ramshaw
                       Date 9 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw


aPPENDIX
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA300482015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 March 2017                              |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                 surjeet [s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Singh of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, a senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of India and was born on 4 June  1988.   He
    entered the UK on 15 September 2009 on a student visa.  He extended his
    visa twice.  The last visa was  valid  until  27  March  2015.   On  14
    November 2014 he made an application for leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of his family and private  life.   The  respondent
    refused that application on 20 August 2015.  The reason for the refusal
    was that the respondent believed that the appellant had used  deception
    in obtaining his English language test certificate in  support  of  his
    student visa application and therefore did  not  meet  the  suitability
    requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.   Notwithstanding
    the fact that the appellant did not meet the  suitability  requirements
    the  respondent  also  assessed  his  application  in  terms   of   the
    eligibility requirements under Appendix FM.   The  respondent  did  not
    accept that the appellant had been living with his partner, Ms [W], for
    at  least  two  years  prior  to  the  date  of  the  application   and
    consequently he did not meet the definition of partner  as  defined  in
    Gen1.2 of Appendix FM.  The respondent considered  that  the  appellant
    did not meet the requirements as a parent because he did not have  sole
    responsibility for his daughter - a requirement under the  Rules.   The
    respondent considered the appellant's claim under paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Rules finding that the appellant did not meet the  requirements  as
    there were not very  significant  obstacles  to  his  reintegration  in
    India.  The respondent took into account her duties under  the  Borders
    Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  Section  55.   The  respondent
    concluded that the appellant had entered into his relationship fully in
    the knowledge that he had no permanent basis  of  stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom and would have been aware that he would be  required  to  leave
    following the completion of his  studies.   The  respondent  considered
    that the appellant could return to India and make  an  out  of  country
    application to return to the UK whilst his partner and  child  remained
    here or alternatively his partner and child  could  leave  the  country
    with the appellant.

 2. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. In a decision promulgated on 14 October 2016 First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    A M S Green dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The judge found that the
    appellant had not  demonstrated  compelling  circumstances  that  would
    warrant granting him leave to remain in the United Kingdom  outside  of
    the Immigration Rules.  The judge considered that the only merit at all
    in going outside the Immigration Rules proceeded only from  the  impact
    that the appellant's return to India would have upon his  2�  year  old
    daughter and possibly his stepchildren.

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    On 1 February 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio granted the appellant
    permission to appeal.

 5. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge's finding on Article 8  was
    perverse.  It is submitted that  at  paragraph  36  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision it is stated that the only merit to  go  outside  the
    Rules is in relation to the child's best  interests.   Accordingly  the
    Tribunal has  embarked  upon  a  proportionality  exercise  by  finding
    compelling reasons to consider the claim  outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules  but  nevertheless  at  paragraph  39  the   Tribunal   makes   a
    contradictory finding by stating that there are no compelling  reasons.
    It is asserted that by finding that Section 117B(6) of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act') is met it was  not  in
    the public interest for the appellant to be removed.  The  satisfaction
    of Section 117B(6) is a complete proportionality exercise - reliance is
    placed on the case of Treebhawan and Others  (Section  117B(6))  [2015]
    UKUT 00674 (IAC).  It is also submitted  that  the  judge's  conclusion
    that the appellant should return to India to make a  fresh  application
    is perverse and is in conflict with both statute and  established  case
    law.  Reliance is placed on the case of R (On the application of  Chen)
    v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (Appendix  FM-Chikwamba-
    temporary separation-proportionality)  [2015]  UKUT  00189  (IAC).   In
    cases involving children where removal would interfere with the child's
    enjoyment of family life with one or other of his parents whilst  entry
    clearance is obtained, the balance of proportionality falls  in  favour
    of the claimant.  Reliance is placed on the case of Zoumbas (Appellant)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74 and  it  is
    argued that such a decision is rarely proportionate.

 6. It is asserted that the judge's conclusion that the appellant's partner
    would in the future support an application by increasing her  hours  is
    both speculative and contradictory and that the  appellant  's  partner
    would not be able to work if the appellant were removed as she  has  no
    childcare.

 7. It is  also  asserted  that  the  Tribunal  has  failed  to  take  into
    consideration material evidence.  It  is  asserted  that  the  Tribunal
    indicates that the only consideration outside of the Immigration  Rules
    would be in relation  to  the  children.   It  is  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal erred in placing no weight on the evidence that the  appellant
    wished to visit the grave of his deceased  daughter.  It  is  incumbent
    upon the Tribunal to make  a  finding  which  would  affect  a  further
    assessment under Section 117B(6).  It is submitted that by  failing  to
    make a finding on the parental relationship the best interests  of  the
    three children have not been adequately factored into the assessment.

 8. Mr Singh submitted that  the  judge  placed  too  much  weight  on  the
    respondent's evidence of the timescale for processing applications  for
    leave to enter the UK.  The judge did not take into consideration  that
    the appellant's partner would need to get a second job  and  she  would
    need to have that  job  for  six  months  before  she  would  meet  the
    financial requirements of the Immigration Rules. He submitted that  the
    appellant's partner would be unable to work at  all  if  the  appellant
    left as her mother was not available to provide childcare.  This  would
    amount to an indefinite period of separation.  It was not in  the  best
    interests of the child to be separated from her father for  what  would
    be  a  fairly  lengthy  period  of  time.   Not  only   is   there   is
    disproportionate  interference  but  the  whole  case  was  made   more
    difficult  because  there  are  three  stepchildren.   The  appellant's
    stepchildren do not have regular contact with  their  father;  he  sees
    them at weekends intermittently.  He submitted that  the  evidence  was
    that the appellant was a father figure and a role model. Given the ages
    of the children it would have a devastating affect on them if  he  were
    to leave the United Kingdom.  Mr Singh confirmed that the challenge  to
    the First-tier Tribunal decision was an  irrationality  challenge.   He
    submitted that the whole family were between a rock and a hard place as
    taking away the primary carer to enable the appellant's partner  to  do
    her job will lead to the result that she would have to  leave  her  job
    and the appellant would therefore not be able to obtain entry clearance
    as a partner as she would be unable to meet the financial requirements.



 9. I invited Mr Singh to address me on the ground of appeal that the judge
    had failed to make findings on key evidence.  He indicated that he  was
    unable to address me on that ground.  With regard to the other  grounds
    of appeal Mr Singh simply adopted submissions made in the grounds.

10. Mr Norton submitted that at paragraph  36  the  judge  referred  to  MA
    Pakistan (R on the application of MA (Pakistan) and Others) [2016] EWCA
    Civ 705.  He submitted that the judge correctly set  out  that  Section
    117B(6) is not a full stop once it is met.  The grounds of appeal refer
    to the case of Treebhawan and Others (Section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT  674
    (IAC).  However, as is clear from MA (Pakistan) the position set out in
    Treebhawan is not correct.  The appellant  cannot  meet  the  financial
    requirements. In both in country and out of country cases it  is  clear
    from Section 117B(3) that there is a significant public interest in the
    economic wellbeing of the country that applicants  should  be  able  to
    financially support themselves.  This has been  confirmed  recently  by
    the Supreme Court.  It cannot be the case that where somebody is unable
    to meet the financial requirements and therefore unlikely to succeed in
    an application for entry clearance that that must amount to  compelling
    circumstances to grant leave to remain outside of the Rules.   If  that
    were the case there would be a complete undermining of the  requirement
    to be able to meet the financial  requirements  or  to  be  financially
    independent.   In  answer  to   my   query   concerning   the   judge's
    consideration of  whether  or  not  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
    appellant's daughter to leave the United Kingdom he submitted  that  in
    finding that the appellant's daughter and  stepchildren  would  not  be
    required to leave the United Kingdom the judge  had  in  essence  found
    that it would be unreasonable for them to leave the United Kingdom.  It
    was inherent in the judge's decision, in  finding  that  the  witnesses
    were credible, that the  appellant  was  one  of  several  persons  who
    exercises parental control over his stepchildren.   He  submitted  that
    the judge had taken into consideration that there would be an  upheaval
    if the appellant were to be removed to India and  that  the  judge  had
    taken into consideration both the appellant's daughter and stepchildren
    as is set out in paragraph 38 of the decision.  Mr Norton  agreed  that
    only the appellant's daughter's best interests had been  considered  by
    the Secretary of State and not those of his stepchildren.  However,  he
    submitted that the lack  of  any  evidence  regarding  the  appellant's
    daughter or stepchildren being  adversely  affected  by  the  appellant
    returning to India effectively rendered any  failure  to  consider  the
    interests as not material to the decision overall.

11. I reserved my decision. I invited submissions on remaking the  decision
    if I were to found an error of law. Both parties agreed I could  remake
    the decision. Mr Singh requested that he be permitted to file and serve
    letters from the appellant's stepchildren and  for  a  short  statement
    from the appellant's partner regarding the effect on  the  stepchildren
    if the appellant were to be returned.

Discussion

12. With  regard  to  the  TOEIC  certificate  the  judge  found  that  the
    respondent had not discharged the burden of proof to  substantiate  the
    allegation  that  the  appellant  had  obtained  his  test  certificate
    fraudulently. There was no cross appeal by the respondent against  that
    finding.

13. At paragraph 29 of the decision the judge sets out:

    "29. Could the appellant have benefited from the provision of EX 1  and
         Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules?  In  terms  of  EX  1  (a)  I
         accept that the appellant has a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
         relationship with his daughter.  She is under 18 years old and is a
         British citizen. The question that I must determine is  whether  it
         would be unreasonable to expect her to  leave  the  United  Kingdom
         with the appellant.  Ms Bhachu deals with this at  some  length  in
         her skeleton argument.  She argues that it would be in the  child's
         best interest to remain in the United Kingdom and the  impact  that
         would be felt with the appellant leaving this  country.   There  is
         nothing to suggest that the appellant's daughter would be  required
         to leave the United Kingdom.  Her mother is British and she and the
         child's grandparents can care for her ..."

14. Although the judge sets out that the question that she  must  determine
    is whether it would be not be  reasonable  to  expect  the  appellant's
    daughter to leave the United Kingdom she has failed  to  undertake  any
    analysis.  The judge merely finds that the child will not  be  required
    to leave the  United  Kingdom.   This  is  not  an  assessment  of  the
    reasonableness of her leaving the UK. EX 1 (a) requires  an  assessment
    as to whether or not it would be reasonable for the child to leave  the
    United Kingdom.  Mr Norton argued that the judge must  have  considered
    that it would be unreasonable to her to leave the UK because the  judge
    proceeded on the basis that  the  child  would  not  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge when considering s117B(6) set out at paragraph 37:

    "37. The wording  in  section  117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  essentially
         requires me to consider whether it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the
         appellant's daughter to go to India with him which is what  I  have
         already considered in terms of EX1(b) of the Immigration Rules  and
         my position is no different under the statutory provisions.   There
         is nothing  in  the  evidence  that  I  believe  suggest  that  the
         appellant's daughter  or  his  stepchildren  will  be  required  or
         expected to leave the United Kingdom if he returns to India."

15. The judge has again simply referred  to  the  fact  that  the  children
    cannot be required to leave  the  United  Kingdom.  The  provisions  in
    EX.1(a) and in 117B(6) have two aspects.  The first is that  the  child
    is either a British citizen or qualifying child and  secondly  that  it
    must be not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  If it was simply a matter that a child could not be  required
    to leave the United Kingdom because they were a  British  citizen  then
    that reasonableness additional requirement would be otiose as a British
    citizen child cannot be required to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    judge has failed to make a finding on whether it or  not  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.

16. I do not accept the appellant's submission that 117B(6) is  a  complete
    proportionality exercise.  For the reasons given above if that were the
    case then the requirement to make a finding that it is  not  reasonable
    that the child should be expected to leave  the  UK  would  be  otiose.
    Both 117B(6) and EX.1(a) require a finding to be made.  I also  do  not
    accept the appellant's argument that other factors are not to be  taken
    into account if 117B(6) is satisfied.  As made clear in MA Pakistan  in
    conducting the proportionality exercise  factors  such  as  immigration
    status are  relevant  to  the  assessment  of  the  proportionality  of
    removal.

17. I do not accept the appellant's submission that the judge's conclusions
    with regard to the proportionality of the appellant returning to  India
    to make an out of country application for entry clearance was  perverse
    and in conflict with statute in established case law.   The  judge  set
    out at paragraph 35:

    "35. In effect, the respondent believes that the appellant  should  not
         be allowed to jump the queue  by  being  granted  leave  to  remain
         outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   He  should   not   be   treated
         differently from other people who would be required to make out  of
         country applications.  I am  reminded  that  in  Chikwamba  (FC)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 40 the House
         of Lords  said  that  in  deciding  whether  a  general  policy  of
         requiring people such as the appellant to return to apply for entry
         in accordance with the Rules of this  country  was  legitimate  and
         proportionate in a particular case, it was  necessary  to  consider
         what the benefits of the policy  were.   Whilst  acknowledging  the
         deterrent effect of the policy  the  House  of  Lords  queried  the
         underlying basis of the policy in other respects and made it  clear
         that the policy should  not  be  applied  in  a  rigid,  Kafkaesque
         manner.  The House of Lords  went  on  to  say  that  it  would  be
         comparatively rarely, certainly in family cases involving  children
         that an Article 8 case should be dismissed on  the  basis  that  it
         would be proportionate and more appropriate for  the  appellant  to
         apply for leave from abroad.  In R (On the application of  Chen)  v
         the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  (Appendix  FM  -
         Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT
         00189 (IAC) it was held that:

         (i)  Appendix FM does not include  consideration  of  the  question
             whether it would be disproportionate to expect  an  individual
             to return to his home  country  to  make  an  entry  clearance
             application to rejoin family members  in  the  United  Kingdom
             there may be  cases  in  which  there  are  no  insurmountable
             obstacles to family life  being  enjoyed  outside  the  United
             Kingdom but where temporary separation to enable an individual
             to  make  an  application   for   entry   clearance   may   be
             disproportionate.  In all cases, it will be for the individual
             to place before the Secretary  of  State  evidence  that  such
             temporary separation will  interfere  disproportionately  with
             protected rights."

18. It is clear that the judge correctly considered that what was necessary
    was for the appellant to demonstrate that  temporary  separation  would
    interfere  disproportionately  with  protected   rights.    The   judge
    correctly  applied  the  case  law.   It  was  for  the  appellant   to
    demonstrate that the interference would be disproportionate. The  judge
    noted at paragraph 38, 'I have not seen any supporting expert  evidence
    (e.g. medical or psychiatric) that would indicate that the  Appellant's
    daughter and stepchildren will be significantly and adversely  affected
    by  his  returning  to  India.'  The  appellant's   submission   is   a
    disagreement with the conclusion that the judge reached.

19. I do not accept the submission that the judge placed too much weight on
    the respondent's evidence of the timescale for processing  applications
    for leave to enter the UK.  The  judge  at  paragraph  34  specifically
    rejected the respondent's argument that weight should be given  to  the
    short processing times.

20. It is clear  from  the  decision  that  the  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting   relationship   with   the
    appellant's partner's children.   Indeed  at  paragraph  37  the  judge
    implicitly acknowledges that in terms of Section 117B(6) she  would  be
    required to consider, in addition  to  the  appellant's  daughter,  his
    stepchildren.  However,  the  respondent  did  not  consider  the  best
    interests of the appellant's stepchildren and neither  did  the  judge.
    Having accepted implicitly that the appellant has a subsisting parental
    relationship with his stepchildren it was incumbent upon the  judge  to
    consider their best interests.

21. I find that the failure to consider and make a finding  in  respect  of
    whether or not it was reasonable to expect the appellant's daughter and
    stepchildren to leave the UK as required by EX.1(a) and Section 117B(6)
    amounted to a material error of law. It was also a  material  error  of
    law not  to  consider  the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's  step
    children. I set aside the decision.

22. I consider that I can remake the decision on the basis  of  the  papers
    before me. I will  permit  the  appellant  to  serve  relevant  further
    evidence in respect of the appellant's step-children as  requested  the
    hearing.

23.  I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.            to the First-tier

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a  material
error of law.  I set aside that decision pursuant  to  section  12(2)(a)  of
the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

Directions

The appellant will file at the usual Upper Tribunal address and [email]  any
further relevant evidence within fourteen days of receipt of  this  decision
and will serve the same on the respondent.  The  respondent  will  file  and
serve on the appellant within fourteen days of receipt of that evidence  any
observations on that evidence.


Signed                     P                    M                    Ramshaw
                       Date 2 April 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

