
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30169/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 December 2016                  |On 15 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MARIE ARKEITA MENDY
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Nasim, Counsel, instructed by the Legal Rights
Partnership


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
        (Appellant)   against   Judge   of    the    First-tier    Tribunal
        Heatherington's promulgated decision of 11  October  2016  allowing
        the Respondent's appeal against the Appellant's  refusal  to  grant
        her indefinite leave to remain (ILR). In her Rule 24  response  the
        Respondent contends that the judge erred in law in concluding  that
        her father did not have sole responsibility for her.


   Background


     2. The Respondent is a national of Gambia, date  of  birth  21  August
        1998. She entered the United Kingdom on  7  September  2013  having
        been granted entry clearance as a  child  visitor  valid  until  28
        February 2014. The Respondent made and  in-time  application  on  7
        January 2014 for ILR as the child of a  settled  person,  but  this
        application was refused on 24 March 2014. The  Respondent  appealed
        this decision and her appealed was allowed by judge of  the  First-
        tier  Tribunal  Norton-Taylor,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  3
        February 2015, to the extent that the Appellant's decision was  not
        otherwise  in  accordance  with  the  law  and   the   Respondent's
        application remained outstanding. This  was  because  it  had  been
        accepted by the presenting officer that the Respondents father  had
        pre-existing indefinite leave to remain and the application  should
        have been considered under paragraph 298 of the  immigration  rules
        as well as appendix FM.


     3. The Appellant remade her decision on 21 August 2015. On  this  date
        the  Respondent  turned  17.  The  Appellant  did  not  accept  the
        Respondent's father had sole parental  responsibility  for  her  or
        that  there  were  serious   and   compelling   family   or   other
        considerations which made her exclusion undesirable. The  Appellant
        went on to consider whether the Respondent met the requirements  of
        appendix FM (decision under the child route) and  paragraph  276ADE
        (relating to her private life) but concluded that the  requirements
        of these rules had not been met. The  Appellant  then  went  on  to
        consider whether  there  were  "exceptional  circumstances"  which,
        consistent with the right to respect for private  and  family  life
        contained in Article 8, might warrant consideration of a  grant  of
        leave to  remain  outside  the  immigration  rules.  The  Appellant
        considered section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
        Act 2009 and noted the Respondent's wish to remain in the  UK  with
        her father  and  half  siblings.  The  Appellant  did  not  however
        consider that such circumstances existed.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

     4. By the time of the appeal hearing  the  Respondent  had  turned  18
        years old. The judge heard evidence from  the  Respondent  and  her
        father. The Respondent stated that she regularly calls her  mother,
        sometimes daily and sometimes on  alternate  days.  The  Respondent
        believed her father's  financial  support  might  continue  if  she
        returned to Gambia. Her paternal grandmother died on 9 August  2016
        and her maternal grandmother  lived  in  Senegal.  The  Respondents
        father  financially  helped  her  mother  and  the  Respondent  was
        enrolled in college. The  judge  heard  from  Mr  John  Mendy,  the
        Respondents father.


     5. At 8.1 of his decision the judge indicated that the relevant  rules
        for the appeal before him was rule 298(i) (c)  or  (d).  The  judge
        however set out the whole of rule  298.  The  judge  considered  TD
        (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole  responsibility")  Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT
        00049.


     6. At 9.1 the judge set out his principal  findings.  These  included,
        inter alia, findings that the Respondent had lived with her  father
        for 3 years, that she had been educated in the UK for 3  years  and
        spoke English fluently, that she was financially dependent  on  her
        father as a student, that although she had turned 18  her  paternal
        grandfather was now 74 years old,  that  her  mother  had  mobility
        problems  and  was  in  no  position  to  support  and  assist  the
        Respondent, that her mother had  moved  from  the  town  where  the
        Respondent had previously been educated, that  the  Respondent  was
        undertaking a level 3 Diploma in Health  and  Social  Care  with  a
        completion date of 20 June 2017, that she had a  relationship  with
        her half-sisters and her half-brother with  whom  she  spent  every
        other weekend, and that her father had  a  home  and  was  able  to
        accommodate her without recourse to public funds.


     7. The judge rejected the Respondents assertion that  her  father  had
        been solely responsible for the Respondent before she came  to  the
        UK. The judge found  it  abundantly  clear  that  the  Respondent's
        mother never abandoned or  abdicated  responsibility  for  her  and
        noted that they were in regular touch with each  other.  The  judge
        noted that from 2012 ending in August  2013  the  Respondent  lived
        with her mother. The judge found that the Respondent's  mother  was
        plainly involved in her upbringing. At 9.4  the  judge  stated,  "I
        accept that Mr Mendy is present and settled in the  United  Kingdom
        and from 7 September 2013 he has had sole  responsibility  for  the
        [Respondents] upbringing. However, where both parents are  involved
        in a child's upbringing, it is exceptional for one of them to  have
        sole responsibility. Following the guidance given in TD  (Paragraph
        297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049 I cannot
        find that Mr Mendy was  solely  responsible  for  the  [Respondent]
        before she came to the United Kingdom. The facts indicate a  shared
        responsibility rather than sole responsibility."


     8. The judge then went on to consider the Respondent's best interests.
        The judge stated that the Respondent's claim had  not  be  properly
        considered and, were it not for the delays in reaching the  current
        stage of the appeal process, the judge might have been dealing with
        a child. The judge noted  that  the  Respondent  had  had  3  years
        residence in the UK, was studying on a college  course  and  had  a
        hoped-for career  path.  She  had  a  relationship  with  her  half
        siblings and her father was present and settled in the UK  and  was
        capable of making suitable arrangements for her care.  At  9.8  the
        judge stated, "I  have  considered  the  continuity  of  residence,
        whether it is appropriate to change the place  of  residence  where
        she has grown up  for  3  years,  in  circumstances  where  she  is
        socially aware. In all of the above  stated  circumstances  I  find
        that it would be inappropriate to disrupt the social, cultural  and
        educational ties the [Respondent] now has". The judge  found  there
        were 'serious and compelling family or other considerations' making
        the Respondent's exclusion from the UK undesirable. The appeal  was
        allowed under the immigration rules.

The grounds of appeal and the grant of permission

     9. The Appellant contended that the judge  gave  insufficient  reasons
        for finding the existence of serious and compelling considerations.
        The reasons given by the judge were said  to  be  inadequate  given
        that the Respondent was now an adult, had only lived in the UK  for
        3 years and in light of any disruption to her social, cultural  and
        educational ties. The grounds additionally submitted that,  as  the
        Respondent arrived in the UK as a visitor, she could not  meet  the
        requirement of paragraph 298(ii) as she was no longer a  child  and
        had not been admitted to the UK or granted  leave  in  one  of  the
        exhaustive categories listed in 298(ii)(b) to (e).


    10. Designated judge of the First-tier Tribunal Peart found both of the
        grounds arguable.

Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

    11. At the outset of the hearing Mr Nasim provided me with  a  copy  of
        the rule 24 response. In addition to resisting any contention  that
        the basis upon which the  judge  allowed  the  appeal  was  legally
        erroneous, the rule 24 response submitted that the judge  erred  in
        law in his consideration of the sole responsibility issue.  It  was
        submitted that the judge had misconstrued the principles in TD  and
        had  treated  the  mother's  abandonment   and/or   abdication   of
        responsibility   as   a   pre-requisite   to   meeting   the   sole
        responsibility test. It was  submitted  that  the  judge  erred  in
        concluding that the Respondent's father was not solely  responsible
        for her  before  she  came  to  the  UK,  and  that  he  unlawfully
        restricted himself to considering events prior  to  the  Respondent
        entering the  UK.  It  was  noted  that  the  judge  did  find  the
        Respondent's father solely responsible for her after her arrival in
        the UK.


    12. According to Mr Nasim it had been agreed at  the  hearing  by  both
        parties that the sole issues were paragraph 298(i)(c)  or  (d)  and
        Article 8. It was submitted that  the  presenting  officer  at  the
        hearing before Judge Norton Taylor had agreed that the  application
        should have been considered under paragraph 298 of the  immigration
        rules and the refusal letter of 21 August 2015 did  not  raise  any
        issue under paragraph 298(ii). The Appellant's argument was said to
        be, in  any  event,  misconceived  as  paragraph  298(ii)  drew  no
        distinction between  the  types  of  leave  granted,  as  the  rule
        required, 'limited leave to enter or remain' which  the  Respondent
        had. The suggestion that the judges reasoning was inadequate  under
        paragraph 298 (i)(d)  was  misconceived  as  the  judge  had  given
        adequate reasons for his conclusion. It was finally submitted  that
        the judge failed to consider Article 8 in his decision.


    13. In oral submissions Mr Armstrong adopted the Respondents grounds of
        appeal and submitted that the judge was entitled to find an absence
        of sole responsibility. The judge  gave  insufficient  reasons  for
        concluding there were "serious and compelling" reasons  making  the
        Respondent's exclusion  from  the  UK  undesirable.  Mr  Nasim,  in
        response, submitted that the Respondent had been 17  years  old  at
        the date of the Appellant's decision and  that  her  appeal  should
        have been considered on that basis. He reiterated that at no  stage
        had the Appellant raised any issue  relating  to  the  Respondent's
        compliance with paragraph 298(ii). I was referred  to  the  judge's
        finding, at 9.4, that,  from  7  September  2013,  the  Respondents
        father had sole responsibility for her upbringing. It was submitted
        that the judge had provided adequate reasoning and an assessment of
        his reasoning had to take into account all his findings as outlined
        in 9.1. It was submitted that, under Article  8,  weight  ought  to
        have been reduced from the public interest because  the  Respondent
        had been prejudiced by the previous unlawfulness decision  in  that
        she was no longer under the age of 18. It was noted that there  had
        been no adverse credibility findings made by the judge.


    14. I indicated to both parties that, in  the  event  that  I  found  a
        material error of law, I would proceed to remake the decision based
        on the same evidence that was before the  judge  (no  new  evidence
        having been proffered by either party).

Discussion

    15. The 2nd ground of appeal contends that, as the  Respondent  entered
        the UK pursuant to a child visitor entry clearance on  7  September
        2013, and was 18 years old at the time of the appeal hearing before
        the First-tier Tribunal, she could not  meet  the  requirements  of
        paragraph 298 (ii) and  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  failing  to
        consider this.


    16. Mr Nasim strenuously argued that  this  had  never  been  an  issue
        before the First-tier Tribunal. He pointed to the agreement reached
        in the appeal before Judge Norton-Taylor, to  the  absence  of  any
        reference to paragraph 298(ii) in the  Reasons For Refusal  Letter,
        and to 8.1 of the judge's decision where the relevant rules for the
        purpose of the appeal were said to be paragraph 298(i)(c) or (d).


    17. The decision of Judge  Norton-Taylor,  promulgated  on  3  February
        2015, merely indicated that the Respondent's application should  be
        considered under paragraph 298. It did not  restrict  consideration
        to any particular subparagraph.


    18. It does however appear from the Reasons For Refusal Letter and  8.1
        of the judge's decision that the Respondent's ability to  meet  the
        requirements of paragraph 298(ii) had not been identified as  being
        in issue. I note however that  at  the  date  of  the  Reasons  For
        Refusal Letter the Respondent was 17 years old.  It  was  therefore
        quite obvious, at the time of the Appellant's  decision,  that  she
        met the requirement of paragraph 298(ii)(a).


    19.  At  the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  hearing  the
        Respondent had turned 18. This materially affected her  ability  to
        comply with paragraph 298(ii). This appears to have been overlooked
        both by the presenting officer, the  judge  and  indeed  Mr  Nasim.
        There was no explicit waiver by the Appellant of the need  for  the
        Respondent to fulfil  the  other  requirements  of  paragraph  298.
        Moreover, the potential difficulties that the Respondent would have
        in meeting the requirements of paragraph 298(ii) were, prima facie,
        obvious. A judge cannot allow an appeal under the immigration rules
        unless all the material requirements of the  immigration  rules  at
        play are met (see, for example, RM (Kwok On Tong: HC395  para  320)
        India [2006] UKAIT 00039). Although it was not a point drawn to the
        judge's attention the judge was nevertheless only entitled to allow
        the  appeal  under  the  immigration  rules,  as  he  did,  if  the
        Respondent met those requirements.


    20. Although the Respondent was 17 years old when the decision that was
        the subject of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was  made,
        at the date of the hearing of the First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  she
        was over the age of 18. Mr Nasim  effectively  submitted  that  the
        Tribunal should continue to treat the Respondent as if she were 17.
        He was unable to point to  any  authority  in  support  of  such  a
        proposition. A judge cannot ignore a material change in a  person's
        circumstances between the date of the Secretary of State's decision
        and the date of the appeal and must consider any matter he  or  she
        thinks relevant to the  substance  of  the  decision,  including  a
        matter arising  after  the  date  of  the  decision  (s.85  of  the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002). Although  the  judge
        was aware that the Respondent had turned 18  the  judge  failed  to
        consider the relevance of this change of circumstance in  terms  of
        the Respondent's ability to meet all the requirements of  paragraph
        298. This is quite surprising given that the judge actually set out
        the full requirements of that paragraph (at 8.1).


    21. Paragraph 298(ii)(b) to (e) sets out a number of requirements  that
        need to be met in dealing with an applicant under paragraph 298 who
        is over the age of 18. These relate to the basis  upon  which  they
        were granted leave to enter or remain in the UK. It was not  argued
        by Mr Nasim that the Respondent  entered  the  UK  in  any  of  the
        categories identified in 298(ii)(b) to (e). Mr Nasim submitted that
        it didn't matter under  which  category  the  Respondent  had  been
        granted limited leave to enter or remain in the UK (by reference to
        the beginning of 298(ii), but this fails to take into  account  the
        additional requirements listed at 298(ii)(a) to (e).


    22. In light of the above reasoning  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge
        materially  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  consider  whether  the
        Respondent could meet all of the  requirements  of  paragraph  298.
        Further, and in light of the above analysis, I  am  satisfied  that
        the Respondent could not  have  met  any  of  the  requirements  of
        paragraph 298(ii) at the date of her appeal before  the  First-tier
        Tribunal.


    23. I am  additionally  satisfied  that  the  judge  was  not  lawfully
        entitled  to  conclude   there   were   'serious   and   compelling
        considerations' that made the Respondent's exclusion  from  the  UK
        undesirable.


    24. Paragraph 298(i)(d) reads, so far as material:
           The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite leave
           to remain in the United Kingdom as the child of a parent,
           parents or a relative present and settled in the United Kingdom
           are that:
           ...
              (d) one parent or a relative is present and settled in the
              United Kingdom and there are serious and compelling family or
              other considerations which make exclusion of the child
              undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made for the
              child's care;
    25. Between 9.5 and 9.8 the judge gives his reasons for concluding  the
        existence   of   'serious   and   compelling   family   or    other
        considerations'.  This  consisted   of   delays   in   the   prompt
        consideration of the Respondent's claim and  appeal,  her  3  years
        residence in the UK, her studying on a college course relating to a
        hoped-for career path, her relationship with her half siblings  and
        her father, and the inappropriateness of disrupting the  continuity
        of her residence in circumstances where she is "socially aware".


    26. The judge attaches weight to purported delays in dealing  with  the
        Respondent's application. The Respondent made her  application  for
        indefinite leave to remain on 7 January 2014 and this  was  refused
        on 24 March 2014, some 2 � months later. Although this decision was
        ultimately held to be unlawful because it had only been  considered
        under the immigration rules giving expression to family and private
        life rights, and not under paragraph 298, there was  no  inordinate
        delay. The Respondent succeeded to a limited extent in  her  appeal
        some 10 months later. Given the general delays experienced  in  the
        First-tier  Tribunal  this  cannot  be  regarded   as   inordinate.
        Following her successful appeal on 3 February  2015  the  Appellant
        remade her decision on 21 August 2015, just over  6  months  later.
        This delay is not inordinate. I am consequently not satisfied  that
        the judge was entitled to regard these periods of  time  as  delays
        capable of contributing to the existence of serious and  compelling
        family or other considerations making her exclusion undesirable.


    27. Moreover, in reaching his conclusions relating to the existence  of
        serious and compelling considerations the judge failed to take into
        account a number of relevant factors. There was no consideration in
        this part of the decision of the Respondent's family  circumstances
        in Gambia, where she has a mother with  whom  she  is  in  frequent
        contact. There was no consideration of her evidence that her father
        was likely to continue to support  her,  as  he  is  doing  to  her
        mother. Although referring to the fact that the  Respondent  was  a
        young woman of 18 years old no consideration was given by the judge
        to the possibility of the  Respondent  continuing  her  studies  in
        Gambia or looking for employment in Gambia. There was  no  evidence
        that she would be returned to an unacceptable social  and  economic
        environment. The Respondent had lived in Gambia for  the  first  15
        years of her life and would undoubtedly have been familiar with the
        language, culture and  way  of  life.  There  was  nothing  in  the
        evidence before the judge indicating that there was anything beyond
        the normal bonds of affection, apart possibly from  some  financial
        support, in respect of  the  Respondent's  relationships  with  her
        father and her half siblings. There was certainly  no  evidence  of
        any unmet needs and no evidence of any  neglect  or  abuse.  It  is
        entirely unclear what the judge meant when he said  the  Respondent
        was "socially aware" having lived in the UK  for  3  years.  Having
        lived in Gambia for the first 15 years of her life,  including  her
        formative years, the Respondent would also undoubtedly be "socially
        aware" of life there.


    28. In light of the  above  assessment  I  find  the  judge  failed  to
        consider  all  of  the  Respondent's  material  circumstances,   as
        described above, and that  he  was  not  consequently  entitled  to
        conclude there were serious and  compelling  considerations  making
        her exclusion from the UK undesirable.


    29. The Respondent contends that the judge erred in law  in  concluding
        that her father did not have sole  responsibility  for  her.  Given
        that  the  Respondent  cannot  meet  any  of  the  requirements  of
        paragraph 298(ii), it is not strictly necessary for me to  consider
        the judge's assessment of sole responsibility. She  cannot  succeed
        under the immigration rules. I am nevertheless satisfied  that  the
        judge was ultimately entitled to  conclude  that  the  Respondent's
        father did not have sole responsibility for her.  Contrary  to  the
        rule 24 response the judge did not require the  Respondents  mother
        to abandon and abdicate her responsibility  as  a  prerequisite  to
        meeting the sole responsibility test. At 9.3  the  judge  made  the
        observation  that  the  Respondent's  mother  never  abandoned   or
        abdicated responsibility for her. The Respondent had lived with her
        mother in Gambia and they were in regular contact with each  other.
        The judge was lawfully entitled to take into account the absence of
        any abandonment or abdication as a relevant factor  when  assessing
        whether the father had  sole  responsibility.  The  decision,  read
        holistically, does not indicate that the judge elevated the absence
        of abandonment or abdication to a pre-requisite.


    30. The  evidence  before  the  judge  indicated  that  the  Respondent
        regularly called her  mother,  sometimes  daily  and  sometimes  on
        alternate days. Although the Respondent's  father  was  financially
        responsible for her, and for  her  mother,  as  was  noted  in  TD,
        "Wherever the parents are, if both  parents  are  involved  in  the
        upbringing of the child, it will be exceptional that  one  of  them
        will have sole responsibility."


    31. The  judge's  assertion  that  the  Respondent's  father  had  sole
        responsibility for her since her arrival in  the  UK  was  a  legal
        conclusion  without  adequate   analysis.   The   judge's   factual
        assessment, including his finding that the Respondent's mother  has
        mobility problems and was not in a position to support  and  assist
        the Respondent, and his finding that the Respondent was financially
        dependent on her father, did not exclude the possibility  that  the
        Respondent's mother still exercised joint  continuing  control  and
        direction over the Respondent's upbringing,  including  making  the
        important decisions in her life. Very frequent contact between  the
        Respondent and her mother made it very likely that the  mother  was
        still involved in the upbringing of her daughter.


    32. For the reasons given above I am not satisfied that the  Respondent
        meets the requirements for a grant of indefinite  leave  to  remain
        under paragraph 298. In the process of  re-making  the  decision  I
        will now consider whether the Respondent meets the requirements  of
        appendix FM or paragraph 276 ADE  of  the  immigration  rules.  The
        Respondent is now 18 years of age.  She  is  not  in  a  subsisting
        relationship with any partner. She is no longer a child and she  is
        not a parent. It was not submitted by Mr Nasim that the  Respondent
        could meet any of the categories identified in appendix FM.


    33.  With  respect  to  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276  ADE  the
        Respondent has not lived in the UK for at least 20  years,  is  not
        under the age of 18, and has not  spent  at  least  half  her  life
        living continuously in  the  UK.  With  respect  to  paragraph  276
        ADE(1)(vi) I am not  satisfied  there  would  be  very  significant
        obstacles to her integration in Gambia. She lived in  Gambia  until
        the age of 15, and has only lived in the UK for 3  years.  She  has
        family in Gambia including her mother with whom she is in  frequent
        contact. She believed that her father would continue to financially
        support her in Gambia and there was  nothing  in  the  evidence  to
        suggest otherwise. The fact that  the  Respondent  has  established
        friendships including those with her  half  siblings,  has  a  good
        relationship with her father who financially supports her,  and  is
        in the middle of an educational course  cannot  on  any  reasonable
        view constitute very significant obstacles. There is no evidence of
        any relationship of dependency or reliance, other  than  financial,
        between the Respondent and anyone in the UK. She can  maintain  her
        friendships via remote  forms  of  communication.  Whilst  this  is
        clearly an inferior way of maintaining relationships there  was  no
        evidence  to  suggest  that  the  Respondent  would  be  unable  to
        communicate via telephone or Skype or that her removal would  sever
        her existing relationships. The Respondent is a bright and  healthy
        young woman who would most likely have the financial support of her
        father and would be able to continue her  education  in  Gambia  or
        look for employment. She would not be returning to a  situation  of
        destitution.


    34. I have additionally considered the  public  interest  factors  that
        must be considered in determining whether her removal would  breach
        Article 8, as identified in sections 117B of the 2002  Act.  Whilst
        the Respondent speaks very good English and, as  a  result  of  her
        father's  support,  could  be   regarded   as   being   financially
        independent, these are at best neutral factors (see Rhuppiah v SSHD
        [2016] EWCA Civ 803). I take into account that the  maintenance  of
        effective immigration control is in the public interest and I  note
        that little weight should be given to her private life  as  it  was
        established when her immigration status was precarious.


    35. Having cumulative regard to the above considerations I am satisfied
        that the Respondents removal from the UK would not breach Article 8
        outside the immigration rules.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by a material error of  law.  I
remake the appeal dismissing the appeal.

I make no anonymity order.


[pic]                               14 December 2016

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


