
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30241/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14th July 2017                         |On 3rd August 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                jagtar singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Singh, Counsel instructed by SMG Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of India born on 25th April  1986.   He
    first arrived in the UK on 10th June 2006 when he was  given  leave  to
    enter for a short period as a work permit holder.   The  Appellant  did
    not depart, and eventually  after  two  unsuccessful  applications  for
    leave to remain, on 27th February 2015 he again applied  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of his family and private life.   That  application
    was  refused  on  27th  August  2015  for  the  reasons  given  in  the
    Respondent's letter of that date.   The  Appellant  appealed,  and  his
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe (the Judge)  sitting
    at Birmingham on 3rd November 2016.  He decided to dismiss  the  appeal
    for the reasons given in his Decision dated 13th  November  2016.   The
    Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and on 28th April  2017
    such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeal because  he  found  that  the  Appellant
    could not qualify for leave to remain within the Immigration  Rules  as
    an overstayer.  That decision has not been challenged in  this  appeal.
    As the Judge stated at paragraph 20 of the Decision, the  issue  before
    him therefore was whether there were grounds  to  grant  the  Appellant
    leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.  The Judge was satisfied
    that the Appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his
    wife, the Sponsor Kiran Bala, a British citizen.   However,  the  Judge
    found at paragraph 27 of the Decision that there were not  any  grounds
    to  consider  the  Appellant's  Article  8  ECHR  rights  outside   the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Singh argued that the Judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    coming to this conclusion.  He referred to the reasons  given  for  the
    grant of permission and submitted that the Judge had given insufficient
    reasons for his conclusion at paragraph 24 of the Decision  that  there
    were no insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant returning to live  in
    India.  Further, the Judge had failed to attach  sufficient  weight  to
    the evidence that the Appellant's return to India  would  result  in  a
    disruption of the Sponsor's medical treatment for infertility, and  for
    that reason  the  Judge  had  erred  in  finding  that  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances.  Overall, the Judge had  given  insufficient
    reasons for his decision.

 5. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to the Rule 24 response  and  submitted
    that the grounds of application amounted to no more than a disagreement
    with the decision of the Judge.  The Judge had carefully  analysed  all
    the relevant evidence and had made clear  findings  for  which  he  had
    given sufficient reasons.  The Judge had dealt with all the  issues  in
    the case in  paragraphs  20  to  26  inclusive  of  the  Decision.   In
    particular, the Judge  had  noted  that  the  Sponsor's  treatment  for
    infertility had not commenced.  The Judge had clearly demonstrated that
    he had carried out the balancing exercise necessary for any  assessment
    of proportionality.

 6. I find no material error of law in the decision of the  Judge  which  I
    therefore do not set aside.  The Judge wrote in  paragraph  20  of  the
    Decision that the issue before him was whether there  were  grounds  to
    consider the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights outside the  Immigration
    Rules.  The  Judge  then  comprehensively  analysed  all  the  relevant
    evidence before coming to his conclusion at  paragraph  27  that  there
    were no such grounds.  It is clear from what the Judge  wrote  that  he
    found no exceptional circumstances which had not been considered  under
    the Immigration  Rules.   In  particular,  the  Judge  dealt  with  the
    Sponsor's medical treatment at paragraph 25 of the Decision.   I  agree
    with the submission of Mrs Aboni that the grounds of application amount
    to no more than a disagreement with the decision of the Judge.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date   3rd August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

