
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30363/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th May 2015                              |On 14th August 2015           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                               MS MUMA SINKALA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Ijezie, Solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Zambia born on  8th  October  1989.   The
    Appellant's immigration history was that  she  arrived  in  the  UK  in
    September 2007 with leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a student.
     This leave was subsequently extended until 14th May 2014 as a  Tier  1
    Post-Study Migrant.  Prior to expiry of her visa the Appellant  applied
    for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  and  by  Notice  of  Refusal
    dated 14th July 2014 the Appellant's application  was  refused  on  the
    basis that she did not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    and that there were no exceptional circumstances which would bring  the
    Appellant within the provisions of Article 8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Nixon  sitting  at  Birmingham  on  12th  November  2014.    The
    Appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal Judge was that she  had
    developed a private life in the UK, had  filed  additional  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Section 120 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 and argued that she had a right of abode in the United Kingdom  as
    she was in fact a  British  citizen.   Arguments  in  support  of  such
    contention  were  that  both  her  parents,  grandparents  and   great-
    grandparents were  citizens  of  the  UK  and  colonies  and  that  she
    therefore qualified as a British citizen and was  entitled  to  such  a
    right of abode.  In a determination promulgated on 18th  November  2014
    the Appellant's appeal was dismissed  under  the  Rules  and  on  human
    rights grounds.

 3. On 27th November 2014 the Appellant lodged Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  On 12th January 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Shimmin noted that the Grounds  of
    Appeal argued that on the basis of the findings made by the judge as to
    the status of the Appellant's parents the judge erred  in  finding  the
    Appellant was not entitled to a right of abode.

 4. On 23rd January 2015 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of
    Appeal under  Rule  24.   The  Rule  24  response  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's grounds were purely  opportunistic  and  merely  sought  to
    detract from the very proper, reasonable and  sustainable  findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.   The  Rule  24  reply  noted  that  the
    Appellant had purported to rely  on  post-decision  evidence  submitted
    with her application  for  leave  to  appeal  and  that  there  was  no
    compelling explanation or reason offered why those documents  were  not
    submitted in support of the original application.

 5. The appeal came initially before me to determine whether or  not  there
    was a material error of law on 20th February 2015.  At that hearing the
    Appellant appeared by  her  instructed  solicitor  Mr  Ijezie  and  the
    Secretary of State by her Home Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr  Jarvis.
    They continue to be the legal representatives at the restored  hearing.



 6. I was satisfied  that  there  was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   In  particular  by
    disposing of the appeal by stating that the evidence  relating  to  the
    grandparents is sufficient is I found a material error of law  when  it
    seemed to me as a matter of  law  it  was  necessary  to  look  at  the
    parents' position and that it was necessary for the judge to go further
    and to provide detailed findings based on the factual situation and the
    relevant statutory authorities.

 7. The findings of fact as against the analysis as to whether there  is  a
    right of abode are not challenged and consequently I was satisfied that
    the correct approach in this matter  was  to  find  that  there  was  a
    material error of law, to set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and to adjourn the hearing reserving it to myself within  the
    Upper Tribunal to be disposed of by way of submissions at  a  time  and
    date to be fixed.  I noted that both legal  representatives  personally
    wished to appear at the restored hearing.  As set out in the directions
    whilst the Appellant was perfectly entitled to and may  well  wish  to,
    attend the next hearing if the venue were to be somewhere that was  not
    convenient to her then I was, bearing in mind the matter would be dealt
    with by submissions alone be prepared to excuse her attendance.

 8. I gave directions for the hearing of this matter  and  noted  that  the
    only issue outstanding is whether or  not  the  Appellant  is  entitled
    under statutory authority, in  particular  the  terms  of  the  British
    Nationality  Act  1981,  to  automatically  be  entitled   to   British
    citizenship and a right of abode.  In accordance with my  directions  I
    am very helpfully  provided  by  Mr  Jarvis  and  Mr  Ijezie  with  the
    following

       . A background statute and guidance bundle.

       . An extensive Appellant's bundle extending to 199 pages.

       . A consolidated bundle of Practice Directions.

       . Skeleton argument on behalf of the Respondent.

Relevant Issues

 9. Both skeleton arguments produced to me which form the principal  thrust
    of the submissions are most helpful.  From them the following questions
    are, it is submitted to me, of relevance

       . Did the Appellant's parents have citizenship of the United  Kingdom
         and colonies status before Zambian independence in 1964?

       . Was the Appellant's paternal grandfather a British subject  on  1st
         January 1949?

       . In any event were the Appellant's parents citizens  of  the  United
         Kingdom and colonies (CUKCs) after Zambian independence in 1964?

       . In the alternative - did the Appellant's parents have the right  of
         abode for the purpose of Section 2(1) of the 1971 Act?

The Appellant's Evidence

10. Whilst no evidence was given before me by the Appellant in order to set
    out the background of this matter  it  is  appropriate  to  recite  the
    historical facts.  The Appellant states that  her  mother  Mrs  Pauline
    Sinkala was born on 11th May 1959 as a citizen of  the  United  Kingdom
    and colonies (CUKC).  Her parents and mother were born British subjects
    in 1924 and 1939 respectively and her paternal grandfather and paternal
    grandmother were, it is contended, British subjects at the time of  her
    father's birth in 1924.  Her paternal grandfather had been born in 1902
    and  her  paternal  grandmother  in  1920.   The  Appellant's  maternal
    grandparents were British subjects at the time of her birth in 1939 her
    maternal  grandfather  having  been  born  in  1903  and  her  maternal
    grandmother in 1905.  Her maternal  grandmother  obtained  her  Zambian
    citizenship on 23rd March 1976 without losing her CUKC  status  and  in
    1988 entered the UK to join her father who was studying  at  the  time.
    At the time of entry into the UK she did not need a visa  and  did  not
    apply for one.

11. The Appellant believes her father's lineage was  that  he  was  born  a
    citizen of the UK and colonies  on  26th  March  1958  in  the  British
    Colonial Protectorate of Northern Rhodesia.  The  Appellant's  father's
    parents were born British subjects in 1935 and 1949 respectively.   The
    Appellant's maternal  grandmother  is  still  alive.   The  Appellant's
    father's grandparents were British subjects at the time of her father's
    birth  in  1935.   Her  father's  maternal  grandparents  were  British
    subjects at the time  of  his  mother's  birth  in  1949.   Her  father
    obtained his Zambian citizenship on 14th October  1977  without  losing
    his CUKC status.  In October 1987 he entered the UK for further studies
    and at the time of entry did not need a visa nor did he apply for  one.



12. The Appellant was  born  on  8th  October  1989  at  Liverpool  General
    Hospital.  She lived with her parents in the UK  for  slightly  over  a
    year after she was born and re-entered the UK in 2007  with  a  student
    visa valid until 31st March 2008 which  was  subsequently  extended  to
    31st October 2011.  She was subsequently granted post-study work  leave
    valid until 14th May  2014  when  she  submitted  the  application  for
    further leave which has led to the current appeal.

13. It is the Appellant's  contention  that  she  qualifies  as  a  British
    citizen and/or is entitled to right of abode.  She is of good character
    and conduct and does not have any criminal record.  She has been in the
    UK for a period of eight years and has  developed  family  and  private
    life here.  Since 2003 she has worked for Santander Bank plc.  She  has
    close relatives living in  Sheffield  who  are  settled  here.   It  is
    against that background that this appeal comes to be considered.

Submissions/Discussions

14. It is the submission of Mr Ijezie that the Appellant is entitled  under
    Sections 1, 11 and 50 of the British Nationality Act 1981 to  automatic
    entitlement to British citizenship and under  Section  2(1)(a)  of  the
    Immigration Act  (as  substituted  by  Section  39(2)  of  the  British
    Nationality Act 1981) to a right of abode.

15. He submits that the findings made at paragraph 15 of her  determination
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nixon are unchallenged and that  the  CUKC
    status of the Appellant's parents did not change upon the  independence
    of Zambia in 1964.   He  consequently  contends  that  the  Appellant's
    parents qualified for a right of abode prior to  1st  January  1983  by
    virtue of Section 2(1)(b)(ii) of the 1971 Immigration Act (as enacted).

16. He contends that  it  therefore  follows  that  since  the  Appellant's
    parents are CUKCs with a  right  of  abode  as  "patrials"  before  1st
    January 1983 that the  Appellant's  parents  automatically  qualify  as
    British citizens on the commencement date of the  1981  Act  (i.e.  1st
    January 1983) by virtue of Section 11 of the  British  Nationality  Act
    1981  and  as  confirmed  by  paragraph  15.3.1  of  the  Home   Office
    publication entitled "British nationality: summary."

17. Mr Jarvis contends that the Appellant's  assertion  that  the  "factual
    findings" of the First-tier Tribunal Judge should stand  is  untenable.
    Those factual findings can be narrowed to three issues and  it  is  the
    third one that is contentious.

      a) The Appellant's mother was born in Zambia  (Northern  Rhodesia)  on
         11th May 1959.

      b) The Appellant's father was born in Zambia  (Northern  Rhodesia)  on
         26th March 1958.

      c) The parents were CUKCs as a consequence of the Zambian Independence
         Constitution Act and the Appellant being  the  daughter  of  people
         with that lineage.

    It is the contention of Mr Jarvis that the finding of CUKC  status  for
    any of the relevant parties is not purely a  question  of  fact  but  a
    mixed one of fact and law and that it is unsafe for the Upper  Tribunal
    to preserve a finding on the position of the Appellant's parents  where
    the Appellant simultaneously argues that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    materially erred in findings relating to the nationality/status of  the
    Appellant's grandparents.

18. Further the Appellant's own case is that  Section  2(1)(b)(ii)  of  the
    1971 Act is the channel through which the Appellant's parents  had  the
    right of the abode in the UK namely that

          a) The Appellant's paternal grandfather was a CUKC and;

          b)  Had  this  status  by  birth,  adoption,  naturalisation   or
             registration in the UK or its islands.

    Therefore it is Mr Jarvis' submission that the evidence relating to the
    Appellant's grandparent is at the heart of this appeal.

19. Mr Jarvis points out that taking the claim at its highest the Appellant
    cannot possibly show that she has  acquired  British  citizenship.   He
    notes that as a starting point the  Appellant  relies  on  the  British
    Nationality Act 1981 which states

         "(i) a person born in the United Kingdom after commencement, or  in
             a qualifying territory on or after the appointed day, shall be
             a British citizen if at the time of the birth  his  father  or
             mother is -

              (a) a British citizen; or

              (b) settled in the United Kingdom (or that country)."

20. Consequently  the  Appellant  claims  that  her  parents  were  British
    citizens at the time she was born  by  virtue  of  Section  11  of  the
    British Nationality Act.  That statutory guidance states

         "11. Citizens of UK and colonies who are to become British citizens
             at commencement.

             (i)  subject to sub-Section  (2),  a  person  who  immediately
                  before commencement -

                  (a)  was a citizen of the United Kingdom and colonies; and



                  (b)  had the right of abode in the  United  Kingdom  under
                      the Immigration Act 1971 as then in force,  shall  at
                      commencement become a British citizen."

    Mr Jarvis states that the important words there are  to  refer  to  the
    1971 Immigration Act that was then in force.  He emphasises  the  words
    "then in force" which he submits are important.  He kindly provides  me
    with a copy of the relevant Section 2 at that time.

         "2-(1)   A person is under this Act to have the right of abode,  in
                the United Kingdom if -

                (a)    he is a citizen of the United  Kingdom  and  colonies
                    who  has  that  citizenship  by  his  birth,   adoption,
                    naturalisation   or   (except   as   mentioned    below)
                    registration in the United Kingdom  or  in  any  of  the
                    islands; or

                (b)    he is a citizen of the United  Kingdom  and  colonies
                    born to or legally adopted by  a  parent  who  had  that
                    citizenship at the time of the birth  or  adoption,  and
                    the parent either -

                   (i) then had that citizenship  by  his  birth,  adoption,
                        naturalisation  or  (except  as  mentioned   below)
                        registration in the United Kingdom or in any of the
                        islands; or

                   (ii)     had been born to or legally adopted by a  parent
                        who at the time of that birth or  adoption  so  had
                        it; or

                (c)    he is a citizen of the United  Kingdom  and  colonies
                    who has at any time been settled in the  United  Kingdom
                    and islands and had at  that  time  (and  while  such  a
                    citizen) been ordinarily resident  there  for  the  last
                    five years or more; or ..."

21. Mr Jarvis consequently applying the statutory guidance submits that  it
    is necessary firstly for the Appellant to show that  her  parents  were
    CUKCs immediately before 1st January 1983 and secondly that her parents
    had the right of abode in respect of the 1971 Act.  He submits that  in
    order to show that her parents would be treated as British citizens for
    the purpose of the 1981 Act the Appellant would have to show  that  her
    parents remained CUKCs, and had at that time been settled in the United
    Kingdom and had been ordinarily resident there for the last five years.
     He thereafter takes me  to  the  definitions  within  the  71  Act  of
    "settled" and "ordinary resident."  He consequently contends  that  the
    CUKC was obliged to have been resident for  five  years  and  have  had
    indefinite leave to remain at the end of that period before 1st January
    1983.

22. Mr Ijezie has already submitted that the CUKC status of the Appellant's
    parents did not change upon the independence of Zambia in 1964 and  put
    forward his submissions as to why they  had  CUKC  status.   Mr  Jarvis
    seeks to challenge/examine that scenario.  He starts  by  pointing  out
    that by Section 1 of the Zambian Independence Act 1964 the  territories
    which  comprised  Northern  Rhodesia   before   independence   were   a
    protectorate and consequently as a result of  that  Section  4  of  the
    British Nationality Act 1948 did not apply to the  Appellant's  family.
    It is the Secretary  of  State's  contention  that  the  only  way  the
    Appellant can claim that her parents were CUKCs before independence  in
    1964 is via Section 5 of the British Nationality Act 1948.  That states



         "5(1)    Subject to the provisions of this Section, a  person  born
             after the commencement of this Act shall be a citizen  of  the
             United Kingdom and colonies by descent  if  his  father  is  a
             citizen of the United Kingdom and colonies at the time of  the
             birth;

              Providing that if the father of such a person is a citizen  of
             the United Kingdom and colonies by descent  only  that  person
             shall not be a citizen of the United Kingdom and  colonies  by
             virtue of this section unless -

             (a)  that  person  is  born  or  his  father  was  born  in  a
                  protectorate, protected state, mandated territory or trust
                  territory or  any  place  in  a  foreign  country  whereby
                  treaty, capitulation, grant, usage, sufferance,  or  other
                  lawful means, his majesty then  has  or  had  jurisdiction
                  over British subjects."

23. It is consequently the submission of Mr Jarvis that the  Appellant  has
    to show

          a) That at the date of her father's birth (26th March  1958)  his
             father (i.e. the Appellant's paternal grandfather) was a CUKC.

          b) That the Appellant's paternal grandfather obtained the CUKC by
             descent  from  his  father   (i.e.   the   Appellant's   great
             grandfather).

          c) And either the Appellant's father or paternal grandfather were
             born in a protectorate (as one option).

    He then goes on to  submit  that  in  order  to  discover  whether  the
    Appellant's paternal grandfather was a CUKC on 26th March  1958  regard
    has to be had to the transitional provisions of the British Nationality
    Act 1948 in particular Section 12 which sets out the qualification  for
    becoming a citizen of the UK and colonies in the event that the  person
    was a British subject immediately before the date  of  commencement  of
    the Act (1st  January  1949).   Consequently  he  submits  the  initial
    question thereafter to be asked  is  whether  or  not  the  Appellant's
    paternal grandfather was a British subject on 1st January 1949  and  in
    order to determine that regard has to be given  to  the  definition  of
    British subject which is to be found in  the  British  Nationality  and
    Status of Aliens Act 1914 (as amended after 1933).  Those  persons  who
    are natural born British subjects pursuant to that Act are set  out  at
    part 1 Section 1(1) of the Act.  Paragraph 1(1)(a) states

         "The following person shall be deemed to  be  natural-born  British
         subjects namely:-

             (a)  any  person  born  within  his  majesty's  dominions  and
             allegiance."

24.  Therefore  it  is  Mr  Jarvis'  contention  that  if  the  Appellant's
    grandfather was born in Northern Rhodesia as claimed he was born within
    a protectorate and as a consequence the Appellant cannot claim  he  was
    born within his majesty's dominions and allegiance.  He  contends  that
    this is supported by paragraph 1.3.1 of the British Nationality summary
    document which states

         "At common law, subject status was acquired  by  birth  within  the
         crown's 'dominions and allegiance.'"

25. Schedule 1 of the 1914 Act lists the  dominions.   I  acknowledge  that
    Northern Rhodesia is not recited as one  of  his  majesty's  dominions.
    Consequently it is submitted by Mr Jarvis that either

    (a)  The Appellant's great  grandfather  has  to  be  born  within  his
         majesty's allegiance and be a British subject at the  time  of  her
         grandfather's birth (Section 1(1)(b)(i))  British  Nationality  and
         Status of Aliens Act 1914; or

    (b)   The  Appellant's  great  grandfather  was  naturalised   (Section
         1(1)(b)(ii)),  was  a  British  subject  by   annexation   (Section
         1(1)(b)(iii)), in the service of the crown (Section 1(1)(b)(iv)) or
         his birth was registered by a British Consulate (Section 1(1)(b)).

26. In reply to such assertions Mr Ijezie states  that  the  Appellant  has
    never claimed, nor supplied, any evidence that  her  great  grandfather
    was a British subject as defined by the  1914  Act  nor  is  there  any
    evidence as to where he was born.

27. Mr Ijezie takes me to paragraph 12(3) of the  British  Nationality  Act
    1948.   This  paragraph  as  previously   indicated   refers   to   the
    transitional provisions.  Paragraph 12(3) states

         "A person who was a British subject immediately before the date  of
         the commencement of this Act shall on that date become a citizen of
         the United Kingdom and colonies if he was born within the territory
         comprised at the  commencement  of  this  Act  in  a  protectorate,
         protected state or United Kingdom trust territory."

    Consequently Mr Ijezie  argues  that  whilst  Section  2  of  the  1971
    Immigration Act requires the grandparents to be CUKCs at the  time  the
    Appellant's parents were born this is the case because they  were  born
    prior to Zambia's independence.  This is challenged by  Mr  Jarvis  who
    points out that the thrust of the Secretary of State's argument is that
    the whole issue of whether or not an Appellant's relative  lived  in  a
    protectorate is predicated on their being  a  British  subject  in  the
    first place and the Appellant's grandfather was not a British  subject.



28. The Appellant argues that her parents retained their CUKC  status  even
    after Zambian independence by virtue of the exceptions to Section  3(3)
    of the Zambian Independence Act 1964.  These read

         "4(1)    Subject to sub-Section (5) of this section, a person shall
             not cease to be a citizen of the United Kingdom  and  colonies
             under Section 3(3) of this  Act  if  he,  his  father  or  his
             father's father -

              (a) was born in the United Kingdom or in a colony; and

         (2)  a person shall not cease to be a citizen of the United Kingdom
             and colonies under the said Section 3(3) if either:

              (a) he was born in a protectorate or protected state, or

             (b)  his father or his father's father was so born and  is  or
                  at any time was a British subject.

29. The Appellant claims that her paternal  grandfather  was  born  in  the
    British colonial protectorate of Northern  Rhodesia  in  1935.   It  is
    pointed out that there is no documentary support for this assertion but
    that the Appellant claims that her paternal grandfather Wilton  Sinkala
    was born in "a colony."  She also asserts that her father was therefore
    born in a protectorate (or protected state) for the purpose of  Section
    4(2)(a) of the Zambian Independence  Act  1964  and  for  her  paternal
    grandfather Wilton Sinkala for the purpose of Section  4(2)(b)  of  the
    Zambian Independence Act 1964.  It is therefore the  Appellant's  claim
    and submission that as a consequence of those assertions  and  evidence
    the exception in Section 4(1)(a) of the Zambian Independence  Act  1964
    applies to her father (and by consequence of Section 4(3) her mother as
    well) in  that  they  did  not  lose  their  CUKC  status  on  Zambia's
    independence as was the general consequence  of  Section  3(3)  Zambian
    Independence Act 1964.

30. That assertion is challenged by Mr Jarvis on behalf of the Secretary of
    State.  The basis of this is that Section 5 of the Zambian Independence
    Act 1964 makes plain that any  reference  in  Section  4  to  a  colony
    protectorate or a protected state  does  not  include  a  reference  to
    Zambia.  He submits that the Appellant's evidence/assertion relating to
    the birthplace of her father and paternal  grandfather  being  Northern
    Rhodesia/Zambia means that her  father  (and  mother)  were  (and  are)
    Zambian nationals as a consequence of independence on 24th October 1964
    as  per  Section  3(3)  of  the  Zambian  Independence  Act  1964.   He
    consequently submits that as a result of this the Appellant cannot even
    assert that her father and/or mother were  CUKCs  for  the  purpose  of
    Section 2(1)(c) of the 1971 Act.

31. The arguments then proceeded  to  discussion  on  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant's parents have a right of abode for the  purpose  of  Section
    2(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 i.e. the  status  of  the  Appellant's
    parents' right to abode as at 1st January 1983.  It is  the  contention
    of  the  Appellant's  representatives  that  the  Appellant's   parents
    automatically qualify as British citizens on the commencement  date  of
    the British Nationality Act  1981  on  the  basis  that  on  that  date
    pursuant to Section 11(1)  of  the  81  Act  the  CUKC  status  of  the
    Appellant's parents was deemed to have automatically changed to British
    citizenship.  Further, and I do not think this is a contentious  point,
    Section 2(1)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971 was substituted by  Section
    39(2) of  the  British  Nationality  Act  1981.   Therefore  Mr  Ijezie
    contends that since the Appellant's parents  automatically  qualify  as
    British citizens on the commencement date of  the  1981  Act  i.e.  1st
    January 1983 and the Appellant was born in the UK on 8th  October  1989
    it therefore follows that the Appellant qualifies as a British  citizen
    by virtue of Section 1(1)(a) of the British Nationality  Act.   In  the
    alternative he submits that since the  Appellant's  parents  are  CUKCs
    with a right of abode on or before 1st January 1983 it follows that the
    Appellant qualifies as a British citizen  by  Section  1(1)(b)  of  the
    British Nationality Act 1981 taking into account the definition of  the
    word "settled" in Section 50 of  that  statute.   Therefore  his  final
    submission is that the Appellant qualifies as a British citizen and has
    a right of abode under Section 2(1)(a) of the Immigration Act  1971  as
    substituted by Section 39(2) of the British Nationality Act 1981.

32. Mr Jarvis contends that even if  the  Appellant's  parents  were  CUKCs
    after Zambian independence in 1964 they did not have the right of abode
    with reference to Section 2(1) of the 1971 Act.  He points out that the
    Appellant's case is that Section 2(1)(b)(ii) of the 1971 Act applies to
    her father and or mother.  He takes me to the relevant section

         "2(1)    A person is under this Act to have the right of  abode  in
             the United Kingdom if ...

             (b)  he is a citizen of the United Kingdom and  colonies  born
                  to or legally adopted by a parent who had that citizenship
                  at the time of the birth or adoption and the parent either
                  -

                  (i)  then had  that  citizenship  by  his  birth  adoption
                      naturalisation  or  (except   as   mentioned   below)
                      registration in the United Kingdom or in any  of  the
                      islands; or

                  (ii) had been born to or legally adopted by a  parent  who
                      at the time of that birth or adoption so had it; or"

    He consequently contends  that  the  Appellant's  reliance  on  Section
    2(1)(b)(ii)  is  therefore  wholly  misconceived  because  the  section
    clearly requires the Appellant's father to be a CUKC  at  the  material
    time, for the Appellant's paternal grandfather to have been a CUKC when
    the Appellant's father was born i.e. on 26th March 1958  and  that  the
    Appellant's paternal grandfather's CUKC  status  at  the  time  of  the
    Appellant's father's birth or at any later point had been registered in
    the UK (or the UK's islands).

33. Mr Jarvis states that in response to such requirements the Secretary of
    State makes the following points

      a) The Appellant's father was not a CUKC after 1964.

      b) The  Appellant  has  provided  no  documentary  evidence  that  her
         paternal grandfather was a CUKC on 26th March 1958.

      c) The Appellant has never claimed  that  her  paternal  grandfather's
         CUKC status was ever registered in the UK (or islands).

      d) That reliance could not be regarded  as  a  "patrial"  pursuant  to
         Section 2(6) of the 1971 Act by which a person who was a  CUKC  and
         had the right of abode on the basis that the Appellant's father did
         not have the right  of  abode.   He  further  emphasises  that  the
         Appellant's sole reliance appeared to be on paragraph 14.5.2 of the
         Home Office British national summary.  That summary quotes

             "The idea  of  patriality  was  that  it  should  serve  as  a
             secondary status (e.g. an individual CUKC would also have been
             either a 'patrial' or  a  'non-patrial.)'   A  patrial  was  a
             person who had a right of abode in the UK under  Section  2(6)
             of the 1971 Act and who, as a result was 'free  to  live  in,'
             and to come and go  into  and  from  the  UK  without  let  or
             hindrance ...'  A 'non-patrial' on the other hand, could  only
             enter and 'live and work and settle in the  UK  by  permission
             ...'"

34. He contends that the only evidence supplied of the Appellant's  parents
    entering the UK shows they obtained leave to enter and further leave to
    remain on Zambian passports between 1987 and  1989.   He  submits  that
    such entry was as "non-patrials."  He states that this does not support
    the Appellant's contention that they were "patrials"  i.e.  people  who
    were by the virtue of the right of abode free to come and go in the  UK
    without permission.

35. Finally Mr Jarvis contends that the Appellant's father did not have the
    right of abode as a consequence of Section 2(1)(c)  of  the  1971  Act.
    That states

         "(c) he is a citizen of the United Kingdom and colonies who has  at
             any time been settled in the United Kingdom  and  Islands  and
             had at that time (and while such a  citizen)  been  ordinarily
             resident there for the last five years or more; or ..."

    He states therefore that such a condition require that the  Appellant's
    father was a CUKC at the material time i.e. immediately  prior  to  the
    commencement of the British Nationality Act 1981 on 1st  January  1983.
    He notes that the Appellant's father had been settled in the UK meaning
    that he had to be  ordinarily  resident  without  being  subject  under
    immigration laws to any restriction on the  period  for  which  he  may
    remain.  He equates this effectively  to  having  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.  Further the requirement was that the Appellant's father  would
    have had to be an ordinary resident in the UK for at least  five  years
    at some point immediately prior to the commencement of the 81 Act.   He
    notes that the Appellant does  not  claim  that  her  father  had  been
    settled or ordinary resident in the UK during the relevant period prior
    to the commencement of the 1981 Act and the only evidence supplied  (at
    its highest point - to use his words) indicates  that  the  Appellant's
    father entered the UK with his wife on 3rd October 1987 with  leave  to
    enter extended until 28th November 1989.  As a consequence of  this  he
    contends that the Appellant was, and is not, the  child  of  a  British
    citizen for the purpose of Section 1 of  the  British  Nationality  Act
    1981 and therefore the appeal should be dismissed.

Findings

36. It seems to me that the correct approach to this  matter  is  to  start
    with the ultimate conclusion namely that if an Appellant qualifies as a
    British citizen they would have a right of abode under Section  2(1)(a)
    of the 1971 Immigration Act and further if the Appellant's parents  had
    CUKC status it would automatically be deemed to have changed to British
    citizenship status on 1st January 1983 by virtue of  Section  11(1)  of
    the British Nationality Act 1981 and  would  therefore  qualify  for  a
    right of abode under Section 2(1)(a) of the 1971 Immigration Act.   The
    question to be answered is whether or not those criteria are met.

37. The Appellant's legal representatives take a  simplistic  approach  and
    make two alternative  submissions  of  fact  as  to  why  their  client
    qualifies  for  a  right  to  abode.   Firstly  they  state  that   the
    Appellant's parents automatically qualify as British  citizens  on  the
    date of commencement of the  British  Nationality  Act  1981.   In  the
    alternative they contend that the Appellant's parents  are  CUKCs  with
    the right to abode on or before 1st January 1983  and  therefore  by  a
    different route the Appellant qualifies as a British citizen under  the
    1981 Statute.  The initial contention, namely the bland statement  that
    the Appellant's parents were  British  citizens  at  the  time  of  the
    Appellant's birth, seems to me to be unsustainable as a mere  statement
    of fact as it is governed by the relevant law at that time.   It  would
    have been necessary to show that the  Appellant's  parents  were  CUKCs
    immediately before 1st January 1973 and that her parents had a right of
    abode in respect of the relevant version of the 1971 Act at that  time.
    Consequently the correct approach  is  to  analyse  the  position  with
    regard to her parents' CUKCs status.  Again this has to  be  considered
    against the statement from the Appellant's legal  representatives  that
    the Appellant's parents were CUKCs with a right of abode on  or  before
    1st January 1981.

38. The approach of the two legal representatives differs.  The Appellant's
    representatives take a simplistic approach seeking to rely on paragraph
    15 of the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge that following
    independence the Appellant's parents retained their CUKC  rights  along
    with their new citizenship of Zambia and thus retained their  right  of
    abode as patrials.  In finding that there was an error of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal and acknowledging that the issue of whether someone
    has a right of abode is a mixed analysis of fact and law  I  set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   I  therefore  do  not
    consider that it is open to the Appellant's  legal  representatives  to
    hide behind that finding.  It is  unsafe  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    preserve a finding relating to the position of the Appellant's  parents
    where the Appellant simultaneously argues that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge materially erred in findings  relating  to  the  nationality  and
    status of the Appellant's grandparents.  Consequently a bland statement
    made by the Appellant's legal representatives the  Appellant's  parents
    are CUKCs with a right to abode as patrials and relying on the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge for that conclusion goes to  the  very
    root of this appeal and is unsustainable as a fact.  Albeit  that  this
    is a re-hearing by way of submissions only it is  a  re-hearing  having
    found a material error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge as to whether or not the Appellant has a right to abode.
     In such circumstances it is fundamental that the whole principle  upon
    which such a  contention  is  maintained  becomes  subject  to  further
    judicial scrutiny.

39. It therefore is  necessary  to  scrutinise  the  manner  by  which  the
    Appellant's parents contend they have a right of abode under Section  2
    of the 1971 Act.  It is not sufficient to merely rely on the finding of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  She, I understand, was not given nearly
    as much information in this matter as I have been.

40. In order to succeed the  Appellant  will  have  to  show  tracing  back
    further that her paternal grandfather was a CUKC and had this status as
    a result of birth, adoption, naturalisation or registration in  the  UK
    or its islands.

41. I find the arguments in what is a very complex analysis of law  of  the
    Secretary of State to be persuasive.  It would  be  necessary  for  the
    Appellant to  show  that  her  parents  were  CUKCs  prior  to  Zambian
    independence in 1964.  Nothing has been produced by  the  Appellant  to
    rebut the contention that the only manner in which that can be done  is
    by showing that  the  Appellant's  parents  meet  the  requirements  of
    Section 5 of the British Nationality Act 1948 namely that it  would  be
    necessary to show that at the date of her father's birth his father was
    a CUKC; that the Appellant's paternal grandfather obtained the CUKC  by
    descent from his father and  that  either  the  Appellant's  father  or
    paternal grandfather were born in a protectorate.  I am  not  satisfied
    that they were.  In order for the Appellant's paternal  grandfather  to
    have been a British  subject  on  1st  January  1949  I  agree,  having
    followed the detailed paper  trail  with  the  submission  made  by  Mr
    Jarvis, that it would have been necessary for  him  to  be  a  "British
    subject" under the terms of the 1914 British Nationality and Status  of
    Aliens Act.  That has not been proven although I acknowledge the  great
    difficulty that would befall such a tracing exercise to the  Appellant.
    Further I agree with the contention made by the Secretary of State that
    the Zambian Independence Act of 1964 does not provide any assistance to
    the Appellants and that Section 5 of the Zambian Independence Act  1964
    makes  plain  that  any  reference  in  Section  4  is  to  a   colony,
    protectorate or a protected state  does  not  include  a  reference  to
    Zambia although it is difficult  to  construe  what  that  section  was
    referring to if it does not refer to Zambia.  In  any  event  a  strong
    argument is put forward that the Appellant's parents  did  not  have  a
    right of abode pursuant to Section 2(1) of  the  1971  Act  and  strong
    reasons are given for this by the Secretary of State in particular that
    the Appellant's father was not a CUKC after  1964,  that  there  is  no
    documentary evidence to show that the Appellant's paternal  grandfather
    was a CUKC on 26th March 1958, that the  Appellant  has  never  claimed
    that her paternal grandfather's CUKC status was ever registered in  the
    UK    and    could    not    be    regarded     as     a     "patrial."



42. For all these reasons I am satisfied, albeit I appreciate it will be  a
    great disappointment to the  Appellant,  that  the  causative  link  of
    events that would require to be met  in  order  for  her  to  meet  the
    requirements of the British Nationality Act 1981 and to qualify  for  a
    right of abode  are  not  met  and  for  those  reasons,  which  extend
    considerably on those set out at paragraphs 16 and 17 of the First-tier
    Tribunal's Judge's determination, I find that the  Appellant  does  not
    have a right  of  abode  in  the  UK  and  the  Appellant's  appeal  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal seeking British citizenship and/or a right  to  abode
in the UK based on the status of her parents and  pursuant  to  the  British
Nationality Act 1981 do stand dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
