
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/30120/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 November 2015                  |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                IFTIKHAR ALI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Grubb, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. I refer to the Appellant in this appeal as the Secretary of State and
       the Respondent as the Claimant. The Claimant is a Pakistani  national
       who was born on 2 January 1983.  On  17  June  2014  he  applied  for
       further leave to remain as a spouse of a person present  and  settled
       in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  Secretary  of  State  considered  his
       application under paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules and  refused
       it under paragraph 286 with reference to 284(ix)(a)-(e) of HC 395  as
       amended.  The Secretary of State concluded that the Claimant did  not
       satisfy the requirements of paragraph EX.1  (b)  of  the  Immigration
       Rules. The application was also refused under paragraph 276ADE of the
       Immigration Rules. The Secretary of State made a decision  to  refuse
       to vary the Claimant's leave to enter or remain and decided to remove
       him by way of directions under section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum
       and Nationality Act 2006.

    2. The Claimant appealed against the Secretary of State's  decision  and
       his appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Suffield-Thompson
       in a decision promulgated on 16 June 2015. She allowed the appeal  on
       the grounds that the decision was not in accordance with the law  and
       under the Immigration Rules.

    3. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal. Permission was granted by First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Reid on 16 September 2015 on the grounds that  it
       was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  finding  that
       there had been procedural unfairness by the Secretary of State  given
       that the Appellant did not  possess  the  required  English  language
       certificate at the date of the application. It is said in  the  grant
       of permission to be arguable that the Judge did not fully reason  the
       insurmountable obstacles argument and placed too much weight  on  the
       factors in the UK.

The Grounds

    4. The grounds asset that the First-tier Tribunal made  material  errors
       of  law  in  respect  of  her  finding  that  there  was  common  law
       unfairness. The Claimant did not lodge  the  required  documentation,
       namely an  English  language  certificate,  to  demonstrate  that  he
       satisfied the requirements of the Immigration Rules at  the  date  of
       the application as he had not sat the required test. The Secretary of
       State relied on the case of Marghia  (procedural  unfairness)  [2014]
       UKUT 00366 and  submitted  that  there  could  be  no  unfairness  in
       expecting the Claimant to lodge the  correct  documentation  with  an
       application especially where he had had approximately two and a  half
       years to study and prepare his application.

    5.  The  grounds  also  assert  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
       misdirected herself as to the nature and threshold of the test  under
       EX.1 (b) by  finding  that  "insurmountable  obstacles"  existed  and
       focussed largely on the factors in the United Kingdom as  opposed  to
       being forward focused to obstacles in Pakistan. It is also  submitted
       that the First-tier Tribunal had either failed  to  provide  adequate
       reasons and/or to find insurmountable  obstacles  on  the  basis  of:
       British Nationality; the sponsor having a 28  year  old  son  from  a
       previous marriage; being "westernized" and the age  gap  between  the
       Claimant and the sponsor. The Secretary of State asserts  that  there
       was no background evidence set  out  as  to  the  societal  views  on
       divorce and remarriage nor why the Claimant's 28 year old son was not
       living an independent life given his factual circumstances.

    6. The  grounds  further  assert  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       imported her consideration of "insurmountable obstacles" to paragraph
       276ADE (vi). It is submitted that her earlier findings in relation to
       "insurmountable  obstacles"  infected  her  subsequent  findings   on
       "significant obstacles" on return to Pakistan.



The Hearing

    7. Mr Richards submitted that the grounds were detailed and  clear.  The
       point on fairness did not relate to case law but to a misdirection as
       to what procedural fairness was. The Claimant  did  not  possess  the
       particular qualification that he was required to have and there could
       be no unfairness in refusing the application on that  basis.  It  was
       not relevant that he asked for the passport back so he could take the
       test. In respect of insurmountable obstacles the Judge had failed  to
       explain adequately how the circumstances were outlined in  the  facts
       of  the  case  that  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to   the
       relationship  continuing  overseas.  That  point  was  amplified   in
       paragraph 12 of the grounds of appeal  and  those  were  the  factors
       identified by the Judge and it  was  difficult  to  see  how  without
       further  obstacles  those  factors  could  amount  to  insurmountable
       obstacles. Essentially for those reason and for the reasons  set  out
       in the grounds the Judge's consideration of the issues in this appeal
       was inadequate to the extent that it amounted to a material error  of
       law and should be reheard.

    8. Ms Grubb submitted as a preliminary point that the Judge allowed  the
       appeal on a number of grounds. The Secretary of State would  have  to
       succeed on paragraph 276ADE, paragraph EX (1) (b) and Article  8  but
       did not challenge the findings in relation to  Article  8.  Ms  Grubb
       relied on her skeleton argument. She submitted  in  relation  to  the
       unfairness point that the Judge directed herself to the correct  case
       law which set out the proper principles which she properly  followed.
       Marghia related to substantive failure. The allegation that was  made
       was not that the Respondent was bound to allow  the  application  but
       that there was unfairness in failing to provide the passport. It  was
       significant that it was for the Tribunal  to  determine  whether  the
       Rules were met at the time the appeal was before it. Had the Claimant
       succeeded  in  his  English  language  tests  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal hearing the appeal could have been allowed. In  refusing  to
       allow  the  Claimant  to  have  his  passport  there  was  procedural
       unfairness. The Judge did make a finding that the Secretary of  State
       had behaved in a manner that had deliberately thwarted  the  Claimant
       from sitting the test. Deliberate steps were  taken  to  prevent  the
       Claimant from sitting  the  test.  There  could  be  very  little  to
       criticise in  the  determination.  Turning  to  the  point  regarding
       insurmountable obstacles, there was no representation  on  behalf  of
       the Secretary of State and  when  considering  whether  the  test  of
       insurmountable obstacles had been applied it was not for the Judge to
       set out every part of the evidence.  The  Judge  must  show  relevant
       factors had been taken into account. The paragraphs dealing with this
       had done that. It was difficult for the Judge to deal  with  all  the
       points where there had been no representations  or  submissions.  The
       Judge had regard to the points and the reasoning that  was  set  out.
       The reasoning in respect of insurmountable obstacles was  sufficient.
       There were some points raised in relation to  whether  the  sponsor's
       son was living an independent life. The analysis to  be  carried  out
       related to the difficulties in relocating and part of  those  factors
       would be the ties to the UK. The  finding  that  there  was  a  close
       relationship was not flawed. Significantly there  was  a  finding  of
       fact  that  the  sponsor  would  face  discrimination  based  on  the
       sponsor's evidence which was unchallenged and was a clear and  strong
       factor. There had been no error. The  Respondent's  submissions  were
       that the error in respect of the  insurmountable  obstacles  infected
       the  significant  obstacles  analysis  and  Ms  Grubb  repeated   her
       observations that there were significant obstacles.

    9. Mr Richards replied that the appeal was not allowed under  Article  8
       and there was a throw away comment in in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
       decision that she did not approach an Article 8 assessment. One could
       not lodge grounds of appeal against a casual comment. It  was  not  a
       decision and if I was minded to find errors of law  for  the  reasons
       identified in the grounds they would be material and the matter ought
       to be reheard.

   10. Ms Grubb submitted that the factual findings were sufficient to  make
       the findings in relation to Article 8.

  Discussion and Findings

   11. The First-tier Tribunal found at paragraphs 24 to 27 of the  decision
       that the Secretary of State had  acted  unfairly  in  preventing  the
       Appellant sitting an English language test by retaining his  original
       passport. She found at paragraph 25:

           "This means that the Appellant's application was refused without
           him being given a fair opportunity to meet  the  Rules.  I  find
           that  the  Respondent  has  behaved  in  a   manner   that   has
           deliberately thwarted this Appellant sitting the test ..."

   12. The Claimant applied for further leave to remain on 17 June 2014. His
       application was accompanied by  a  letter  dated  30  May  2014  from
       Newport Immigration Advice Centre  stating  that  the  Appellant  was
       taking an ESOL course with their organisation but that he was not yet
       ready to take the exam  as  ESOL  Entry  Level  3.  This  letter  was
       considered in the Secretary of State's refusal letter of 15 July 2014
       and she concluded on the basis of this letter and the absence  of  an
       English language certificate  in  speaking  and  listening  that  the
       Claimant did not meet the Immigration Rules.

   13. The First-tier Tribunal found that the Secretary of State refused the
       Claimant's application without giving him a fair opportunity to  meet
       the Rules. In  coming  to  this  conclusion  she  acted  in  material
       misapprehension of the facts of the case. She  concluded  that  there
       was unfairness as the Claimant was prevented by the  Respondent  from
       taking the English language test. She referred to letters written  to
       the Secretary of State by Newport Immigration Advice Centre  dated  4
       November 2014 and 30 March 2015. However, both of these letters post-
       dated the Secretary of State's decision in this  case  which  was  in
       July 2014. At that point the  information  before  the  Secretary  of
       State was that he was not ready to take the test.

   14. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not find,  nor  did  she  consider,
       whether there was unfairness to the Claimant in failing to return his
       passport to him after he requested it post-refusal in November  2014.
       The Claimant argued at paragraph 12 of his skeleton  argument  before
       the First-tier Tribunal that had the Secretary of State returned  his
       passport after the decision he could have passed the test by the date
       of the  hearing.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  consider  this
       argument or allow the appeal on this basis. Whilst this argument  was
       renewed by Ms Grubb in her skeleton argument, this was not the  basis
       on which the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the  appeal  as  not  in
       accordance with the law.

   15. I therefore find that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law
       in allowing the appeal on the basis that  the  Secretary  of  State's
       decision was  unlawful  as  the  Claimant  was  not  allowed  a  fair
       opportunity to meet the Rules. At the date of decision, the  Claimant
       had conceded he could not meet the Rules and had not  even  requested
       the return of  his  passport.   There  therefore  can  have  been  no
       procedural or substantive unfairness.

   16.  The  Respondent  also  argues  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  also
       misdirected itself as to the nature and threshold of the  test  under
       paragraph EX.1(b) in finding that "insurmountable obstacles"  existed
       by virtue of the reasons given by the Tribunal at paragraph 29 of the
       decision. The First-tier Tribunal found, at paragraphs 28 and  29  of
       the decision that:

           "28.  ... the Appellant has family there but has no one  who  is
           able to offer him, or him and his wife a home.  He  is  employed
           here in the UK and with the current situation in Pakistan he  is
           highly unlikely to be able to find work.

           29.   Most significantly his wife is a British Citizen  and  has
           lived in the UK for 30 years. She has a son in the  UK,  friends
           and a wide circle of friends she has made since being here.  Her
           parents are elderly and in no way financially able to offer  her
           and her husband support or a  home.  The  Appellant's  wife  has
           become Westernized since being in the UK. She is  also  divorced
           and remarried to a younger man so would face  discrimination  on
           her return. I  find  all  of  these  factors  combined  lead  to
           obstacles as intended under EX1 (b) as they are more  than  mere
           difficulties or minor hurdles to over-come."

   17. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  it  was  arguable
       that the Judge did not  fully  reason  the  insurmountable  obstacles
       argument and arguably placed too much weight on factors in the UK.

   18.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  refer  to  the  definition   of
       "insurmountable obstacles" set out in paragraph EX.2 of the Rules:

           "For  the  purpose  of   paragraph   EX.1.1(b)   "insurmountable
           obstacles" means the very significant difficulties  which  would
           be faced by the applicant or their partner in  continuing  their
           family life together outside the  UK  and  which  could  not  be
           overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the applicant
           or their partner".

   19. In R(on the application of Agyarko) v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  440  the
       Court of Appeal considered the meaning of "insurmountable  obstacles"
       in paragraph EX.1, per Sales LJ:

           "21.  The phrase "insurmountable  obstacles"  as  used  in  this
           paragraph of the Rules clearly  imposes  a  high  hurdle  to  be
           overcome by an applicant for leave to remain  under  the  Rules.
           The test is significantly more demanding than  a  mere  test  of
           whether it would be reasonable to expect a  couple  to  continue
           their family life outside the United Kingdom.

           22.    This  interpretation  is  in  line  with   the   relevant
           Strasbourg jurisprudence. The phrase "insurmountable  obstacles"
           has its origin in the Strasbourg jurisprudence  in  relation  to
           immigration cases in a family context, where it is mentioned  as
           one factor among others to be taken into account in  determining
           whether any right under Article 8 exists for family  members  to
           be granted leave to remain  or  leave  to  enter  a  Contracting
           State: see e.g. Rodrigues da Silva and Hoogkamer  v  Netherlands
           (2007)  44  EHRR  34,  para.  [39]  ("...  whether   there   are
           insurmountable  obstacles  in  the  way  of  the  family  living
           together in the country of origin of one or more of them  ...").
           The phrase as used in the Rules is intended  to  have  the  same
           meaning as in the Strasbourg jurisprudence. It is clear that the
           ECtHR regards it as a formulation imposing a stringent  test  in
           respect  of  that  factor,  as  is  illustrated  by  Jeunesse  v
           Netherlands (see  para.  [117]:  there  were  no  insurmountable
           obstacles to the family settling in Suriname,  even  though  the
           applicant and her family would experience hardship if forced  to
           do so).

           23.    For  clarity,  two  points  should  be  made  about   the
           "insurmountable  obstacles"  criterion.   First,   although   it
           involves a stringent test, it is obviously intended in both  the
           case-law and the Rules to  be  interpreted  in  a  sensible  and
           practical rather than a purely literal way: see, e.g.,  the  way
           in which the Grand Chamber approached that criterion in Jeunesse
           v Netherlands at para. [117]; also the observation by this court
           in MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
           [2013] EWCA Civ 1192; [2014] 1 WLR 544,  at  [49]  (although  it
           should be noted that the passage in the judgment  of  the  Upper
           Tribunal in Izuazu v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
           [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC); [2013] Imm AR 453 there  referred  to,  at
           paras. [53]-[59], was making a rather  different  point,  namely
           that explained para. [24] below regarding the   significance  of
           the criterion in the context of an Article 8 assessment).

           24.   Secondly, the "insurmountable obstacles" criterion is used
           in the Rules to define one  of  the  preconditions  set  out  in
           section EX.1(b) which need to be satisfied before  an  applicant
           can claim to be entitled to be granted leave to remain under the
           Rules. In that context, it is not simply a factor  to  be  taken
           into account. However, in the context of making a wider  Article
           8 assessment outside the Rules, it is a factor to be taken  into
           account, not an absolute requirement which has to  be  satisfied
           in every single case across the whole range of cases covered  by
           Article 8: see paras. [29]-[30] below."

   20. The First-tier Tribunal found that factors referred to in  paragraphs
       28 to 29 of the decision amounted to "more than mere difficulties  or
       minor hurdles".   She did not direct herself that  there  had  to  be
       "very significant difficulties" to family life continuing in Pakistan
       and I find in the circumstances, she failed to give adequate  reasons
       as to why  the  factors  she  took  into  account  amounted  to  such
       difficulties or would have given rise to very serious hardship.  This
       amounted to a material error of law as it cannot  be  said  that  she
       would have reached the  same  conclusion  had  she  directed  herself
       properly.

   21. It follows from this conclusion that I find  that  her  finding  that
       there would be very significant obstacles to the  Claimant  returning
       to Pakistan are infected by the same error as she allowed the  appeal
       under paragraph 276ADE on basis of her  conclusions  under  paragraph
       EX.1.

   22. The First-tier Tribunal did not allow  the  appeal  under  Article  8
       outside the Rules and remarked that  she  did  not  need  to  make  a
       detailed Article 8 assessment. She made a series of observations  and
       commented that she would have allowed the appeal  outside  the  Rules
       had she made a full Article 8 assessment. Ms Grubb  argued  that  the
       Article 8 assessment should stand as the Secretary of State  did  not
       seek permission to appeal in relation to the Article 8 assessment. It
       is clear, however, both from the reasoning in paragraph 31 and due to
       the fact that the appeal was allowed in paragraphs 32 and 33  of  the
       decision under the Rules and on the basis that it was unlawful due to
       unfairness that appeal was not allowed under Article  8  outside  the
       Rules.

Notice of Decision

   23. For the above reasons, the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
       allow the Claimant's appeal involved the making of an error  of  law.
       That decision cannot stand and is set aside. In view of the extent of
       judicial fact-finding required in the appeal is remitted to the First-
       tier Tribunal.

   24. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  rehearing
       before a judge other than Judge Suffield-Thompson.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

There was no application for anonymity before me or  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal and no reason for such an order arises on the facts of  this  case.
No order is made.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
