
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30747/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11 July 2017                           |On 18 July  2017                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                              john sunday Ayine
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss D Ofei-Kwatia of Counsel instructed by Ronik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Ghana  born  on  20  November  1980.   He
    arrived in this country as a visitor in 2002 with leave to remain until
    20 June 2003.  He subsequently  overstayed.   On  27  October  2014  he
    applied for leave to remain on the basis of  his  relationship  with  a
    British citizen, the sponsor, and her  two  children  from  a  previous
    relationship.

2.   The respondent considered that the appellant's  relationship  with  his
    partner did not qualify under the Rules as they  had  not  been  living
    together in a relationship akin to marriage  for  at  least  two  years
    prior to the date of application.  Reference was made  to  GEN.1.2.  of
    Appendix FM.  The appellant said he and his  partner  had  been  living
    together since February 2013, but despite  a  request  being  made  for
    further evidence, the Secretary of State was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had adduced evidence that he qualified for leave to remain as
    a partner as defined.  The Secretary of State noted the  appellant  did
    not have sole parental responsibility for the  stepchildren.   A  point
    was also taken that the appellant was not taking any active role in the
    lives of his stepchildren,  relying  on  a  report  received  from  the
    children's school which stated  he  was  not  listed  as  an  emergency
    contact for either of the children, and that none of the  teachers  was
    aware of a man dropping off or collecting the children.

3.   The appellant appealed.  The appellant was represented by Counsel  (not
    Miss  Ofei-Kwatia),  but  there  was  no  Presenting  Officer  for  the
    respondent.

4.   Having set out the respective  cases  of  the  parties  the  First-tier
    Judge dealt with what is really the principle issue  in  this  case  in
    that it was contended that the appellant should have been dealt with as
    the spouse of the sponsor and not her partner because  of  a  customary
    marriage in Ghana.  The judge dealt with the issue of  the  appellant's
    relationship in the following extract from her determination:

         "19. It is the appellant's case that he is the sponsor's  'spouse'.
             He seeks to rely on a customary marriage which is said to have
             taken place on 22nd February 2014.  However, on  the  evidence
             before me, the appellant has  failed  to  satisfy  me  on  the
             balance of probabilities that he is  legally  married  to  the
             sponsor or that the customary marriage relied on in fact  took
             place.  Although the appellant's bundle includes some evidence
             relating  to  the  purported  registration  of  the  customary
             marriage, it does not include the marriage certificate itself.
              The reasons for refusal letter refers to the appellant having
             provided a customary marriage certificate  but  this  in  fact
             appears to be a document evidencing the purported registration
             of the marriage and not a marriage certificate.  The statutory
             declarations now relied on by the appellant are dated February
             and March 2014.  The appellant's application was made on  17th
             November 2014.  If these documents are authentic  and  existed
             at least eight months before the date of application, I  would
             have expected the appellant to provide them to the  respondent
             with the application.  Furthermore, the statutory  declaration
             refers to the marriage ceremony  taking  place  in  Accra  and
             states that 'dowry was paid in full and  all  other  customary
             rites in terms of drinks and  libation  were  performed  after
             which prayers were said  by  the  principal  members  of  both
             families to seal the marriage and  the  couple  were  declared
             husband and wife.'   However,  the  appellant  has  failed  to
             provide any photographic evidence in respect of this  ceremony
             or any evidence to confirm the payment of  a  dowry.   It  was
             also the appellant's oral evidence that both  of  his  parents
             are dead and that he had no close relations  living  in  Ghana
             which undermines the statement in  the  statutory  declaration
             that the ceremony was attended by  the  principal  members  of
             both families.  It is for the appellant to provide  sufficient
             evidence to prove that he is legally married in Ghana  and  to
             satisfy me that the documents  that  have  been  provided  are
             genuine and can be relied on.  He has  failed  to  do  so.   I
             therefore find that the appellant has failed to establish that
             the sponsor is his 'spouse' for the purposes of GEN 1.2.(i).


         20.  In his application form, the appellant stated that he  started
             living together with the sponsor on 11th February  2013.   The
             application form is dated 17th November 2014.   The  appellant
             and the sponsor  were  not  therefore  living  together  in  a
             relationship akin to marriage for at least two years prior  to
             the date of application and so  the  appellant  is  unable  to
             bring himself with a GEN 1.2(iv).  The fact that  the  sponsor
             does not meet the definition of 'partner' as provided  for  by
             GEN 1.2 means that the appellant cannot qualify for  leave  to
             remain under Section R-LTRP."

5.   The judge then found that the appellant did not qualify  for  leave  to
    remain under the Rules, nor that there were very significant  obstacles
    to his integration into Ghana.

6.   The judge then turned to consider  Article  8  outside  the  Rules  and
    accepted that the appellant enjoyed  a  private  life  and  arguably  a
    family life in the United Kingdom, and that Article 8 was engaged.  The
    determination concludes as follows:

         "23. In conducting any balancing exercise under Article 8, there is
             a duty upon me under Section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
             and Immigration Act 2009 to treat the best  interests  of  any
             child affected by my consideration as a primary consideration.
              In this case,  I  must  have  regard  to  the  sponsor's  two
             children, who are aged eight and eleven.  I  did  not  receive
             any oral or written evidence from the children in  respect  of
             their feelings towards the appellant and how they  would  feel
             about him no longer being a part of their household.  However,
             I am willing to accept that they are fond of the appellant and
             have become  accustomed  to  him  featuring  in  their  lives.
             Nevertheless, the appellant is not their father and I am  told
             that the children continue  to  see  their  biological  father
             approximately three times  a  month  and  that  they  maintain
             contact with their biological father  by  telephone.   I  also
             take into account the fact that they  could  maintain  contact
             with the appellant if he returned to Ghana using modern  forms
             of communication and could possibly visit  him  there  in  the
             future.  I was told that the appellant takes and collects them
             from school each day.  This  was  also  the  evidence  of  the
             sponsor.  However, the sponsor said that she is no  longer  in
             employment and I find that she would be  available  to  escort
             her own children to and from school if the appellant  were  no
             longer living with her.  I also take  into  account  the  fact
             that the children are still relatively young and I  find  that
             they are likely to adjust without any  significant  difficulty
             to a change in the composition of  their  household,  just  as
             they did when the  appellant  first  moved  in  with  them  in
             February 2013.  I find that it is in the best interests of the
             children to continue to live with their mother and to continue
             to maintain their relationship with their biological father.


         24.  In considering the proportionality of the appellant's removal,
             I must also have regard to the public interest factors set out
             in Section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
             Act.   Section  117B(1)  confirms  that  the  maintenance   of
             effective immigration control is in the public interest.   The
             appellant came to this country in 2002 as a visitor and he has
             remained here illegally ever since.  I find that he has  shown
             a blatant disregard for the immigration laws of  this  country
             and that this must weigh heavily against him.  In  respect  of
             Section 117B(2) I accept that the  appellant  speaks  English.
             However, the case of AM (s117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260  makes
             it clear that this is a neutral factor in any consideration of
             proportionality  under  Article  8.   The  appellant  is   not
             financially independent and I note that the sponsor  confirmed
             that she was now reliant on benefits.  I was not provided with
             any evidence to suggest  that  the  appellant  is  skilled  or
             qualified in any particular field of work and I  am  therefore
             unable to conclude  that  he  would  gain  employment  without
             difficulty if he were granted leave to remain.


         25.  Section 117B(4) provides that little weight should be given to
             a private life or a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying
             partner that is established by a  person at a  time  when  the
             person is in the United Kingdom illegally.  In this case,  the
             appellant has been in the United  Kingdom  illegally  for  the
             duration of his relationship with the  sponsor.   I  therefore
             attach little weight to his relationship  with  her.   I  also
             take into account the case of Rajendran [2016] UKUT 138  which
             confirms that although Section 117B(4) refers to private  life
             and not to family  life,  when  assessing  the  weight  to  be
             attached  to  any  family  life,  the   unlawfulness   of   an
             applicant's  stay  in  this  country  is  something  that  can
             nevertheless be taken into account under established Article 8
             principles.  The appellant and  the  sponsor  have  chosen  to
             embark upon a relationship in  the  full  knowledge  that  the
             appellant has no right to be here.  Any hardship or  emotional
             distress  caused  by  the  appellant's  removal  is  therefore
             entirely of their own making.


         26.  Section 117(6) provides that in the case of a  person  who  is
             not liable  to  deportation,  the  public  interest  does  not
             require the person's removal where the person  has  a  genuine
             and subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child
             and it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.  It is the appellant's case that he  meets
             this  requirement.   I  do  not  agree.   I  accept  that  the
             sponsor's children are qualifying children by virtue of  their
             British citizenship and I also accept that  it  would  not  be
             reasonable to  require  them  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.
             However, I find that the appellant does not enjoy a 'parental'
             relationship with the children.  I have considered the  recent
             case of R (on  the  application  of  RK)  v  SSHD  (s117B(6));
             "parental relationship" IJR [2016]  00031  which  acknowledges
             that a parental relationship may be enjoyed by someone who  is
             not a child's biological or adopted parent and may be  enjoyed
             by  more  than  two  people.   I  particularly  note  that  at
             paragraph 45 of the  judgement,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb
             recognises that a step-parent or partner of the primary  carer
             of a child when a family has split after separation or divorce
             of the parents may in certain circumstances fall  within  this
             category.   However,  notwithstanding  the   fact   that   the
             appellant has been living as part of the same household as the
             sponsor's children for more than three  years,  the  appellant
             has failed to  satisfy  me  that  his  relationship  to  those
             children is properly categorised as a 'parental' one.  I  note
             that the children continue to see their biological father on a
             regular basis.  I have not been provided with any evidence  to
             suggest that the appellant is involved  in  taking  any  major
             decisions in respect of their care and upbringing.  He is also
             not contributing towards their  upbringing  financially.   The
             fact that he may take the children to school and pick them  up
             is not enough to amount to a 'parental relationship'.  I  have
             also not been provided with any  evidence  from  the  children
             themselves to suggest that they view the appellant as a father
             figure.  Although a letter dated 4th November 2016 shows  that
             the children's  school  has  apologised  to  the  sponsor  for
             disclosing information to the respondent without  gaining  her
             prior consent, the school has not  provided  any  evidence  to
             contradict the factual information given in the e-mail of 13th
             May 2015 that is relied on by the respondent  in  the  reasons
             for refusal letter, or to suggest that the  appellant  attends
             parents evenings or other school events or to confirm that  he
             is on their records as an emergency contact  or  that  he  has
             ever been seen to escort the children to and from school.   On
             the basis of all of the information before me, I find that the
             appellant does not  have  a  'parental  relationship'  to  the
             sponsor's children for the purposes  of  Section  117B(6)  and
             that he is therefore unable to benefit from this provision.


         7.   For all the reasons given, I conclude that the appellant  does
             not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rule  and  that
             there is no basis for allowing  his  appeal  under  Article  8
             outside the Rules.  Of course, there is nothing to prevent him
             from submitting an application  for  entry  clearance  in  the
             future if he is able to meet the relevant requirements of  the
             Immigration Rules.  The appeal is dismissed."


8.   There was an application for permission to  appeal.   On  31  May  2017
    permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  first  and  second  of  the
    grounds.  It was found to be arguable that the judge had not  correctly
    applied the law to the facts in relation to the customary  marriage  by
    proxy of the appellant.  In relation to ground 2 it was  arguable  that
    when considering whether the appellant met the  Immigration  Rules  for
    the purpose of proportionality in consideration of Article 8, that  the
    appellant and his sponsor had been living together  in  a  relationship
    akin to marriage for over two years at the date of hearing.

9.   Counsel argued that the judge had erred in finding that  the  appellant
    was not married to the sponsor in paragraphs 19 and 20  of  the  Rules.
    There was a marriage certificate which had been before the Home Office.
     The procedures complied with the legal  requirements  in  Ghana.   The
    Ghana  customary  marriage  registration  certificate  was   the   only
    officially obtainable documentation/certification of a valid  customary
    marriage having taken place in Ghana.  The Secretary of State  appeared
    to have accepted the customary marriage and there was no reason  to  go
    behind the documents relied upon.  Counsel sought to rely on matters on
    which permission had not  been  granted.   She  acknowledged  that  the
    grounds had not articulated the point but she had "plugged the gap"  as
    she put it. However I saw no reason to allow such points to  be  raised
    at the hearing in all the circumstances.  However, she  did  argue  the
    point which was raised in ground 2 on which permission had been granted
    - as of the date of the hearing the parties had  been  living  together
    for three years and this could be taken into account under Article 8.

10.  Mr Clarke submitted that the  argument  about  the  customary  marriage
    ignored the reasoning of the judge who had not  found  the  documentary
    evidence reliable on the balance of probabilities.  It was not the case
    that the refusal letter accepted the  validity  of  the  marriage,  and
    indeed it was implied that the requirements were not met -  if  it  had
    been accepted that the parties were married, then  the  decision  would
    have been worded differently.

11.  The judge's reasoning in paragraph  19  was  comprehensive.   Reference
    was made to NA (Customary marriage and divorce - evidence) Ghana [2009]
    UKAIT 00009.  In paragraph 16 the  expert  had  stated  that  the  best
    evidence was "from witnesses who were present at these informal  events
    to confirm they took place."  Any error in respect of  the  description
    of the document by the First-tier Judge was immaterial.   In  paragraph
    19, however, the judge had made very significant credibility  findings.
    Statutory  declarations  in  February  and  March  2014  postdated  the
    appellant's application and the judge was entitled to make the comments
    she  had  done  about  them.   The  burden  lay  on  the  appellant  as
    established in NA (Ghana).  There was no evidence about the  dowry  and
    she had not erred in referring to the death of the appellant's parents,
    particularly as the appellant's father's signature appeared to  feature
    on the document at pages 22 to 23 of the bundle which is described as a
    statutory declaration.  Mr Clarke sought to make an additional point by
    reference to paragraph 5 of NA (Ghana) where it had been  said  that  a
    valid customary marriage could only be validly contracted  between  two
    Ghanaian citizens and both parties must have capacity to marry.

12.  In reply Counsel submitted that she had had  no  notice  of  the  point
    about customary marriages needing to be contracted between two Ghanaian
    citizens, and it was not a good point as it had subsequently been found
    to be wrong.  There were  attempts  to  go  behind  a  properly  issued
    certificate.

13.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered all the material before me.  I remind myself  that
    I can only  interfere  with  the  decision  of  the  judge  if  it  was
    materially flawed in law.

14.  In this case the grounds were limited as I have said by the  First-tier
    Tribunal to grounds 1 and 2.

15.  The principal issue is the question of the validity  of  the  marriage.
    The problem with the appellant's submission is that it is  quite  clear
    that the burden of proof rests on the party relying on the marriage  as
    is said in NA (Ghana) and the judge correctly addressed herself on  the
    burden and standard of proof.  I am not satisfied that any error in the
    description of the certificate by the judge was in  any  way  material.
    The point made by the judge about  the  statutory  declarations  was  a
    perfectly proper one.  The judge was further entitled to  comment  that
    there was no photographic evidence in respect of the  ceremony  or  any
    evidence to confirm the payment of a dowry.  There was the odd  feature
    that prayers were said by the principal members of both  families  when
    it was the appellant's evidence that both of his parents were dead  and
    that he had no close relations living in Ghana.  Mr Clarke  pointed  to
    the document in the appellant's bundle which appeared  to  feature  the
    signature of the appellant's father. This does not appear to be a point
    directly relied upon by the judge, but it does nothing to undermine the
    judge's conclusions and observations.  It was open to the judge to find
    there was insufficient evidence to prove that the appellant was legally
    married in Ghana and that the documents provided were genuine and could
    be relied upon.

16.  It followed from these findings that the appellant could not  meet  the
    definition of partner under the Rules as the judge states.

17.  Permission was granted in respect of ground 2 on the basis that it  was
    arguable that:

     "when considering whether the appellant met the Immigration  Rules  for
         the purpose of proportionality in consideration of Article 8,  that
         the appellant and  his  sponsor  had  been  living  together  in  a
         relationship akin to marriage for over two years  at  the  date  of
         hearing."

18.  It was pointed out that the judge had accepted  in  paragraph  26  that
    the appellant had been living as part of  the  same  household  as  the
    sponsor's children for more than three years.

19.  It is quite clear that the judge recognised that her duty was  to  look
    at matters as at the date of the hearing.  In conducting the  balancing
    exercise the  judge  took  into  account  all  relevant  matters.   She
    comments that she had no written or oral evidence from the children but
    accepted they were fond  of  the  appellant.   She  accepted  that  the
    appellant continued to see their biological father some three  times  a
    month.  Contact was maintained with him by  telephone.   Contact  could
    also be maintained with the appellant, and as she comments in paragraph
    27 of her decision, there was nothing to prevent him from applying  for
    entry clearance if appropriate.   It  is  plain  that  the  judge  gave
    careful consideration to the best interests of the children.

20.  There were significant countervailing factors in the case as the  judge
    points out by reference to the  statutory  considerations  set  out  in
    Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   She
    was entitled to find that the appellant had shown a  blatant  disregard
    for the immigration laws which must weigh  heavily  against  him.   The
    appellant had been  in  the  UK  illegally  for  the  duration  of  his
    relationship with the sponsor.  The parties had chosen to embark upon a
    relationship in the full knowledge that the appellant had no  right  to
    be in the United Kingdom.

21.  The  judge  in  paragraph  26  of  her  determination  found  that  the
    appellant did not have a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
    with  the  children  and  she  was  entitled  to  conclude   that   the
    relationship was not properly categorised as a parental one in all  the
    circumstances.  Permission to appeal in respect of  this  issue  (which
    had been raised in ground 4) was not granted and I  see  no  reason  to
    open up argument on the grounds on which permission was not granted.  I
    do not find that the judge erred in concluding that the  appellant  did
    not make out a case under the  Rules.   The  balancing  exercise  under
    Article 8 had to be taken in the light of the statutory  considerations
    to which the judge alludes in paragraphs 24 and 25 of the decision.

22.  For the reasons I have given I am not satisfied that  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Judge was materially  flawed  in  law.   The  appeal  is
    dismissed.

23.  The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and I make none.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.



Signed                                  Date 18 July 2017


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

