
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/30274/2015
                                                               IA/30279/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th July 2017                             |On 3rd August 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Shamayal [K]
                                    [K k]

                                                       Respondents/Claimants


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents/Claimants:  Mr M Biggs, Counsel instructed by JKR
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The first claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh and is the mother of  the
    second claimant, her daughter, born on [ ] 2011.
2.   The first claimant arrived in the United Kingdom in 2004 as  a  student
    and had leave in that capacity until 12th April 2015.

3.   On 19th September 2014 she applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  ten  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence.  The application  was  refused  on  24th  August  2015,  the
    general reason being that  she  did  not  meet  the  Immigration  Rules
    because the periods of her absence from  the  United  Kingdom  were  in
    excess of the permitted time.  The appeal of her  daughter  remains  in
    line with her appeal.

4.   The first claimant sought to appeal against the decision, which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Thew on 12th August 2016.

5.   The relevant period which led to the refusal, was an  absence  of  over
    six months between October 2008 and June 2009, when  she  travelled  to
    visit her mother who was seriously ill with kidney failure.

6.   The Immigration Rule permitted a single absence  of  up  to  180  days,
    whereas it was noted that her absence was one of  242  days.   It  said
    that it was not appropriate to exercise discretion in her case and thus
    she did not meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276B(i)(a)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

7.   An additional element in the decision of 24th August 2015 was that  she
    had exercised deception in the obtaining of a TOEIC speaking test  with
    Educational Testing Service.  Thus her application was refused  on  the
    basis of suitability as well as eligibility.

8.   In the course of the determination, and for reasons  set  out  therein,
    the Judge came to the conclusion that there was no proper basis for the
    respondent to  consider  that  any  deception  had  been  exercised  in
    relation to the TOEIC certificate.  It is to be noted that  Mr  Clarke,
    on behalf of the Secretary of State, does not seek to  argue  that  the
    Judge was in error on that finding.  Thus the challenge to  suitability
    on that ground is  not made out and should fall away from the decision.

9.   The Judge noted that, in terms of absence, there was some  guidance  in
    terms of a policy relating to long residence.  The policy indicated, as
    is set out in paragraph  30  of  the  determination,  that  in  certain
    circumstances it may be appropriate to exercise discretion over  longer
    absences in compelling  or  compassionate  circumstances.   The  policy
    directs the caseworker where there is a single absence of over 180 days
    as follows:-

         "You must consider how much  the  absence  was  due  to  compelling
         circumstances and whether the appellants returned to the UK as soon
         as they were able to do so.


         You must also consider the reasons for the absence".

10.  It is far from clear from the decision  of  24th  August  2015  whether
    that policy was considered or applied.  The explanation that the  delay
    in returning was because the  mother  was  seriously  ill  with  kidney
    failure was said to have been considered, but it was not accepted  that
    it was necessary for the first claimant to remain in Bangladesh for 242
    days before returning to the United Kingdom.

11.   The  Judge,  however,  in  the  course  of  the  determination  looked
    carefully at the circumstances in which  the  first  claimant  went  to
    Bangladesh and the reasons why she stayed there.  The evidence from the
    first claimant as to why she felt compelled to remain with  her  mother
    over and above the period permitted under the Rules  was  recorded  and
    that can be seen at paragraphs 37 and 38 of the determination.

12.  Essentially the Judge,  having  considered  all  that  had  been  said,
    accepted that the period of 242 days was reasonable and  that  such  of
    the absence was therefore due to compelling circumstances and that  the
    first claimant returned to the  United  Kingdom  as  soon  as  she  was
    reasonably able to do so.

13.  No challenge is made to those findings nor  any  suggestion  made  that
    the Judge was not entitled to come to that conclusion.

14.  Challenge is made, however, to the way in which  the  Judge  thereafter
    dealt with the appeal. The Judge purported to follow Ukus  (discretion:
    when reviewable) [2002] UKUT 00307 (IAC) which indicates that  where  a
    decision maker has failed to exercise a discretion it will be  for  the
    decision maker to complete the task by reaching a lawful decision.   In
    this case the Judge considered that the  discretion  should  have  been
    exercised differently and accordingly allowed the appeal.

15.  The Secretary of State sought to challenge  the  decision,  firstly  on
    the grounds that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  failed  to  provide
    adequate reasons for finding  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    discharged the evidential  legal  burden  of  proving  that  the  first
    claimant acted dishonestly.  As I indicated that challenge is no longer
    proceeded with.  It was also said that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    had failed to provide adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  discretion
    towards the first claimant should be exercised differently in  relation
    to the circumstances surrounding the first claimant's absence from  the
    UK for more than six months.  As then drafted, it seems to me that such
    lacks merit, as the Judge clearly had set out  reasons  why  discretion
    should have been exercised.

16.  However, permission was granted to the respondent to challenge, not  so
    much on those particular grounds, but on the question as to whether  it
    was open to the Judge to allow the appeal on the stated basis.

17.  Thus it is a matter that came to me to determine the issue.

18.   Directions  had  been  issued  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  make
    representations on the matter for which permission  had  been  granted.
    Sadly no submissions have been prepared.  I am grateful, however, to Mr
    Biggs for his detailed skeleton argument and to Mr Clarke in presenting
    certain documents to assist a determination of that issue.

19.  In essence the nub of the challenge made to the approach taken  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge lies with, and to the extent that Section  86
    of the 2002 Act, as amended by the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 and  the  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006
    remains in force and effective.

20.  This was a matter considered in particular by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Greenwood (No. 2) (para 398 considered) [2015] UKUT 00629  (IAC).   The
    detail of Section 86 is set  out  in  paragraph  20  and  the  Tribunal
    considered  in  some  detail  what  was  the  outcome  of  the  various
    amendments, including The Immigration Act  2014  (Commencement  No.  3,
    Transitional and Saving Provisions) Order 2014 and The Immigration  Act
    2014 (Commencement  No.  4,  Transitional  and  Saving  Provisions  and
    Amendment) Order 2015.

21.  The relevant passages in Section 86 that  originally  is  of  relevance
    are those contained in 86(3) and (6):-

         "(3) The Tribunal must allow the appeal in so far as it thinks that-




             (a)  a decision against which the  appeal  is  brought  or  is
                  treated as being brought was not in  accordance  with  the
                  law (including Immigration Rules), or


             (b)  a discretion exercised in making a decision against which
                  the appeal is brought  or  is  treated  as  being  brought
                  should have been exercised differently.


             ...


         (6)   Refusal  to  depart  from  or  to  authorise  departure  from
             Immigration Rules is not the exercise of a discretion for  the
             purposes of subsection (3)(b)."

22.  It would seem that part  of  that  Section  86  was  preserved  by  the
    Transitional and Saving Provisions Amendment Order  2015  (Commencement
    No. 4) of 25th February 2015.  That amendment coming into force on  6th
    April 2015 is set out in some detail in that Order at Article 8,  which
    incorporates 9(1)(a) to (d) and (2) and (3).

23.  It is the argument, as advanced by Mr Biggs, that so far as  the  power
    under 86(3)(b) such  remains  for  certain  categories  of  cases.   In
    support of that matter he relies upon Section 9(1)(c)(iv),  namely  "to
    refuse to vary a person's leave to enter or remain and where the result
    of that decision is that the person has no leave to enter or remain".

24.  He submits that the application which was made by  the  first  claimant
    was to be granted indefinite leave  to  remain  and  therefore  was  an
    application that fell squarely within that particular sub section.

25.  On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Clarke relies  upon  the  final
    wording to Article 9(1)(c) "unless that decision is also a  refusal  of
    an asylum, protection or human rights claim".

26.  He submits that it is entirely clear from the decision  that  was  made
    and was the subject of appeal, that the  first  claimant's  application
    was treated as a human rights claim and therefore  Section  86  is  not
    applicable.

27.  Mr Biggs however relies upon Section 113 of the 2002 Act which  defines
    a human rights claim as:-

     "meaning a claim made by a person to the Secretary of State at a  place
         designated by the Secretary of State that to remove the person from
         or require him to leave the United Kingdom (or to refuse him  entry
         to the United Kingdom) would be unlawful under  Section  6  of  the
         Human Rights Act 1998".

     He submits that such is not the application that was made by the  first
    claimant, notwithstanding how it was treated by the Secretary of  State
    in the decision of 24th August 2015.

28.  The explanatory note to Commencement  No.  4  Transitional  and  Saving
    Provisions Amendment Order speaks of Article 8 inserting a new  Article
    9 into the Commencement Order, which contains  some  saving  provisions
    for certain types of decisions or applications which are made prior  to
    6th April 2015.  The explanatory note sets out a number of matters  but
    does not deal specifically with the application for indefinite leave to
    remain.

29.  It seems to me, however, that there is a practical distinction  between
    an application for indefinite  leave  to  remain  and  applications  to
    remain as a Tier 1, Tier 2 or Tier 4 Migrant.  Refusal  of  the  former
    does not automatically bring to an end the leave that had been  granted
    and which could continue until the expiry of that leave  as  originally
    granted, whereas refusal of Tier 1 and Tier 2 or Tier 4 Migrant  brings
    to an end the basis upon which they can lawfully remain in  the  United
    Kingdom.

30.  It is to be noted that in the appeal itself, which led to  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, the aspect of removal was  linked
    with the application for indefinite leave to remain.

31.  In all the circumstances I am not persuaded that the power as  provided
    under Section 86 is preserved in the situation that presents itself  in
    this appeal.

32.  Even if I am wrong on this matter, this is  the  consideration  whether
    the policy highlights a discretion to be exercised in making a decision
    under the Immigration Rules, or whether it is a discretion which is  to
    be exercised outside of the Rules.  Mr Biggs invites  me  to  read  the
    policy in conjunction with the Immigration Rules as part and parcel  of
    the original decision making process, thus qualifying  to  some  extent
    the requirements of the Rules.

33.  Mr Clarke submits that it is clearly a discretion outside of the  Rules
    and falls within the prohibition in 86(6) "Refusal to depart from or to
    authorise departure from Immigration Rules is not  the  exercise  of  a
    discretion for the purposes of subsection  (3)(b)".   It  seems  to  me
    common sense  that  the  policy  is  informative  of  the  respondent's
    exercise of discretion as to whether to  depart  from  the  Immigration
    Rules and  it  cannot  properly  be  said  to  be  part  of  the  Rules
    themselves.  In those circumstances, again, I find that if  Section  86
    does not apply such as to permit the Judge  to  have  supplemented  his
    discretion for that of the Secretary of State.

34.  I recognise this is a matter not without  difficulty  and  I  note  the
    decision in Ukus (discretion: when reviewable) [2002] UKUT 00307 (IAC).
     That however was a case seemingly revolving  around  the  exercise  of
    discretion in the  decision  making  process  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer under Section 86(3)(a) and 86(3)(b) and  recognised   paragraph
    21, however, that not all discretionary powers open to the Secretary of
    State are appealable in the Tribunal.

35.  The real issue in this case, however,  is  whether  there  has  been  a
    material irregularity in the decision process.  This was recognised  by
    the President in a recent decision of the Tribunal in Greenwood (No. 2)
    (para 398  considered)  [2015]  UKUT  00629  (IAC).   Remittal  to  the
    Secretary of State is now not one of the disposal powers  available  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The powers  that  remain  are  to  allow  the
    appeal, to dismiss the appeal or to  make  a  decision  to  the  effect
    whereof the Secretary of State  either  must,  or  may,  make  a  fresh
    decision.

36.  It seems to me that if one  considers  policy  rather  than  discretion
    there is perhaps a better focus that can be addressed to the nature  of
    this appeal.

37.  It has long been held that the proper approach to be taken in  relation
    to human rights is to consider whether the claimants succeed under  the
    Immigration Rules, and if not, whether there are any  compassionate  or
    compelling circumstances outside of the Rules, which  would  render  it
    disproportionate for the claimants to be removed from the jurisdiction.
     This not a near miss situation in that there exists a  policy  of  the
    Secretary of State, which sets out the circumstances in which a  breach
    of the Immigration Rules will, in effect be  disregarded,  there  being
    compelling or compassionate circumstances so to do.

38.  In  the  particular  circumstances  of  this  case  the  accusation  of
    dishonesty has fallen away, and so there is nothing positive  to  place
    against the suitability of the first claimant, she having been  in  the
    United Kingdom with leave and being obedient to the Immigration  Rules.
    There is nothing in her situation or circumstances on that matter which
    would call for her removal.

39.   Although  technically  in  breach  of  the  Immigration   Rules,   the
    respondent, in the policy, has recognised that there may be  compelling
    or compassionate circumstances which exist outside of the  Rules  which
    would  render  refusal/removal  unnecessary.    The   Judge   has,   in
    considering  the  matter,  come  to  the  conclusion  that  there  were
    compelling and compassionate circumstances applying the  policy  or  as
    recognised by the policy, such that it  would  be  disproportionate  to
    remove the claimants from the jurisdiction.

40.   Clearly  the  Judge  cannot  exercise  the  discretion  to  grant  the
    particular type of leave, namely indefinite leave that was sought,  but
    is entitled to look at the matter as a whole and come to the conclusion
    that it would be wholly disproportionate in the light of that policy to
    require the claimants to leave the jurisdiction and indeed to be unfair
    of the Secretary of State not to grant the leave sought.  In  terms  of
    the appeal, as lodged by the first claimant, this was recognised by  Mr
    Clarke as not only an application for a specific remedy,  but  also  an
    indication that it would be disproportionate to  remove  the  claimants
    from the jurisdiction.

41.  In the circumstances I do not find any material error  in  the  outcome
    of the appeal but would interpret the findings of the Judge  along  the
    lines of human rights and proportionality that I have indicated.

42.  Even if I am wrong on that, I would simply set aside  the  decision  of
    the  Tribunal  Judge  and  remake  it  on  the  basis  that  there  are
    compassionate and  compelling  circumstances  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules which render removal disproportionate such as to allow  therefore
    the appeal in relation to human rights.  In the circumstances it  would
    be for the Secretary of State to grant such relief for such a period to
    reflect the decision as made. I would hope  that  the  application  for
    indefinite leave as originally made would be granted.

Notice of Decision

43.  In all the circumstances therefore  the  appeal  of  the  Secretary  of
    State to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  The decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal shall stand, namely that the claimants' appeal in respect
    of human rights is allowed.

44.  No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                 [pic]                 Date 3 August 2017
