
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA304512014
     IA304522014
     IA304542014
     IA304552014
     IA304562014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th May 2016                              |On 16th June 2016             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                 Afroza [A]
                                 Motiur [R]
                                    [A M]
                                    [M R]
                                    [T R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by JS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants, nationals of Bangladesh,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State to remove them as
    illegal entrants and/or as persons subject  to  administrative  removal
    under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999,  their  human
    rights claims having been refused.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Monson
    dismissed the appeals and the Appellants now appeal with permission  to
    this Tribunal.

 2. The background to these appeals is that  the  first  Appellant,  Afroza
    [A], along with the second Appellant,  who  is  her  husband,  and  the
    third, fourth and fifth Appellants, who are their  children  under  18,
    appeal  against  the  decisions  of  the  Respondent  to  refuse  their
    applications for leave to remain on the basis of their family life.

 3. The first Appellant entered the UK on 6th August 2005 with valid  entry
    clearance as a student, along with her husband and the third Appellant,
    [AM] (who was born in Bangladesh on 15 December 2001), who were  issued
    visas  for  the  same  duration  to  accompany  the  Appellant  as  her
    dependants.  Their entry clearance was valid until 30th  November  2007
    and they  successfully  extended  their  leave  to  remain  until  30th
    November 2008 and again until 30th November 2009.  The fourth Appellant
    was born in the UK on 23 January 2007.

 4. On 18th November 2009 the first Appellant applied for leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant with the second, third and fourth
    Appellants as her dependants but that application was refused  on  13th
    July 2010 because, when the Tier 4 Sponsor Register  was  checked,  the
    college at which the Appellant proposed to study was not listed on  the
    Tier 4 Sponsor Register.  Their  appeals  against  this  decision  were
    dismissed on 3rd November 2010.

 5. The first Appellant gave birth to the fifth Appellant on 20th September
    2011 and in 2013 she applied for leave to remain on the  basis  of  her
    private and family life, naming  her  husband  and  three  children  as
    dependants.  That application was rejected as invalid on 17th  November
    2013 and on 26th October 2013 she made a valid application on the  same
    grounds and that application was refused on 15th November 2013 with  no
    right of appeal.  The first Appellant sought permission  to  apply  for
    judicial review and those proceedings were settled on  the  basis  that
    the Secretary of State would make a fresh decision  to  reconsider  the
    refusal which would trigger an in country right of appeal.

 6. On  9th  July  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  gave  her  reasons  for
    maintaining her decision to refuse to grant  leave  to  remain  to  the
    Appellants and to make directions  for  their  removal.   That  is  the
    decision subject to the appeal in this case.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the appeals on the basis  that
    he first considered the parents' claims and decided that the appeals of
    the parents could not succeed in their own right as neither parent  had
    a viable private or family life claim under the Rules and there were no
    compelling circumstances to  consider  their  appeals  outside  of  the
    Rules.

 8. The judge noted that the only obstacle to their reintegration into life
    in Bangladesh which has been put forward is an economic  one,  that  is
    that they would find it difficult to find a job but the judge  attached
    no credence whatsoever to this claim, noting that the first Appellant's
    employability was considerably enhanced by the qualifications  obtained
    by her studies in the UK.

 9. In terms of the children the judge referred to this  as  "a  piggyback-
    type case" in that the parents are seeking to piggyback on the  private
    lives of  the  two  older  children  to  secure  leave  to  remain  for
    themselves and the younger children.  The judge said at paragraph 35:

         "Whether the issue is to be looked at through the prism of EX.1(a),
         or Rule 276ADE or Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, the question  is
         the same, and the  considerations  which  need  to  be  taken  into
         account are also the same.   As  the  question  only  needs  to  be
         answered once, I propose to answer it by reference to the statute."

10. The judge noted that the two older children do not  qualify  under  the
    seven year Rule as set out in the Rules and that Exception 1 is not  in
    play  because  the  parents  do  not  meet  the  necessary  eligibility
    requirements. The judge noted: "As per Rule 276ADE(1)(iv), the children
    had not accrued seven years' residence  at  the  date  of  application,
    albeit this is not a point which is taken against them in  the  refusal
    letter."

11. The judge went on to say that the two older  children  are  undoubtedly
    qualifying children under section 117B (6)  as  the  statute  does  not
    require that the child in question should  have  accrued  seven  years'
    residence as at the date of application  as  opposed  to  seven  years'
    residence at the date of the decision and/or appeal hearing.

12. The judge went on to consider the best interests of  the  children  and
    the wider proportionality considerations.  The judge concluded that the
    children are citizens of Bangladesh, that they will be  able  to  enjoy
    all of the  benefits  that  such  citizenship  entails,  they  will  be
    returned to Bangladesh with their parents and  siblings,  they  do  not
    have any medical conditions or  special  educational  needs,  they  can
    access education in Bangladesh where English  is  widely  spoken,  they
    have always remained in the care  of  a  Bangladeshi  family  and  will
    therefore be aware of the language and culture of Bangladesh  and  they
    will enjoy family reunion with relatives in Bangladesh.  He noted  that
    none of the children are old enough to have developed any skills  which
    are not transferable to  Bangladesh  and  none  of  them  have  started
    studying towards a recognised qualification with the exception  of  the
    eldest child but noted that her GCSE exams are still some way off.

13. The judge noted in relation to the wider proportionality considerations
    that the Appellant only entered the UK for a temporary purpose and that
    she and her husband never had a legitimate expectation of being able to
    carry on family life in the UK on  a  permanent  basis.   Although  the
    family has integrated well into the UK the judge noted  that  they  are
    not financially independent and that the children are being educated at
    public expense and that was damaging at a  macro-economic  level.   The
    judge concluded that the removal of the entire family is  proportionate
    to the legitimate aim and that it is reasonable for the two  qualifying
    children to leave the UK with their parents and younger sibling.

14. The Appellants' Grounds of Appeal challenge the judge's analysis  under
    the Immigration Rules and under Article 8.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted on the basis that: "Whilst concerned with  Section  117B(6)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 the  guidance  in  the
    case of Treebhawon and others suggests that the grounds are arguable."

15. At the hearing before  me  Mr  Iqbal  accepted  that  the  decision  in
    Treebhawon and others  (section  117B  (6))  [2015]  UKUT  00674  (IAC)
    relates to circumstances where there  is  a  finding  that  it  is  not
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK. He accepted that the
    judge in this case had not made such  a  finding.   He  relied  on  his
    grounds and made one additional submission which  was  that  the  judge
    made a material mistake of fact at paragraph 35 of  the  decision.  The
    judge stated  that  the  eldest  child  had  not  accrued  seven  years
    residence at the date of  application  whereas  in  fact  he  noted  at
    paragraph 7 that the application was made on 26th October 2013  and  at
    paragraph 4 that the Appellant, her husband and child entered the UK on
    6th August 2005 which meant that by  6th  August  2013  the  child  had
    completed eight years' residence in the UK.  Mr  Iqbal  submitted  that
    this was a crucial mistake of fact.

16. Mr Kotas responded by submitting that this issue was not  mentioned  in
    the grounds and in any event  it  was  not  material  as  the  ultimate
    question was still whether it was reasonable at the date of hearing  to
    expect the children to leave the UK.

17. I accept Mr Kotas' submission in relation to  this  issue.   The  judge
    clearly identified that the statute  and  the  Rules  all  required  an
    answer to the same question and that was the question  that  the  judge
    went on to answer. This was the question to be  addressed  whether  the
    judge reached that stage through paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules or section 117B of the 2002 Act.

18. Mr Iqbal further submitted that the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    application for two main reasons, firstly that the  children  would  be
    returning to Bangladesh  with  their  parents  and  secondly  that  the
    children could get an education in Bangladesh.  He submitted that these
    two considerations are present in  all  cases  and  that  seven  years'
    residence  would  be  neither  here  nor  there  in  relation  to  that
    submission.  He also submitted that the British  Nationality  Act  1981
    entitles a child to be registered as a British citizen after ten  years
    in the UK and that this indicates that the Respondent is wrong  in  her
    interpretation of reasonableness.

19. Mr Iqbal submitted that the judge did not properly consider all of  the
    factors identified in the case of E-A (Article 8 -  best  interests  of
    child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 315 (IAC) as set out in paragraph 26 of  his
    decision which relate to the factors highlighted in the previous policy
    DP5/96.  Mr Kotas submitted  that  there  is  nothing  wrong  with  the
    judge's decision  and  that  the  judge  had  correctly  laid  out  the
    jurisprudence  and  had  concluded  that  it  was  reasonable  for  the
    Appellants to return to Bangladesh.  He submitted that the point  about
    the British Nationality Act had not been litigated  and  could  not  be
    raised now but in any event the judge had to  confine  himself  to  the
    facts as they were at the date of the hearing.  He submitted  that  the
    judge had given reasons and had weighed up all of the factors as he was
    supposed to do.  In  response  Mr  Iqbal  submitted  that  the  British
    Nationality Act 1981 was a  Robinson  obvious  point  which  the  judge
    should have considered.

20. I am satisfied that there is no material error in this  decision.   The
    judge considered all relevant factors in relation to  the  parents  and
    the children as set out above and  the  judge  concluded  that  it  was
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.  Mr  Iqbal  did  not
    point to any additional factors which the  judge  had  not  taken  into
    account or to any factors which the judge had  taken  into  account  in
    error. The judge was not required to take into account the fact that  a
    child can apply for registration as a British  citizen  when  s/he  has
    been in the UK for ten years as this was  not  raised  before  him  and
    there was no  evidence  that  any  of  the  children  had  applied  for
    registration or been registered as British citizens.

21. I find that the judge reached a rational decision open to  him  on  the
    basis of the evidence before him and I am satisfied that  there  is  no
    material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not  contain  a  material
error of law and I maintain that decision.  The decision of  the  First-tier
Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date: 15 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes








TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                              Date: 15 June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
