

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/30241/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 28 October 2014                            |on 30 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    REEMA
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Livingstone
Brown,      Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but are referred to in the rest  of
    this determination as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant applied for leave  for  a  purpose  not  covered  by  the
    Immigration Rules, namely to make an academic application for and  then
    to undertake a course of study for a PhD without having to leave the UK
    to make the associated immigration application to the respondent.   The
    SSHD  refused  that  application  under  rule  322(1).   The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In her determination  promulgated
    on 28 May 2014 Judge Kempton  found  the  appellant  to  be  a  genuine
    student who had encountered unfortunate setbacks and should be  enabled
    to make her PhD application to a university in the UK, and purported to
    allow the appeal "under the Immigration Rules".

 3. The SSHD appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  The case came before the  Hon
    Mr Justice McCloskey (President of  the  UT)  and  Judge  Dawson  on  2
    September 2014.  In their decision and reasons dated 15 September  2014
    they say that the judge evidently intended to allow  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR outwith the rules and not under the rules,  there
    being no rule under which it could be allowed.  The SSHD's challenge on
    the basis of lack of reasoning was allowed, there being  no  indication
    in the determination of any self-direction as  to  the  relevant  legal
    principles:

          ... apart from a misguided reference to the principles of fairness
          in Patel [2011]  UKUT  211.   It  is  clear  that  the  judge  was
          sympathetic to the appellant but this is not enough.  As  observed
          by Lord Carnwath in Patel [2013] UKSC 72 at [57],  "Article  8  is
          not a  general  dispensing  power"  and  "The  opportunity  for  a
          promising student to complete his course in this country,  however
          desirable in general terms, is not in  itself  a  right  protected
          under Article 8."

 4. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal was therefore  set  aside,
    and the case  came  before  me  for  remaking  of  the  decision.   The
    appellant was  permitted  to  produce  further  evidence,  including  a
    statement on which she was cross-examined  at  some  length,  and  both
    sides made detailed submissions.   It  was  agreed  that  the  ultimate
    question was whether the appellant's  removal  in  consequence  of  the
    decision would be a disproportionate interference  with  her  right  to
    private life.

 5. Mrs O'Brien submitted that the appellant's  primary  aim  was  just  to
    complete her application to a university from inside the UK.  It  might
    be easier to do so here, with  the  advantage  of  directly  meeting  a
    potential PhD supervisor, but that showed minor relative inconvenience,
    not disproportionate interference with a fundamental human right.  Many
    students did obtain PhD places from  outside  the  UK.   There  was  no
    substance to the complaint that the appellant  could  not  perfect  her
    application form India.  As a student, there  was  nothing  to  justify
    going beyond the rules.  Although the appellant said  she  sought  only
    short term leave, much of her evidence suggested longer  term  motives.
    On those other matters, it appeared the  appellant  had  obtained  non-
    emergency medical treatment to which she was not entitled and for which
    ought to have paid.  It was for the prosecuting authorities  to  decide
    if her presence in the  UK  was  required  as  a  witness  in  criminal
    proceedings.  There was no need  for  her  to  be  here  to  further  a
    personal injuries claim.  In the unlikely event that her  presence  was
    needed for that purpose, there are provisions in the rules.   This  was
    a case of seeking to use Article 8 to dispense with the rules.

 6. Mr Winter put the appellant's case as falling within  the  respondent's
    guidance on exceptional circumstances for leave to be  granted  outside
    the rules.  That guidance  was  conveniently  to  be  found  quoted  at
    paragraph 14 of Ganesabalan [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin).  As to factor (a)
    there mentioned, the bulk although not all of the appellant's  time  in
    the UK was lawful.  As to (b)  the  appellant's  principal  reason  for
    seeking leave was to perfect her application to a university and secure
    her place on a PhD course.   It was plausible that it would  be  easier
    to do that while having direct communication  with  her  potential  PhD
    supervisor.  She had said that if she obtained her place on  a  course,
    she would be willing to return to India to make her  application.   She
    had mentioned several other reasons for remaining  in  the  UK  in  the
    medium term, although she said that her intention on  gaining  her  PhD
    was to return permanently to India.  Mr Winter said that none of  those
    reasons would on its own justify leave, but they did so  as  cumulative
    factors in terms of part (b) of the  guidance.   The  appellant  has  a
    network of friends in the UK.  She has been cited as a witness  and  as
    the complainer in a trial next February of a Hindu priest on  a  charge
    of sexual abuse in a temple in Glasgow.  This is a sensitive  issue  in
    the mixed Hindu and Sikh community here, and she is  herself  of  mixed
    Hindu and Sikh origin.  A complaint has been made of an attempt to have
    these proceedings dropped in exchange for payment, which may also  lead
    to a trial.  The appellant may be a witness in these proceedings  also.
    She has a pending claim for personal injury from a separate incident of
    a fall, which is in hands of solicitors.  She has had an operation on a
    birth mark on her eye, a problem which might in the  long  term  affect
    her eyesight if not dealt with.  The operation is to be followed  by  2
    or 3 more.  Doctors in India declined to operate, due to concerns  over
    the possible effect on her eyesight, but  doctors  here  reassured  her
    that the procedure could be undertaken without  such  risk.   There  is
    background evidence of the general disadvantages  for  women  in  India
    (respondent's COI report, paragraphs 24.03,07,15,16,30) which would  be
    significantly  lessened  for  the  appellant  by  a  higher  level   of
    education.  All in all, it was disproportionate to refuse the appellant
    leave for the short period sought to perfect the PhD application  to  a
    university, some 4 to 6 weeks.

 7. I reserved my determination.

 8. Mr Winter has made the best of the appellant's case (i) for  the  short
    period she explicitly asks for and (ii)  on  wider  fronts,  trying  to
    bring other points in  as  cumulative  factors.   However,  broadly,  I
    prefer the submissions for the  respondent.   I  do  not  see  how  the
    additional factors add anything to the case for a short period of leave
    to obtain a place at university, followed by return to  India  to  make
    the application to  the  respondent;  and  I  do  not  think  that  the
    additional factors add up to a right to any period of leave.

 9. It may well be easier to perfect a PhD application with the benefit  of
    direct access to the potential supervisor, but as Mrs  O'Brien  pointed
    out, many such applications  come  from  abroad,  without  meeting  the
    potential supervisor.  In the age of the internet, there is nothing  to
    suggest that the advantage of personal  contact  is  significant.   The
    appellant has had years to work on  perfecting  her  application.   The
    ongoing delay is of her own making.  It could have been easily  avoided
    by complying with the rules long ago.

10. A network of friends here is an ordinary part of  life.   The  criminal
    matters sound serious (sexual abuse by a person in a position of trust,
    and attempted perversion of the course of justice) but if the appellant
    is  needed  as  a  prosecution  witness,  that  is  a  matter  for  the
    prosecuting authorities.  It  does  not  endow  the  appellant  with  a
    separate right to insist on a grant of leave.  There is no need  to  be
    here to pursue the personal injuries claim.  In the unlikely event that
    did call for her presence, the  rules  provide.   She  has  not  argued
    anything close to a case to remain for medical  treatment.   The  rules
    provide for that also, if appropriate.  The  evidence  on  the  medical
    aspect suggests that she may have obtained an irregular  advantage,  so
    this  tends,  if  anything,  against  her  not  in  her  favour.    The
    disadvantages for women in India may be mitigated at the higher ends of
    the social and educational scale, but the  appellant  in  her  evidence
    (although I did not find her generally to be  anything  but  an  honest
    witness) made an exaggerated point  about  how  dramatically  her  life
    chances in India would improve by having a PhD and  not  just  an  MSc.
    The concession she seeks in her favour is  not  a  great  one,  but  it
    essentially for a sympathetic use of Article 8 as a general  dispensing
    power, which is  contrary  to  principle.   Her  case  falls  short  of
    disclosing any such interference with fundamental rights as  to  render
    compliance with the rules a disproportionate outcome.

11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal has been  set  aside,  for
    the reasons fully set out in the Upper  Tribunal's  decision  dated  15
    September 2014.  The following decision is substituted: the appeal,  as
    originally brought to the First-tier Tribunal, is dismissed.

12. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




            29 October 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




