
IAC-HX-MC/12-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30407/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 February 2015                           |On 19 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE E B GRANT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr tosin emmanuel falade
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Shilliday, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Background to this Appeal

 1. The respondent applied for a residence  card  as  confirmation  of  the
    right to reside in the United Kingdom as the spouse of an EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  That  application  was
    refused and the respondent's appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge BA W Khan on 29 October  2014.   The  appeal  was  heard  on  the
    papers. The respondent did not attend or give evidence at  his  appeal.
    In a decision promulgated on 18 November 2014 the appeal was allowed.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal arguing that  the  judge  had
    made a material misdirection of law in  failing  to  follow  and  apply
    Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray on
    6 January 2015 thus the matter came before me to determine whether  the
    decision of Judge Khan contains an error of law.

 4. The respondent did not attend  the  appeal  hearing  nor  did  he  file
    submissions in response to the application for  permission  to  appeal.
    No further evidence was heard from the respondent.

 5. The appellant made an application pursuant to  Rules  15  (2A)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  to  adduce  additional
    evidence which comprised an  earlier  refusal  letter  and  an  earlier
    determination of FTTJ Jones in IA/03083/2013 in which he found that the
    respondent had entered into a marriage  of  convenience.   Because  the
    respondent requested his appeal be determined on the papers the earlier
    determination had not been lodged with the appeal file.  The  appellant
    had endeavoured  to  notify  the  respondent's  representative  of  the
    additional evidence for the error of law  hearing  but  there  were  no
    telephone contact details supplied  by  Lannex  Immigration  and  Legal
    Advice who had not represented the respondent  at  the  appeal  hearing
    before FTTJ Khan. I decided that  the  additional  evidence  should  be
    admitted and granted the appellant permission to adduce the same.

The Decision of Judge A W Khan

 6. The core findings of Judge Khan with regard to the  customary  marriage
    in Nigeria is set out at paragraphs 6 to 9 in which the Judge said  the
    first thing for him to determine was whether the  parties  had  entered
    into a customary marriage  by  proxy  in  Nigeria.  He  considered  the
    registration document adduced and disagreed with  the  respondent  that
    there was some information missing from it before going on to find that
    the respondent met the relevant requirements of Nigerian law under Part
    7 section 42 of the Laws of the Federation of Nigeria 2004.

 7. The Tribunal in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU  law)  [2014]  UKUT  00024
    (IAC) have given guidance concerning the marriage of an EEA national to
    a non-EEA national.  What the Judge was required to do  was  to  assess
    whether the marriage contracted was  recognised  as  valid  in  France.
    Kareem established that without independent and reliable evidence about
    the recognition of the marriage under  the  laws  of  the  EEA  country
    and/or the country where the  marriage  took  place,  the  Tribunal  is
    likely to be unable to find that sufficient evidence has been  provided
    to discharge the burden of proof.  Mere production of  legal  materials
    from the EEA country or country where the marriage took place  will  be
    insufficient evidence because they will rarely show  how  such  law  is
    understood or applied in those countries.  Mere assertions  as  to  the
    effect of such laws will, for similar reasons, carry no weight.

 8. In this case as can be seen from the decision, Judge A W Khan  did  not
    take into account Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014]  UKUT  00024
    (IAC).  Had he done so I am satisfied that he could not have  concluded
    that the  appellant  and  the  qualified  person  had  shown  they  had
    contracted a valid marriage recognised by the laws of France which  was
    a requirement for the marriage to be recognised in the United  Kingdom.



 9. Apart from falling into legal error in  failing  to  apply  and  follow
    Kareem, arguably  because  the  respondent  requested  this  appeal  be
    determined on the papers FTTJ Khan was not made aware  of  the  earlier
    appeal before FTTJ Jones in which the  respondent  was  found  to  have
    entered a marriage of convenience. Those findings  should  have  formed
    the starting point of  the  assessment  by  FTTJ  Khan.  He  cannot  be
    criticised for failing to make findings on an issue  of  which  he  was
    unaware because neither party brought it to his attention. Nevertheless
    it is clearly relevant to the outcome of the appeal because the  second
    application made by the respondent was in respect of  his  marriage  to
    the same spouse and FTTJ Jones in the earlier appeal found that  was  a
    marriage of convenience a finding I adopt in this decision.

10. For all of these reasons I am satisfied that the judge erred in law for
    the reasons set out in the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal.   In
    the circumstances I set aside the decision and remake the  decision  by
    dismissing the appeal.

Conclusions

11. The judge made an error of law and the decision is set aside.

12. I remake the decision dismissing the appeal.

Fee Award

13. The respondent's appeal has been dismissed there can be no fee award.



Signed        19 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge E B Grant



