
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30155/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 October 2015                   |On 23 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Hannah Oluwafunmilayo Alakijan
                                                                    Claimant

Representation:
For the claimant: Mr E Oremuyiwa, of London Investigation Immigration
For the respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The claimant, Hannah Oluwafunmilayo Alakijah, date of birth 14.5.92, is
    a citizen of Nigeria.

 2. The Secretary of State appealed  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lal promulgated 16.3.15, allowing the claimant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 3.7.14, to refuse
    her application for leave to remain in the UK on the  basis  of  family
    and private life. The Judge heard the appeal on 11.3.15.

 3. Judge Lal dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules but  allowed
    it outside the Rules under article 8 ECHR, finding it  disproportionate
    to remove the claimant given her level of integrations  since  arriving
    in the UK around the age of 13.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lambert  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    13.5.15.

 5. Thus the matter came before me on 16.9.15 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  For the reasons set out in my error of law decision, I found
    such error of law in the making  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as to require the decision of Judge Lal to be  set  aside  and
    remade by me at a  continuation  hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.  In
    essence, I found that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to  identify
    any compelling circumstances insufficiently recognised in the Rules  so
    as to justify going on to consider and grant leave  to  remain  outside
    the Rules under article 8.  Further, there was only  cursory  reference
    to the public interest considerations under section 117B  of  the  2002
    Act.

 6. At the First-tier Tribunal the claimant's representative accepted  that
    she could not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  and  the
    appeal was pursued on the basis of article 8 ECHR only.

 7. As there has been no appeal or cross against the part of the First-tier
    Tribunal decision dismissing the appeal on  immigration  grounds,  that
    part of the decision stands unchallenged and, as explained at �11 of my
    error of law decision, the issue cannot be raised at  this  stage.  The
    appeal must remain dismissed on immigration grounds.

 8. Thus the matter came before me again on 22.10.15 for  the  remaking  of
    the decision in the appeal, with the issues limited  to  whether  there
    are compelling circumstances insufficiently recognised within the Rules
    so as to require the claimant to be granted leave to remain outside the
    Rules on the basis of private and/or family life pursuant to article  8
    ECHR.

 9. This approach was endorsed by the Court  of  Appeal  in  Singh  v  SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 74, and again in SSHD v SS (Congo) &  Ors  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 387, where it was held that it is clear that whilst the  assessment
    of Article 8 claims requires a two-stage  analysis,  and  there  is  no
    threshold or intermediary requirement of arguability before a  decision
    maker moves to consider the second stage, whether that second stage  is
    required at all will  depend  on  whether  all  the  issues  have  been
    adequately addressed under the Rules. In other words, there is no  need
    to conduct a full separate examination of article 8 outside  the  Rules
    where in the circumstances of a particular case, all issues  have  been
    addressed in the consideration under the Rules.

10. In SS (Congo) Richards LJ held that the appropriate general formulation
    was that an applicant for LTE had to show that compelling circumstances
    existed (which were not sufficiently recognised under the new Rules) to
    require the grant of such  leave.  It  was  a  fairly  demanding  test,
    reflecting the reasonable relationship between the Rules themselves and
    the proper outcome of the application of article 8 in the usual run  of
    cases, but it was not as  demanding  as  the  exceptionality  or  "very
    compelling circumstances"  test  applicable  in  the  special  contexts
    explained in MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2014] 1 WLR 544 (precariousness of family relationship and deportation
    of foreigners convicted of serious crimes). There could be  no  general
    proposition that leave to remain ("LTR") or LTE outside the Immigration
    Rules should only be granted in exceptional cases, however, in  certain
    specific contexts, a proper application of article 8 might itself  make
    it clear that the legal test for grant of LTR or LTE outside the  Rules
    should indeed be a test of exceptionality. On the basis of the constant
    jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights  itself,  that  was
    the case in relation to applications for LTR outside the Rules  on  the
    basis of family life (where no children were involved)  established  in
    the United Kingdom at a time when the presence of one or other  of  the
    partners was known to be precarious.

11. Before reaching any findings of fact or the  conclusions  to  be  drawn
    therefrom, I have carefully considered the evidence and submissions  of
    the parties before me, including  the  claimant's  consolidated  bundle
    received by the Tribunal in compliance with the directions I issued  in
    my error of law decision for  a  single,  consolidated,  paginated  and
    indexed bundle of all objective and subjective material  relied  on  by
    the claimant.

12. In  particular  I  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  claimant  and  her
    stepfather,  relying  on  their  respective  witness  statements  dated
    6.10.15, followed by the oral submissions of the representatives of the
    parties. Reliance was also placed  by  Mr  Oremuyiwa  on  the  skeleton
    argument at page 26 of the claimant's bundle.

13. The relevant background may  be  summarised  briefly  as  follows.  The
    claimant, now 24 years  of  age,  first  came  to  the  UK  at  age  13
    accompanied by her mother and brother in August 2005 on a  visit  visa.
    She failed to leave and thus became an illegal overstayer,  though  the
    blame for that largely lies with her mother.  She  attended  school  at
    public expense, and went on to obtain a university degree  in  Forensic
    Chemistry. She is unemployed and claims to have never worked in the UK.
    In 2012 she applied for leave to remain on the basis of  private  life,
    refused on 20.7.13. A request  for  reconsideration  on  the  basis  of
    private and family life representations resulted in the further refusal
    decision of 3.7.14, which is the subject matter  of  this  appeal.  The
    Secretary of State did not  accept  that  she  had  lost  all  ties  to
    Nigeria, having lived there approximately 13 years before coming to the
    UK.

14. The claimant is now an adult  of  23  years  of  age.  In  her  witness
    statement of 6.10.15 she asserts a family  bond  with  her  mother  and
    brother in the UK and, since 2008, with her step-father Mr  Adams,  the
    partner of her mother, and a British citizen. He  attended  the  appeal
    hearing and gave evidence in support of the claimant.

15. The claimant has referred  to  medical  evidence  that  her  mother  is
    suffering from mental breakdown,  diagnosed  as  persistent  depressive
    disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder, and her stepfather suffers
    from hypertension. None of this evidence demonstrates that her presence
    is required or necessary, or that either of  them  relies  on  her  for
    practical or emotional support that cannot be provided by others or the
    state health care system.

16. It is  alleged  that  the  family  left  Nigeria  because  of  violence
    perpetrated by her natural father, with whom she has long  ago  severed
    all links and the bundle contains a police diary extract and  affidavit
    dated 16.5.05 asserting domestic violence. Pursuant  to  Tanveer  Ahmed
    [2002] IAR 318 principles it is for the claimant  to  demonstrate  that
    documents produced are reliable. I have  some  serious  concerns  about
    these Nigerian police and court documents as  although  they  are  both
    dated 16.5.05, the claimant's mother states in the affidavit: "That  on
    the 5th of May 2005 I was in violent attacked by my husband which I was
    injured by my right kneel cap and my hand. That I  spend  more  than  5
    days in the Hospital." It would be impossible for the  attack  to  have
    taken place on 15.5.05 and for the mother  to  have  spent  5  days  in
    hospital, since the affidavit claims on its face  to  have  been  sworn
    before the high court on 16.5.05. In the circumstances, I do not accept
    that these documents can be regarded as reliable and thus I  find  that
    the claimant has failed to  establish  that  the  family  left  Nigeria
    because of domestic violence. However, in the overall scheme of things,
    the  precise  reason  for  leaving  Nigeria  may  not  matter  to   any
    significant degree and I do not hold this against the claimant  in  any
    proportionality balancing exercise.

17. I take fully into account that the  claimant  asserts  in  her  witness
    statement that she has no family or links remaining in Nigeria and that
    her family and private life is fully engaged in the  UK.  The  claimant
    spent what she regards as her formative years in the UK and went on  to
    successfully complete a university degree in Forensic Chemistry, funded
    by her stepfather. She has  many  friends  and  associates  across  her
    community.

18. The refusal decision accepts that the  claimant  will  have  enjoyed  a
    level of private life due to the time she has remained in the  UK.  The
    Secretary of State considered that the claimant failed  to  demonstrate
    that she has no ties, including social cultural or family with Nigeria.
    Nor had she demonstrated that she  had  any  significant  private  life
    connections to the  UK  that  could  not  be  maintained  from  abroad.
    Although the claimant asserted that she had lost all ties  to  Nigeria,
    given the amount of time she spent living in Nigeria before  coming  to
    the UK, the majority of her life and most of her formative  years,  the
    Secretary of State did not accept that social, cultural or family  ties
    do not exist.

19. Further, the refusal decision states that whilst the claimant  spent  a
    number of her formative years in the UK, attending school and going  on
    to further education and will have formed some ties in the UK that  may
    make the impact on her private life the greater if she is removed,  she
    failed to show that her ties in the UK go beyond the  normal  emotional
    ties of a close relationship with her mother and brother, both of  whom
    have no leave to remain in the UK  and  would  likely  be  returned  to
    Nigeria, thereby making adapting to life in Nigeria a lot  easier.  She
    would also be able to take  advantage  of  her  school  qualifications,
    degree and experience in the UK in seeking employment in Nigeria on her
    return. I take all of these matters into account.

20. I am not satisfied that any of  the  circumstances  relied  on,  either
    individually or taken as  a  whole,  in  the  round,  can  properly  be
    described as sufficiently  compelling  to  justify  granting  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules.

21. Even if I were to go on to consider private and family life outside the
    Rules on the basis of an  article  8  ECHR  assessment,  following  the
    Razgar stepped approach, I would find, for the reasons set out  herein,
    that the decision of the Secretary of State is  entirely  proportionate
    and not disproportionate to the  rights  of  the  claimant  and/or  her
    family members in the UK.

22. In relation to family life I am not  satisfied  that  the  relationship
    between the claimant and her mother, brother and stepfather, amount  to
    any more than the normal emotional ties that one might expect from such
    relationships. Whilst she still lives at home,  she  is  now  an  adult
    having spent a number of years at university and should be  making  her
    own way in the world, although still  unemployed.  It  is  increasingly
    common for family members to be spread  across  nations  and  even  the
    world. Whilst such family members may still have tender  affection  for
    each other as part of the same family, that is not the sort  of  family
    life which engages the protection of article 8 ECHR  so  as  to  render
    separation unreasonable. If she has any family life with her mother and
    brother, they have no right to remain in the UK either and may well  be
    returned to Nigeria, and thus their presence in the UK does not support
    the claimant's plea to remain in the UK. In the light of Kugathas, I am
    not satisfied that such family life as enjoyed by the claimant  engaged
    article 8 at all, though it would be a relevant factor in  support  her
    private life claim.

23. I bear in mind that the claimant does  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules in relation to either family or private life in the UK,

24. Whilst the claimant cannot meet the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE,
    that is not the end of  the  matter.  The  Immigration  Rules,  and  in
    particular paragraph 276ADE, are the Secretary of State's proportionate
    response to private and family life claims, incorporated into the Rules
    since 9.7.12 and it is the  test  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  family,
    social and cultural ties by which the proportionality of  the  decision
    should be considered in respect of private life. For applications  made
    after 28.7.14 the test is now the very much more stringent one of "very
    significant obstacles to integration."

25. Even if going on to consider article 8 ECHR outside the  Rules,  it  is
    highly relevant to any subsequent proportionality assessment, following
    the Razgar stepped approach, that the claimant does not meet the Rules.
    Any such assessment of proportionality has to be approached through the
    prism of the Rules.

26. The "new" Rules and Part 5A of the NIA Act 2002 seek to strike a  "fair
    balance"  between  the  competing  interests  under  Art  8   and,   in
    themselves, provide a persuasive statement about  the  relevant  public
    interest consideration which  a  court  or  Tribunal  must  bring  into
    account in striking the proper balance under Art 8. Albeit not  in  the
    context of deportation, in Haleemudeen v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  558,
    Beatson LJ at [40] said that the new Rules in Appendix FM:

         "... are a central part of the legislative and  policy  context  in
         which the interests of immigration control are balanced against the
         interests and rights of people who have come to  this  country  and
         wish to settle in it. Overall, the Secretary of State's  policy  as
         to when an interference with an Article 8 right will be regarded as
         disproportionate is more particularised in the new  Rules  than  it
         has previously been."

27. As a consequence, the court or Tribunal is required  to  give  the  new
    Rules (at [47]): "greater weight than as merely a  starting  point  for
    the consideration  of  the  proportionality  of  an  interference  with
    Article 8 rights" (see also SSHD v SS (Congo) and  Others  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 387).

28. Proper weight has to be given to  the  judgment  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, as expressed in the Rules, regarding what is needed to meet  the
    public interest which was in issue. The relevant requirements under the
    Rules are those of paragraph 276ADE. The claimant has not lived in  the
    UK continuously for 20 years, and being over 18 but under  25  has  not
    spent at least half her  life  living  continuously  in  the  UK.  More
    significantly, the claimant could not demonstrate that she had, by  the
    test applicable at the date of the Secretary of State's decision,  lost
    all ties with Nigeria, including social, cultural or family. The  newer
    test is more stringent and would require the  claimant  to  demonstrate
    that there are very significant obstacles to  integration  in  Nigeria.
    Again, the claimant has failed to  demonstrate  such  very  significant
    obstacles. It is asserted on her behalf that  she  has  no  family  and
    nowhere to go to in Nigeria. However, article 8 does not create a right
    of home or accommodation or even employment for a person  returning  to
    their home country. There may be difficulties and challenges but having
    passed her majority five years ago, the claimant should now  be  making
    her own way in the world. Article 8 is not  a  shortcut  to  compliance
    with the Rules  and  an  applicant's  claim  under  article  8  is  not
    strengthened by the degree to which she fails to meet the  requirements
    of the Rules. The claimant spent the most of  her  formative  years  in
    Nigeria and will  be  better  equipped  to  return  by  reason  of  her
    experience and education in the UK. She  will  not  have  any  language
    barriers on return.

29. Further, in the proportionality balancing exercise  I  am  required  to
    have regard to the public interest considerations under section 117B of
    the 2002 Act, including that  immigration  control  is  in  the  public
    interest. More significantly, little weight  is  to  be  given  to  any
    private life developed in the UK whilst  the  claimant's  presence  was
    precarious and indeed mostly unlawful. Pursuant to  Forman  (ss  117A-C
    considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC), in cases where the  provisions
    of sections 117B-117C of the  2002  Act  arise,  the  decision  of  the
    Tribunal must demonstrate that the public interest considerations  have
    been given full effect.

30. It follows that I can attribute  little  weight  to  any  private  life
    developed by the claimant in the UK, including  her  relationship  with
    her mother, brother and stepfather.

31. Putting all these factors together, considering the case in the  round,
    I find, for the reasons  set  out  above,  that  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State was entirely proportionate and not  disproportionate
    to the family and private life circumstances of the  claimant  and  her
    family members. The balance comes down in favour of removal.

Decision:

32. The appeal is dismissed on both immigration grounds  and  human  rights
    grounds.
                    [pic]
                    Signed


                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an anonymity order. Given the  circumstances,  I  make
no anonymity order.


Fee Award     Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee award.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed and thus there can be no fee award.

                    [pic]
                    Signed


                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated

