
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30785/2015
     ia/11624/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2018                            |On 18 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  JUDE [O]
                                  HELEN [k]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Fisher, instructed by Qualified Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, Jude [O] and Helen [K], are husband and wife,  citizens
    of Nigeria and were  born  respectively  on  6  December  1979  and  11
    November 1981.  They have two children both born in the United  Kingdom
    who are aged 3 years and 1 year.  The appeals are linked and the second
    appellant's appeal is dependent upon that of her husband  who  made  an
    application as an entrepreneur migrant under Tier  1.   By  a  decision
    dated 3 September 2015, that application was refused.   The  appellants
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which dismissed the appeal but that
    decision was reversed by the  Upper  Tribunal  on  appeal.   The  Upper
    Tribunal directed  that  the  decision  be  remade  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated on 24 April 2014,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge O'Rourke) dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant  now
    appeals that decisions, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are three grounds of appeal.  The first ground of appeal concerns
    the judge's analysis of  the  evidence  relating  to  the  entrepreneur
    application.  The appellant asserts that the judge's  conclusions  were
    perverse, and with the judge having found that the appellant (here  and
    subsequently I refer to the first appellant, Mr [O] as the 'appellant')
    did not satisfy the entrepreneur provisions of  HC  395  (as  amended).
    Paragraph 12 of the grounds of  appeal  sets  out  a  detailed  set  of
    references to the evidence adduced by the appellant in support  of  his
    application and which, it is asserted, the judge  either  misunderstood
    or ignored.  The appellant's view of that evidence is  that  it  should
    have led the judge to conclude that there was  sufficient  evidence  to
    show business activity and trading within the relevant period.  Had the
    judge assessed the evidence correctly, he would have decided  that  the
    appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  this,  in
    turn, would have been a factor which impacted on the appeal  which  was
    on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 3. First, I am not satisfied that the judge ignored any of  the  evidence.
    At [28], the judge states that he had "examined all  of  the  documents
    provided by the appellant with his three applications and the  evidence
    he  provided  to  meet  the  above  requirement  ..."  [my   emphasis].
    Thereafter, follows a detailed analysis of the  documentation  provided
    by the appellant.  For example, the judge refers to consultancy service
    agreements with Makejrii-Komo Ltd dating from 2014 some of  which  were
    within the "relevant period" required under the Rules and some which he
    found were not.  The judge observed there were  no  invoices  from  the
    appellant's own company to these third party companies the  requirement
    for which is set out in the contract.  As the  judge  observed,  "apart
    from the money being paid  into  the  bank  accounts  there  is  little
    explanation as to where this money comes from and  why".   The  judge's
    conclusion was that the applications were  "premature"  and  failed  to
    show the requirement as to business activity and trading both predating
    and during the relevant period.  The judge noted  that  it  was  likely
    that the application had been "driven by the need to  make  an  in-time
    application due to the  pending  expiry  of  his  post-study  visa  the
    following day".

 4. The grounds of appeal challenge the judge's findings.  However,  having
    considered the grounds of appeal carefully, I am not satisfied that the
    judge has overlooked or indeed misunderstood the evidence.  This is not
    a case where there was obviously a clear "black letter"  error  on  the
    part of the judge.  Rather, the judge, who I am satisfied  did  examine
    all the evidence, is required to carry out an evaluation and to  decide
    whether or not the respondent had been correct  to  conclude  that  the
    relevant  business  activity  within  the  relevant  period  had   been
    established, to the standard of the balance of  probabilities,  by  the
    material produced by the appellant. It was an exercise  which,  by  its
    nature,  required  an  exercise  of   judgment.   Notwithstanding   the
    appellant's protestations that he  had  proved  the  existence  of  the
    business activity, I find that the judge reached his conclusions by way
    of a thorough and rational assessment of  the  evidence.   In  such  an
    assessment, he was not compelled to take the view of the evidence urged
    upon him by the appellant.

 5. Secondly, this is, as I have observed above, an  appeal  on  Article  8
    ECHR grounds.  Unlike, for example, Appendix FM, compliance with  which
    is very likely to indicate success in an Article 8 ECHR appeal,  it  is
    not clear to me why the  mere  fact  that  the  appellant  may  satisfy
    provisions concerning an entrepreneur migrant should indicate a  breach
    of Article 8.  Whilst Appendix FM is, in effect, a codification of  the
    law relating to Article 8, it is difficult to see any relation  between
    the requirements for obtaining an entrepreneur visa and the appellant's
    private and family life other than that the appellant and  his  family,
    had they persuaded the Secretary of State that the  appellant  met  the
    entrepreneur provisions, would have enjoyed a further period  of  leave
    to remain. Even if the appellant had persuaded the judge  that  he  met
    the entrepreneur provisions, it did not follow that he  should  succeed
    under Article 8 ECHR. In any event, I am satisfied that it was open  to
    the  judge  to  reject  the  appellant's  assertion  that  he  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 6. The appellant asserts that his family are able  to  speak  English  and
    that they would make a positive contribution  to  the  UK  economy  and
    society. The judge has concluded that family life may be  continued  in
    Nigeria, the country of which both appellants and  their  children  are
    citizens. The parents of the children have no right to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom and the judge concluded that their best interests  would
    be met if they accompany their parents to Nigeria.

 7. The grounds complain that the judge failed to have regard to  the  best
    interests of the children, in particular the interests of  the  son  of
    the first and second appellants who may or may  not  be  autistic.  The
    judge sets out his findings on Article 8 at [41].  The judge notes  the
    uncertainty over the diagnosis of the son's condition,  observing  that
    there is "no definite diagnosis" and that "the family  support  worker"
    had made the only firm suggestion that the child is autistic  "with  no
    indication as to this person trading  or  expertise  to  make  such  an
    assessment".  Faced with uncertainty over  the  diagnosis,  I  consider
    that the judge correctly concluded that "the available evidence [shows]
    that the child will need  considerable  care  and  attention  from  his
    parents" in any event and notwithstanding any eventual diagnosis. It is
    difficult to see  what  else  the  judge  may  have  concluded  in  the
    circumstances. What is clear from the judge's analysis is that there is
    no question that the child requires a sophisticated drug or drug regime
    or medical interventions.  The judge made  the  reasonable  observation
    that, whether or not the child  lives  in  Nigeria  or  in  the  United
    Kingdom, "the bulk of the responsibility for his care will fall on [his
    parents]".  The difficulty for the judge was that  he  was  seeking  to
    make findings in the almost  complete  absence  of  evidence  regarding
    support organisations or other relevant medical facilities which  might
    assist the child in Nigeria.  In the light of what the Tribunal knew at
    the date of the hearing, the finding that the child  will  require  the
    close attention and care of his parents  represented  a  legally  sound
    outcome to his assessment of best  interests.   That  finding  led,  in
    turn, to the judge's conclusion that  the  two  children  who  are  not
    "qualifying children" for the purposes of Section 117 of the  2002  Act
    could return to continue  their  family  life  with  their  parents  in
    Nigeria.

 8. For the reasons I have given above, the judge  reached  findings  which
    were available to him following an anxious  scrutiny  of  the  relevant
    evidence. The grounds of appeal contain nothing which would lead me  to
    interfere with the outcome of the appeal.  In  the  circumstances,  the
    appeals are dismissed

Notice of Decision

These appeals are dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 1 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 1 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

