
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30251/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC)                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham Employment Tribunal       |                                     |
|On 8th September 2015                |On 11th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             CYNTHIA AMAKA OKOLO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Ruparelia instructed by Just Legal Group


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant (hereafter the SSHD) sought and was granted permission to
    appeal a decision of the First-tier Tribunal which allowed  the  appeal
    of Ms Okolo on Article  8  grounds  to  the  limited  extent  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law and the appellant awaited a
    lawful decision.

 2. Mr Ruparelia agreed that there had been no 'cross-appeal' and that  the
    decision by the FtT dismissing the appeal under the EEA Regulations was
    not challenged.

 3. The SSHD's decision the subject of the appeal stated

    "Since  you  have  not  made  a  valid  application   for   Article   8
    consideration, consideration has not been  given  as  to  whether  your
    removal from the UK would breach Article 8"

 4. Hence the basis of the FtT decision.  Permission  was  granted  on  the
    grounds that the FtT judge had erred in failing to  understand  firstly
    that Ms Okolo could and should have made an application  on  Article  8
    grounds which she  had  not  done;  secondly  because  the  appeal  was
    dismissed under the EEA  Regulations  for  the  reasons  given  in  the
    refusal letter then it could not at the  same  time  be  allowed  under
    Article 8 on those grounds and be remitted to the SSHD for  a  decision
    and thirdly that there was  nothing  to  prevent  the  FtT  judge  from
    reaching a decision on that ground in any event.

 5. Mr Ruparelia relied upon Granovski [2015] EWHC  1478  (Admin)  where  a
    deputy High Court Judge held that the SSHD had  a  residual  discretion
    derived from statue which required Article 8 to be considered.

 6. In Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals: human rights) [2015] UKUT (IAC)
    it was held that where no s120 notice had been served and where no  EEA
    decision to remove had been made, an appellant  cannot  bring  a  human
    rights challenge to removal in an appeal under the EEA regulations.  It
    does not appear that the Deputy High  Court  Judge  had  his  attention
    drawn to any of the relevant caselaw with regard to  this  issue,  such
    caselaw being analysed in Amirteymour.

 7. On that basis I am satisfied  that  the  FtT  judge  erred  in  law  in
    allowing the appeal to the limited extent he did. Furthermore  had  the
    judge considered a decision on Article 8  should  have  been  taken  he
    should in any event proceeded to make it in accordance with the grounds
    of appeal relied upon.

 8. I set aside the decision of the FtT.

 9. I remake the decision by dismissing it - there is no obligation or duty
    upon the SSHD to make an Article 8 decision absent an application being
    made. The Tribunal was not and is not required to determine an  Article
    8 ground of appeal in these  circumstances  -  particularly  where  the
    appellant (as in this case) was not required to leave the  UK  and  had
    extant leave to remain under the Immigration Rules.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing  Ms  Okolo's  appeal
    against the decision of the SSHD dated 15th July 2014 on all grounds


     Date 10th September 2015
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
