
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30556/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 1 July 2015                                | On 14 August 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mujibur rahman
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Ahmed, Counsel


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant's appeal against  a  decision  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom, made on 14 July 2014, came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Majid  ("the  judge")  on  30  January  2015.   In  a   decision
    promulgated on 4 February 2015, the judge allowed the appeal.

2.   The adverse immigration decision was made shortly after  the  Secretary
    of State refused an application for indefinite leave to remain, made by
    the appellant on the basis that he is a victim of domestic violence. He
    entered the United Kingdom on 6 October 2011 and  was  given  leave  to
    enter as a spouse.  Following the breakdown of his marriage  his  leave
    was curtailed,  so  as  to  end  on  24  June  2013.  He  submitted  an
    application for indefinite leave as a victim of  domestic  violence  in
    December that year but this was rejected in February 2014.  He  made  a
    further application in the same category in June that year, giving rise
    in due course to his appeal.

3.   In the decision, the judge recorded that he had carefully read  all  of
    the documents. He went on to find that  the  appellant's  evidence  was
    "unreliable  because  on  his  behalf  it  was  asserted  that  he  was
    depressed".  He recorded a conversation between the Presenting  Officer
    and the appellant's representative, Mr Ahmed, and  their  agreement  to
    "remittal of the case".  The judge recorded that he  agreed  with  that
    submission and he suggested that the  appellant  should  file  evidence
    "one month before the hearing" so that the  Secretary  of  State  might
    consider it.  In  the  final  paragraph  of  the  decision,  the  judge
    concluded as follows:

         "I am persuaded that the appellant's case should  be  remitted  for
         the  respondent  to  make  a  new  decision  under   the   relevant
         Immigration Rules as amended. For clarity I must say that, to avoid
         any anxiety to the appellant meanwhile, my decision is expressed as
         'appeal allowed'."

4.   The Secretary of State applied for  permission  to  appeal,  contending
    that the judge erred in failing to give adequate reasons for  disposing
    of the appeal by "remitting" the matter  to  the  Secretary  of  State.
    There was no finding that the decision was not in accordance  with  the
    law or that it was unlawful in any way.  The judge appeared  to  accept
    that  the  appellant's  evidence  was  unreliable,  as  a   result   of
    depression, but there appeared to be no  medical  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal and so any finding to this effect was unsafe.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted on 23 March 2015.  The judge  granting
    permission found that it was arguable that the judge erred  in  failing
    to either adjourn the appeal or give proper and  adequate  reasons  for
    allowing it.

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Mr Duffy said  that  he  relied  on  the  grounds  in  support  of  the
    application.  In sending the decision back to the Secretary  of  State,
    the judge must have intended to find that it was not in accordance with
    the law but he had not expressly found this to be so and failed to give
    reasons supporting his decision.  The Secretary of  State  refused  the
    application for leave in the light of paragraph 289A of the Immigration
    Rules and also considered paragraph 276ADE.

7.   Mr Ahmed said  that  the  decision  was  free  from  legal  error.   At
    paragraph 7, the judge  made  a  clear  finding  that  the  appellant's
    evidence was unreliable by reason of depression and  he  recorded  that
    the appellant was struggling to recall minor matters.  The judge  found
    that he could not assess the Presenting Officer's submission  regarding
    credibility, as a result.

8.   The evidence showed that  the  appellant  suffered  from  a  depressive
    episode.   Although the determination was not as clear as it might have
    been, the judge did not err in allowing the appeal. Mr Ahmed said  that
    he recalled a conversation with the Presenting Officer on  the  day  of
    the hearing.  The  Secretary  of  State  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant suffered from mental ill health and so it was agreed that  if
    documentary evidence of this were made available, together with  police
    evidence supporting the domestic violence case, the Secretary of  State
    ought to consider it.

9.   Mr Ahmed said that the appellant had a  letter  from  the  Metropolitan
    Police dated 2 June 2015,  seeking  proof  of  his  identity.   In  his
    skeleton argument, Mr Ahmed drew attention to chapter 8, section  4  of
    the relevant IDI.  Home Office policy required a domestic violence case
    to be assessed in the light of evidence from one  or  more  of  several
    sources.  The appellant had a letter from a family doctor,  written  in
    January 2015 and a statement from a  community  group.  The  judge  had
    assessed the oral evidence.

10.  After the hearing, a psychiatric report was  sent,  together  with  the
    police report form. This was sent first in February 2015  and  then  to
    the Upper Tribunal in June this year.  The  judge  had  suggested  that
    documentary evidence should be sent to the Secretary of State.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11.  Notwithstanding Mr Ahmed's valiant attempt to defend  the  decision,  I
    have no hesitation in accepting Mr Duffy's submission that the decision
    contains a material error of law and that it must be  set  aside.   The
    judge has, with great respect, failed to adequately reason his decision
    to allow the appeal. His finding that the appellant's oral evidence was
    unreliable, perhaps because of depression, and the  apparent  agreement
    he  noted  between  the  Presenting   Officer   and   the   appellant's
    representative that the  Secretary  of  State  might  consider  further
    evidence do not, singly or in combination,  amount  to  a  sustainable,
    reasoned justification for the decision to allow the appeal.

12.  The appellant's application  for  indefinite  leave,  as  a  victim  of
    domestic violence, was accompanied by a few  documents.   In  response,
    the Secretary of State gave reasons for finding that  the  requirements
    of the rules were not met.  The  judge  failed  to  engage  with  those
    reasons and, save for  appearing  to  accept  that  the  appellant  was
    depressed, there was also no real engagement with the appellant's  case
    that the requirements of the rules have been met.

13.  If the judge formed the view that evidence of  the  appellant's  mental
    ill health was capable of having a substantial impact on the case,  and
    if the Presenting Officer appeared reluctant to continue in the absence
    of such evidence, the proper course might  have  been  to  consider  an
    adjournment. It is not clear from the decision  why  it  was  that  the
    judge instead allowed the appeal.

14.  Mr Duffy said that in the light  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement, at paragraph 7.2(a),  the  proper  venue  for  remaking  the
    decision  is  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Mr  Ahmed   agreed.    Short
    directions accompany this decision.

DECISION

15.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and is set aside. the decision will be  remade  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, at Taylor House, before a judge other than Judge Majid.


No anonymity direction has been applied for and I make no direction on  this
occasion.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell








