
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30709/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 3RD August 2016                   |On 8TH August 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR ALEX SEGNOU FOMBASSO
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T. Melvin (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms V. Akitola (Legal representative)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this matter is the Secretary  of  State  and  I  shall
    refer to the parties as "the Secretary of State" and to Mr Fombasso  as
    "the Claimant".  This is an error of law  hearing  that comes before me
    for consideration as to whether or not there is a material error of law
    in  the  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal   (Judge   Barber)   (FtT)
    promulgated on 5th February 2016 in which the appeal  of  the  Claimant
    was allowed under  the  EEA  (Immigration  )  Regulations  2006  ("2006
    Regulations"). The appeal was determined on the papers.

Background

2.   The Claimant is a national of the Cameroon and he entered the UK  as  a
    student under the PBS.  He married an EEA national from France on  27th
    July 2009 and on 16th November 2011 he was issued with a residence card
    as a family member for a period of 5 years.  He and his  wife  divorced
    on 3rd March 2015. He applied for permanent  residence  on  27th  March
    2015 under Regulation 15(1)(f) of the 2006 Regulations  with  reference
    to Regulation 10(5). This was refused by the Secretary of State on 28th
    August 2015 because he failed to provide evidence that his former  wife
    was exercising Treaty rights at the time of the  divorce,  as  required
    under Regulation 10(5).

3.   In the  refusal  letter  the  Secretary  of  State  accepted  that  the
    marriage lasted for 3 years and that the parties had lived together for
    a period of at least 1 year for the purposes of Regulation  10(5).  The
    Claimant was also required to provide evidence that he was residing  in
    accordance with the Regulations  at  the  time  of  the  divorce.   The
    refusal was worded in terms of the lack of evidence to  show  that  the
    EEA national was exercising Treaty rights. The  refusal  letter  stated
    "In addition as your application is for permanent  residence  you  must
    show that you have resided in accordance with  the  regulations  for  a
    continuous period of five year period which would mean  that  your  EEA
    spouse continuously exercised free movement rights up to  the  date  of
    divorce and that you have been employed, self employed ...  since  your
    divorce.  Collectively this must cover a continuous period of  5  years
    to meet Regulation 15(1)(f).

4.   The FtT found that  there  was  evidence  that  the  EEA  national  was
    exercising Treaty rights at the time  of  the  divorce  and  relied  on
    evidence of  a wage slip dated March 2015.  It found that the  Claimant
    met the requirements of Regulation 10(5).The appeal was allowed on  EEA
    grounds.

5.   In grounds of application for permission the Secretary of State  argued
    that the FtT erred by failing to consider that  the  Claimant  had  not
    established 5 years residence in accordance with the Regulations.   The
    start date was December 2011 and as at the date of divorce the Claimant
    had established only three years  and  3  months  residence  and  would
    therefore not be entitled to permanent residence until  December  2016.
    For a retained  right  of  residence  the  Claimant  had  not  met  the
    Regulations.  The relevant date was the date of the  hearing  (Boodhoo)
    at which point the Claimant  had  to  show  that  he  was  residing  in
    accordance with the Regulations.

6.   Permission was granted on the  grounds  argued  and  the  Claimant  was
    advised to obtain legal advice.

Submissions

7.   At the hearing before me Mr  Melvin  conceded  that  the  Claimant  had
    established a retained right of residence (Regulation 10(5))  as  there
    was evidence that the sponsor was exercising Treaty rights at the  time
    of the divorce with the wage slip dated March 2015.  But he argued that
    he was not entitled to permanent residence  given  the  start  date  of
    December 2011.  Ms Akitola produced a skeleton argument  and  submitted
    that the Claimant did meet the Regulations  10(5)  and  15(1)(f)  which
    were worded in the alternative in terms of the Claimant or the  sponsor
    showing  that  Treaty  rights  were  exercised.  She  relied  on  Ahmed
    (AmosZambrano) Reg 15A(3)(c)2006EEA Regulations  Pakistan(Rev1)  [2013]
    UKUT 89 (IAC)[49].

Discussion and conclusion

8.   It is now accepted  that the Claimant  meets Regulation 10(5)  and  has
    a retained right of residence as there was evidence before the  FtT  to
    show that his EEA national spouse was exercising Treaty rights  at  the
    time of  the divorce.  This was the issue under  appeal  that  the  FtT
    determined and allowed the appeal. I am satisfied  that  there  was  no
    error there.  There seems to have been some confusion  about  the  wage
    slip issue whether it is in relation to the Claimant or his EEA Spouse.
     The issue relating to the EEA spouse was raised in the refusal  letter
    under  Regulation  10(5)  regarding  evidence  of  the   EEA   national
    exercising Treaty rights at the time of the divorce.  That  matter  was
    resolved in the Claimant's favour.  However, the grounds of application
    for permission and indeed the grant of permission focus on the issue in
    Boodhoo  and  another  (EEA  Regs;  relevant  evidence)   [2013]   UKUT
    00346(IAC) which held that  evidence can be taken into  account  as  at
    the date of hearing to show the Regulations are met.  This was  not  an
    issue that was considered by the FtT. The decision in  Boodhoo  allowed
    for evidence at the date of hearing to be taken into  account,  it  did
    not require the FtT to look at the facts at  the  date  of  hearing  as
    suggested in the grounds of application.  However, I find that the  FtT
    failed to go on to consider Regulation 15(1)(f) which   is  a  material
    error of law. The Claimant provided evidence to show he  was  a  worker
    from April 2010 - March 2015 but none since  the  divorce.   Mr  Melvin
    argued that the  Regulations  required  that  the  5  years  continuous
    residence must be evidenced as at the date of hearing and in any  event
    the Claimant had not shown 5 years from 2011. He was issued a residence
    card on 16.11.2011 as a family member. He needed to  produce  not  only
    evidence that he met Regulation 10(5) but also to cover the whole of  a
    five year period. The  Secretary  of  State  took  the  start  date  as
    December 2011 and calculated 3 years  and  three  months  residence  in
    accordance with the Regulations. Issue was taken as to  the  period  of
    continuous residence in the refusal letter and this  was  therefore  an
    issue that the FtT ought to have gone on to consider but did  not.  The
    error arose in that the FtT failed to  go  on  to  consider  Regulation
    15(1)(f) in terms of the evidence to show 5 years continuous residence.

Decision

9.   There is a material error of law in the decision  which  shall  be  set
    aside although the findings and decision  as  to  Regulation  10(5)  is
    preserved.

Remaking the decision

10.  On the evidence that was before the FtT  the  Claimant  has  not  shown
    that he has established 5 years continuous residence in accordance with
    the Regulations and at the end of that period has a retained  right  of
    residence. He has a retained right of residence under Regulation  10(5)
    but the  evidence  dating  from  2011  fails  to  show  that  he  meets
    Regulation 15(1)(f) in terms of continuous 5 year period or that he  is
    exercising Treaty rights. The start date for under Regulation  15(1)(f)
    unlike for Regulation 15(b) is not the date of  marriage  (EEA  Regs  -
    civil partnership Thailand (2009) UKAIT 00014.  The Claimant will  have
    completed the five year period on  16.11.2016.  The  skeleton  argument
    does not deal with this issue and  focuses  solely  on  that  regarding
    Regulation 10(5).  Miss Akintola  erred  in  her  submission  that  the
    reasons for refusal raised no issue as to the 5 year period.  As is set
    out above [3] it did and this was an issue that remained to be resolved
    in terms of evidence.  The documents produced dated from 2011.

Decision

12.  The appeal under Regulation 15(1)(f) is dismissed.




                               Signed        Date 5.8.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal








                               NO ANONYMITY ORDER
                               NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed        Date 5.8.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


