
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30240/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 5th February 2015                          |On 11th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     M L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C Warren, Counsel, instructed by Kirklees Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Myers made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 22nd September 2014.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 9th August  1989.   She
    entered into an arranged marriage in Pakistan on 27th October 2010  and
    arrived in the UK on 10th August 2011 as a spouse.   The  marriage  was
    unhappy and the judge accepted that it was abusive from the start.

 3. Her husband brought her to her uncle's house in Halifax in August  2013
    and told her that she had to stay there whilst he sorted  out  a  house
    for them to live in in  Bradford.  He  said  he  would  deal  with  her
    application for leave to remain as a spouse  which  was  made  on  19th
    August 2013.

 4. In November 2013 the Appellant  was  interviewed  in  relation  to  her
    application which was subsequently refused on 20th January 2014 on  the
    grounds that the Appellant was no longer living with her husband.

 5. On the instructions of her uncle an  appeal  was  lodged  against  that
    decision and the appeal was listed for hearing on 4th June 2014.

 6. Meanwhile the Appellant had visited the Women's Centre in February 2014
    after being given information about it by her doctor and, on 18th March
    2014, she reported threats made against her  by  her  husband  and  his
    family to  the  police.  They  took  no  action  and  a  complaint  has
    subsequently been made about the way they handled the case.

 7. On 2nd July 2014 the Appellant withdrew her  original  application  and
    submitted the present application for indefinite leave to remain as the
    victim of domestic violence.

 8. The judge found the evidence to  be  inconsistent.   For  example,  the
    Appellant's friend said that she had a phone and she was able to  phone
    her although the Appellant's evidence was that she was  not  allowed  a
    phone.  The Appellant claimed that she  had  little  support  from  her
    uncle and his family but she had  lived  at  her  uncle's  house  since
    August 2013 and they have obtained help for her  by  taking  her  to  a
    doctor and the advice agency as well as arranging  the  appeal  against
    the refusal for indefinite leave to remain.

 9. The judge said that the appellant gave evidence that she had  told  the
    doctor that her husband was violent towards her but the doctor's letter
    makes no mention of violence.  She claimed that she was threatened that
    if she told anyone about the abuse she would meet the same fate as  her
    husband's ex-wife, although she  now  believes  that  her  husband  has
    returned to her and they are living together in Bradford.

10. She rejected the claim that her husband and his family had arranged the
    death of her brother.

11. The judge accepted that the Appellant was very unhappy in her marriage,
    and  consequently  suffered  from  depression,  but  that  whilst   the
    emotional abuse she  suffered  would  come  within  the  definition  of
    domestic abuse, it fell short of violence.

12. Her principal conclusion was that the domestic abuse did not cause  the
    marriage  to  break  down.   She  referred  to  the  evidence  in   the
    Appellant's appeal statement which was that so far as she was concerned
    her relationship was subsisting  even  in  November  2013  because  her
    husband had told her that he would come back to get her once the  house
    was  sorted.   She  made  it  clear  that  she  intended  to  tell  the
    immigration officials in November 2013 that she was  only  living  with
    her uncle on a temporary basis and that her husband kept  promising  to
    take her to live with him but never did.

13. The judge then wrote as follows:

         "When pressed she said that she would not have gone with him if  he
         had returned to her because of his  past  behaviour.   However  the
         prevarication and inconsistencies in the evidence lead me  to  find
         that in the culture from which the Appellant comes she  would  have
         been prepared to go along with the wishes of her family and  return
         to her husband because she would have been  reluctant to admit that
         the  marriage  had  failed.  Understandably  she  would  have  been
         reluctant to return to the abusive household  she  had  encountered
         but in my judgement she would have returned to her husband  had  he
         not abandoned her in favour of  his ex-wife."

14. The judge stated that there was no credible reason given for the  delay
    in submitting the application on the basis of domestic  violence  since
    she had been in receipt of medical attention and help from the  women's
    care centre  since  February  2014.   She  concluded  that  whilst  the
    marriage was abusive from the outset it did not break down  permanently
    until some time after November 2013 when it became  apparent  that  the
    Appellant's husband had abandoned her at her uncle's and  had  returned
    to his ex-wife.

The Grounds of Application

15. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to consider relevant evidence, namely that from the  Women's
    Centre, and the numerous letters submitted by her confirming  that  her
    behaviour mirrored and reflected that of someone who was  subjected  to
    domestic abuse.  Furthermore the judge had erred in refusing the appeal
    on the basis that no  physical  abuse  had  taken  place  which  was  a
    material error of law. Moreover the judge had overly relied on  unclear
    and speculative findings by making reference to the milieu  from  which
    the Appellant came.

16. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge De  Haney  on  26th  November
    2014.

17. On 4th December 2014  the  Respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Submissions

18. Miss  Warren  submitted  that  the  determination  was  not  adequately
    reasoned and that the judge had reached a perverse decision in reaching
    a decision not open to her on the evidence.  There  was  no  basis  for
    her conclusion that the marriage did not break  down  until  some  time
    after November 2013.  She had not dealt with the threats  made  to  the
    Appellant in October 2013 and had improperly relied on her own view  of
    what women from a South Asian  culture  would  do  in  the  Appellant's
    situation.

19. Mr Diwnycz defended the determination and submitted that the judge  had
    relied on the Appellant's own evidence and reached a conclusion open to
    her.



Findings and Conclusions

20. First, with respect to ground 1, the judge  was  not  obliged  to  make
    reference to the letters submitted  by  various  organisations  on  the
    Appellant's behalf because she accepted that the marriage  was  abusive
    from the start.

21. Second, the judge did not dismiss the appeal on the basis that she  was
    not satisfied that there had been violence  but  because  she  was  not
    satisfied that the emotional abuse led to the breakdown of the marriage
    within the currency of the Appellant's visa.

22. Third, the judge did not base her conclusion that the marriage had  not
    broken down until some time after November 2013  upon  her  observation
    that women from South Asia were likely to return to their husbands  but
    upon the Appellant's own evidence that, so far as she was concerned, in
    November 2013 the relationship was subsisting.  The  passing  reference
    to cultural norms was immaterial.

23. In order to succeed in this application the Appellant had to show  that
    the relationship was caused to breakdown before the end of her visa  as
    a result of domestic abuse.  The relevant date is August 2013.   As  at
    that date the Appellant's husband was supportive of a claim for her  to
    be allowed to  remain in the UK as  his  spouse.   On  the  Appellant's
    evidence he took her to her uncle's home on what  she  believed  was  a
    temporary basis.  There is no basis for Miss Warren's  submission  that
    threats were  made  to  her  in  October  2013.   The  application  for
    indefinite leave was pursued until June 2014 and it was  only  at  that
    stage that it was withdrawn and the present application  for  leave  on
    the basis of domestic violence was made.

24. Miss Warren relied on the case of AG (India) v  SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  Civ
    1534 for the proposition that clear reasons have  to  be  given  for  a
    rejection of the Appellant's account, but in this  case  those  reasons
    were given.  In any event,  in  AG  (India),  the  judge  rejected  the
    Appellant's account as a whole and the Court of Appeal said that  clear
    and forceful reasoning to explain why such a course was being taken was
    required. Here the judge accepted the basic evidence of an abusive  and
    unhappy marriage, but that  in  itself  does  not  establish  that  the
    requirements of the Rules have been met.

Decision

25. The original judge did not err  in  law.   The  Appellant's  appeal  is
    dismissed.



Signed.

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor     Date 10th February 2015
