
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30030/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 July 2017                                |On 12 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mr Yasir Ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gajjar, Counsel, instructed by M-R Solicitors
(Larkshall Rd)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision  of
    Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Rayner,  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 24 October 2016 allowed  the  appeal  of  Mr  Yasir  Ali
    against a decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  him  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds.  I will for ease of reference refer  to
    the Secretary of State as the respondent as she was the  respondent  in
    the First-tier and similarly I will  refer  to  Mr  Yasir  Ali  as  the
    appellant as he was the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  4  October  1989.   He
    entered Britain as a student in February 2011 and had leave  to  remain
    in that capacity until March 2012.  Further applications for  leave  to
    remain as a student were unsuccessful.  He then made an application  on
    2 December 2014 for leave to remain on private and family life grounds.
     That application was based on the fact that he had  a  partner,  [KS],
    who later changed her name by deed poll to [AA], and that  he  was  the
    father of [MA], born on [ ] 2014, and the stepfather of [AS],  who  was
    his partner's son by a previous relationship.  [AS] had been born on  [
    ] 2008.  Since the decision was made  to  refuse  the  application  the
    appellant and [KS] have a second child, [HA], born on [  ]  2016.   The
    appellant's partner and all three children are British citizens.

3.   The application was refused on the basis that the appellant  could  not
    fall within the requirements of Section EX.1 and  furthermore  that  he
    had failed or had  fraudulently  claimed  to  have  passed  an  English
    language test in March 2012 in  connection  with  his  application  for
    leave to remain as a student.

4.   The judge considered evidence regarding the English language  test  and
    came to the conclusion that the appellant had put forward evidence that
    was fraudulent with regard to  his  English  language  test.   He  then
    considered the application outside the Rules.  He  set  out  the  usual
    Razgar formula in paragraph 30 of the determination and considered  the
    application under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  He concluded that it  would
    be disproportionate for the applicant to be expected to leave.  He took
    that  position  having  taken  into  account  relevant  Supreme   Court
    decisions, that is, ZH (Tanzania) and Zoumbas.  He also considered  the
    decision in EV (Philippines).  He referred to the best interests of the
    children and on that basis allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

5.   The focus of an appeal of this sort is now that of the  application  of
    Section 117B(6) of the Rules.  The terms of that Section make it  clear
    that in the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation  the
    public interest does not require the person's removal  where  it  would
    not be reasonable to expect a child to leave the United Kingdom.  Under
    the terms of the interpretation of that Section (at section 117 (D)) it
    is stated that it is not reasonable to expect a British child to  leave
    the United Kingdom.

6.   That  Section  has  been  considered  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    Immigration Directorate Instructions, the IDI being  "Family  Migration
    Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life  (as  a  Partner  or  Parent)  and
    Private Life: 10-Year Routes".  The guidance at paragraph 11.2.3  deals
    with the issue of whether or not it would be unreasonable to  expect  a
    British Citizen child to leave the UK, and the conclusion of the IDI is
    that it would be unreasonable.

7.   This was an issue which was considered by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
    case of SF and others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 120
    (IAC).  The Tribunal, who had quite properly been informed of the terms
    of the IDI  by  the  Presenting  Officer  in  that  case,  reached  the
    conclusion that in cases of this  sort  it  would  be  unreasonable  to
    expect a British child to leave. That being  the  case  the  judge  was
    correct to allow the appeal.

8.   I therefore consider that there is no material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Judge and the appeal of  the  Secretary
    of State is dismissed and the appeal remains allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is of the Secretary of State is dismissed. The  decision  of  the
judge in the First-tier to allow the appeal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]                          Date 11 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

