
[pic]
Self-Typed

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30452/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12 November 2014                             |On 18 November 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                           mr taha bin sohail zaki
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     none
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Shepherd sitting at Taylor House on 10  July
    2014) dismissing his appeal on the papers against the decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made on 2 July 2013 to  refuse  his  application  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 Student Migrant, and  to  make
    directions for his removal under s.47 of the 2006 Act.  The  First-tier
    tribunal did not make an anonymity order, and I do  not  consider  that
    such an order is required for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The ground of refusal was that no valid CAS number had  been  submitted
    with his application, and so he did not qualify for the award of points
    under Appendix A.

 3. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier tribunal  were  unspecific  and
    formulaic. His then representatives contended that the decision was not
    in accordance with the law, and their client's rights under  Article  8
    had been violated.

 4. The appellant initially asked for an oral hearing, but on 9  July  2013
    he submitted a thin bundle  of  documents  (which  included  a  witness
    statement) in support of his  appeal  and  asked  that  his  appeal  be
    determined on the papers without the need for him to attend in person.

 5.  In  her  subsequent  determination,  Judge  Shepherd  considered   the
    appellant's evidence and the documents before her. She  concluded  that
    the refusal decision was in accordance with the rules  and  that  there
    had been no breach of evidential flexibility principles, applying  SSHD
    v Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2.

 6. The appellant applied for permission to appeal.  He  acknowledged  that
    the judge had given a detailed decision, but she  had  not  appreciated
    that the college had been removed from the Tier 4 list and so  the  CAS
    could not be issued. So his non-compliance with the  rules  arose  from
    circumstances beyond his control.

 7. Judge Cox granted permission on 3 October 2014. The grounds  failed  to
    show an arguable case for saying that the FTT judge had erred in law in
    finding that he did not meet  the  rules.  But  as  the  appellant  was
    unrepresented, he had looked more widely for an  obvious  error.  There
    was an obvious arguable error in that the judge had not dealt with  the
    issue of common law unfairness or the appeal on Article 8 private  life
    grounds.

 8. At the hearing before me, I was satisfied that the appellant  had  been
    properly served with the Notice Of Hearing at his  last  known  address
    given in the application for permission to appeal, and that  there  was
    no procedural unfairness in hearing  his  appeal  in  his  absence.  Mr
    Armstrong relied on the Rule 24 response dated 16 October 2014, and  on
    Nasim and others (Article 8) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 25 (Nasim No 2).

Discussion

 9. Contrary to what is said in the grant of permission, the judge did  not
    forget to deal with  the  common  law  unfairness  issue.  As  well  as
    addressing the question of evidential flexibility  at  paragraph  [39],
    she directly addressed at paragraph [40] the appellant's  case,  citing
    Patel and Thakur, that he should have been granted  60  days  leave  to
    obtain a new CAS letter from a new college  as  a  consequence  of  his
    original college being delisted while the application was pending.  She
    gave adequate reasons for finding that the appellant was  not  entitled
    to relief on common law unfairness grounds, and the  assertion  in  the
    application for permission is misconceived. It is not the case that the
    judge failed to appreciate the appellant's case that  his  college  had
    been delisted. The judge recognised that this was his case,  but  found
    that the appellant had not proved that the college had  been  delisted,
    or when it had been delisted, and that therefore he had not shown  that
    his failure to produce a  valid  CAS  was  due  to  his  college  being
    delisted between the date of application and the date of decision.

10. It is  true  that  the  judge  did  not  address  in  her  findings  an
    alternative claim under Article 8 ECHR. The  appellant  relied  on  CDS
    (Brazil), as the judge noted at paragraph [31].

11. I am not however persuaded that  the  judge's  failure  to  address  an
    Article 8 claim based on CDS (Brazil)  considerations  was  a  material
    error in the light of (a) the new rules on private life claims and  (b)
    the more recent jurisprudence on private life claims  by  students  who
    fail to bring themselves within the rules.

12. The evidence relied upon did not disclose a viable private  life  claim
    under Rule 276ADE.  As to a claim outside the  rules,  Lord  Carnwath's
    observation in Patel and Others at paragraph [57] is highly  pertinent.
    He said that Article 8 "is concerned with private or family  life,  not
    education as such.  The opportunity for a promising student to complete
    his course in this country, however desirable in general terms, is  not
    in itself a right protected under Article 8".

13. In Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 Lord Bingham said at [17]:
         In considering whether a challenge to the Secretary of State's
         decision to remove a person must clearly fail, the reviewing court
         must, as it seems to me, consider how an appeal would be likely to
         fare before an adjudicator, as the tribunal responsible for
         deciding the appeal if there were an appeal. This means that the
         reviewing court must ask itself essentially the questions which
         would have to be answered by an adjudicator. In a case where
         removal is resisted in reliance on article 8, these questions are
         likely to be:
         (1)  Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public
         authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for
         his private or (as the case may be) family life?
         (2)  If so, will such interference have consequences of such
         gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?
         (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
         (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society
         in the interests of national security, public safety or the
         economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder
         or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the
         protection of the rights and freedoms of others?
         (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate
         public end sought to be achieved?

14. Questions 1 and 2 of the Razgar test fell to be answered in  favour  of
    the appellant, as he had entered the UK as a  student  on  23  December
    2009.  It cannot be disputed that questions 3 and 4 of the Razgar  test
    fell to be answered in favour of the respondent.  On  the  question  of
    proportionality, the only non-standard feature in this case (see Nagre)
    was the argument, rejected by the judge, that the  appellant  had  been
    the victim of circumstances beyond his control. Otherwise there were no
    compassionate or compelling circumstances which disclosed arguably good
    grounds for allowing a student appeal on private life  grounds  outside
    the rules.

15. So, in the light of the judge's primary findings  of  fact,  there  was
    only one possible answer to an Article 8 claim outside the rules, which
    is that the proposed interference was proportionate.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal  did  not
    contain an error of law, and the decision stands.

Anonymity


The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

Signed        Date 18 November 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson



