
[pic]
IAC-fH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30512/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th July, 2015                   |On 4th August, 2015                  |
|Given extempore                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
                          Upper Tribunal Judge Ward


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Ms Maria Marlene Both
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Appearance by the respondent but her son was
present.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and to avoid confusion I shall refer to  her  as  being  the
    "claimant".  The respondent, Maria Marlene Both, is a citizen of Brazil
    who was born on 26th February, 1956.  She  originally  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on 7th August, 2003, on a six month visitor's visa.  She
    had come to visit her son and while  here  she  decided  to  study  the
    English language.  She was granted subsequent student visas until  31st
    May, 2006.

2.   The respondent's son was married to a Portuguese  national  and  before
    the expiry of her student visa, the respondent applied for a  residence
    card as confirmation of her right to reside in the United Kingdom as  a
    non-European Economic Area national family member of  her  daughter-in-
    law.  She was granted a residence card valid from 9th January, 2007  to
    9th January, 2012.  She subsequently made application for  a  permanent
    residence card, but her application to the claimant was  refused.   She
    appealed and her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  O'Flynn
    sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  24th  February,  2014.   In  the  judge's
    determination promulgated on 4th March, 2014 the  judge  accepted  that
    the respondent's appeal should be allowed under the EEA Regulations.

3.   The claimant challenged the decision for reasons  explained  below  and
    the matter came for hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley  first
    on 21st May, 2014.  At that stage it  was  accepted  by  Mr  Deller  on
    behalf of the claimant and Mr Ferrarini, a representative on behalf  of
    the respondent that the determination did contain an error of law.   He
    adjourned the hearing very briefly for the representatives to have  the
    opportunity of discussing the matter further as a result of  which  the
    appeal was adjourned in order that the claimant's representative  might
    make further enquiries.  In a letter addressed to me dated  28th  July,
    2015 Mr Peter Deller, the Presenting Officer who appeared before me  in
    May, 2014, has written explaining that he has now  concluded  that  the
    claimant is entitled to the documents she sought  confirming  permanent
    right of residence under the EEA Regulation 15(1)(b).  His letter says,
    and we quote:

         "This is because from the evidence on file I am content that:

         1.   Mrs Both became the family member of her son and  daughter-in-
             law (dependent relative in the ascending line of Mrs Costa and
             Mr Both) from the date of her arrival in 2003 and

         2.   Mrs Costa herself acquired right  of  permanent  residence  in
             2006 such that no further  evidence  was  required  thereafter
             that she was exercising  treaty  rights  under  Regulation  6.
             Accordingly

         3.   Mrs Both accumulated five years' qualifying residence sometime
             in 2008 and has not lost that right since  she  has  not  been
             absent for two years.  Her residence as a family member  prior
             to 30th April, 2006 can be aggregated with that afterwards.

             This approach differs significantly from the  basis  on  which
             the application was made, refused  and  litigated.   It  means
             that the issues become academic of:

                    . Whether the P6o evidence properly  demonstrated  that
                      Mrs Costa was working at the date of the application;

                    .  Whether  the  FTT  erred  by  not  considering   the
                      situation at date of hearing and after divorce;

                    . Whether Mrs Booth could remain a family  member  when
                      her son  and  Mrs  Costa  became  estranged  and  her
                      continuing dependence on Mrs Costa became uncertain;

                    . Whether Article 8 could successfully be  deployed  in
                      an EEA appeal; and

                    .  Whether  the  FFT  ought  to  have  considered   the
                      assertion  that  Mrs  Both  was  now   eligible   for
                      indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  ten   years   long
                      residence (and what the outcome might have been)."

4.   We are content to allow this appeal and do so with the agreement of  Mr
    Tarlow, who appears for the claimant.   We  are  very  grateful  to  Mr
    Deller for taking the time to investigate the matter and  we  can  only
    apologise to Mrs Both for the length of time that this has taken.   The
    respondent's appeal was allowed by the First Tier Tribunal Judge.   The
    error on his part was not material to the outcome of the appeal and  we
    uphold the decision which shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal on the part of the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Office  is
dismissed.  The determination of the First Tier Judge shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As we have allowed the appeal  and  because  a  fee  has  been  paid  or  is
payable, we have considered making a fee award and have decided  to  make  a
whole fee award of any fee which has been paid.


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
