
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30177/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Oral judgment given at hearing       |On 13 November 2015                  |
|On 29 October 2015                   |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                             ms Veronica Asamoah
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Murphy, Counsel instructed by Clapham Law LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 25 March 1980.  She came to
    the UK and was granted a residence card, valid from 22 February 2012 to
    22 February 2017.  She was married to a French national on  15  October
    2008.  They divorced on 20 March 2013.

 2. On 1 April 2014 the appellant applied for a permanent residence card on
    the basis of marriage.  In a decision dated 12 June 2014 the respondent
    refused the application and  indeed  made  a  decision  to  revoke  the
    appellant's residence card on the basis that she was no longer entitled
    to a residence card as the spouse of a person exercising Treaty rights.

 3. The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Finch at a hearing on 20 March  2014.   Judge
    Finch dismissed the appeal in terms of the appellant's claim  that  she
    was entitled to a retained right of residence.

 4. Permission to appeal was  sought  on  the  basis  that  the  judge  had
    misunderstood the appellant's representative's position in terms of  an
    adjournment request for enquiries to be made by the respondent into the
    appellant's former spouse's status as a qualified person at the date of
    divorce on 20 March 2013.  It was  necessary  for  her  husband  to  be
    either employed (or self-employed in this case) on that date.

 5. The appellant's position was that she was unable to establish that fact
    because of their separation and because she  was  not  able  to  obtain
    information from him.  The appeal proceeded and Judge  Finch  dismissed
    the appeal having taken into account such documentary evidence  as  was
    available to be put before her.  She concluded that the  appellant  had
    not established that her ex-husband was in self-employment on 20  March
    2013 and that therefore she was the family member of a person  who  was
    exercising Treaty rights at the time of their divorce.

 6. Permission to appeal  having  been  granted,  there  was  a  'Rule  24'
    response  from  the  respondent  stating  that  the  "application   for
    permission to appeal" was not opposed although of course by that  stage
    permission to appeal had  already  been  granted.   What  in  fact  the
    respondent was saying was that the appeal to the Upper Tribunal was not
    opposed.

 7. The matter was further clarified before me by Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  on
    behalf of the respondent to the effect that it was  accepted  that  the
    First-tier Judge had erred in law in terms of  her  misapprehension  of
    the situation as to the adjournment request.  It  was  agreed  by  both
    parties before me that the judge's conclusion in terms of  whether  the
    appellant's ex-husband was exercising Treaty rights on  20  March  2013
    was therefore flawed.  The First-tier Judge did not have before her all
    the necessary information for her to come to that conclusion.

 8.  It  was  further  agreed  between  the  parties  therefore,  that  the
    appropriate course of action was for the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be set aside and for the matter to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a decision to be made in the light  of  such  further
    information that the respondent may be able  to  obtain  from  HMRC  in
    terms of the appellant's ex-husband's employed or self-employed  status
    on the date of divorce.

 9. Part of the background to the appeal relates to the decision in Amos  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 552 (on  the
    BAILII website it has a  criminal  division  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
    citation but I think it is correct in the EWCA Civ citation).   Anyway,
    the issue in Amos related to the extent to  which  the  respondent  was
    under a duty to undertake enquiries of a spouse or partner's employment
    record. In the circumstances of this case it was the matter having been
    raised by the appellant which is the pertinent issue, and not in  terms
    of any actual duty on the respondent.

10. On the facts of this case however, it is  accepted  by  the  respondent
    that it is a case  where  enquiries  ought  to  be  undertaken  by  the
    respondent.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller indicated that those  enquiries  will
    take place with HMRC but may take some weeks to conclude.

11. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  did
    err in law in its conclusions in terms of the  appellant's  entitlement
    to a retained right of residence.  I set  aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Having regard to the practice statement at 7.2 it
    is appropriate for the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    for a hearing  de  novo  in  terms  of  the  issue  outstanding  to  be
    determined, that is whether the appellant's ex-husband  was  exercising
    Treaty rights at the date of divorce.

12. Although not discussed before me, it is to be noted  that  the  refusal
    letter states that a decision has been taken to revoke the  appellant's
    residence card. There does appear to be such a revocation  decision  in
    the respondent's bundle, as well as a separate decision  to  refuse  to
    grant confirmation of the right to permanent residence. The  revocation
    issue will require consideration at the fresh hearing.

13. I make the following direction in pursuance of my decision, namely that
    the respondent having  agreed  to  undertake  enquiries  with  HMRC  in
    relation to the employed or self-employed  status  of  the  appellant's
    former spouse, those enquiries must be completed by 1 January 2016.  It
    follows that this appeal must not be listed before that date.

Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside
    and the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing  de
    novo.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  10/11/15
