
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30153/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th October 2017                   |On 14th November 2017                |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                abdul waheed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born on 8th June 1982.   He
    first arrived in the UK on 22nd August 2010 when he was given leave  to
    enter as a  Tier  4  (Student)  Migrant.   The  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for leave to remain on the basis of  his  relationship  with  a
    British citizen.  That application was refused for the reasons given in
    the Respondent's Reasons for Refusal letter  dated  25th  August  2015.
    The Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Majid sitting at Taylor House on 7th September 2016.  He  decided
    to allow the appeal for the reasons given in his  Decision  promulgated
    on 16th September 2016.  The Respondent sought  leave  to  appeal  that
    decision and on 23rd January 2017 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The reasons for the Judge's decision to allow  the  appeal  are  by  no
    means clear from his Decision.  Suffice it to say that  by  a  Rule  24
    response signed  by  the  Appellant's  Counsel  Michael  Biggs  it  was
    conceded that the decision of the Judge contained a material error on a
    point of law.

 4. At the hearing before me, the  Appellant  appeared  unrepresented.   He
    confirmed that he wished the hearing to proceed nevertheless, and  that
    he was fully aware  of  the  contents  of  the  Rule  24  response  and
    understood its consequences.

 5. I therefore find a material error of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal which I set aside.  I need not give my reasons  for  that
    decision in accordance with the provisions  of  Rule  40(3)(a)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  I did not  proceed  to
    remake the decision in the appeal in accordance with the provisions  of
    paragraph 7.2(b) of the  Practice  Statements  as  the  judicial  fact-
    finding in the appeal needs to be done again.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision in the appeal will be remade by the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.


Signed                              Date 13th November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton


