
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30633/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 June 2017                             |On 27 June 2017                  |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                            mr Khair Mohamed Arab
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Emma Rutherford (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Gurung-Thapa, promulgated  on  26th  October  2016,  following  a
    hearing at Stoke-on-Trent on 12th October 2016.  In the  determination,
    the judge dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant  on  human  rights
    grounds, whereupon the Appellant  subsequently  applied  for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant's Claim

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, who was born on 20th
    November 1986.  He applied against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent,
    Secretary of State dated  25th August  2015,  revoking  his  grant  of
    indefinite leave to remain (ILR) pursuant to Section 76(1)(a)  and  (b)
    of the NIAA 2002.

 3. By a decision dated 5th April  2017,  Designated  Judge  R  C  Campbell
    determined that the consequence of the revocation  of  the  Appellant's
    indefinite leave to remain was that he would be required to  now  apply
    for extensions of limited leave.  There  was  no  sign  in  the  papers
    before Designated Judge Campbell of a  decision  by  the  Secretary  of
    State refusing a  human  rights  claim  made  by  the  Appellant.   The
    question before the Tribunal was whether the Appellant had a  right  of
    appeal  by  way  of  the  transitional  provisions  relating   to   the
    Immigration  Act  2014  against  a  particular  decision  made  by  the
    Secretary of State.  Designated Judge Campbell noted how  the  Tribunal
    below had referred to the Supreme Court judgment in George [2014]  UKSC
    28 in order  to  conclude  that  the  deportation  order  made  by  the
    Secretary of State on 17th October  2012  invalidated  the  Appellant's
    leave.  The Secretary of State's  instructions  and  guidance  to  case
    owners is that a deportation order made under the UK Borders Act  2007,
    as in the present case, does not invalidate leave while  an  in-country
    appeal can  be  brought  or  is  pending.   Designated  Judge  Campbell
    determined that the outstanding question now left for determination  by
    this Tribunal was whether the Appellant had a right of  appeal  against
    the August 2015 decision to revoke indefinite leave under Section 76 of
    the 2002 Act.  Taking into account also  the  fact  that  the  decision
    under appeal in George was not made in accordance with the  UK  Borders
    Act  2007,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  Designated  Judge
    Campbell.

Submissions

 4. At the hearing before me on 8th June 2017, Ms Rutherford, appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, handed up three documents in  support  of  her
    appeal.  These  included  her  skeleton  argument,  the  Supreme  Court
    judgment in George  [2014]  UKSC  28,  and  the  relevant  transitional
    provisions that applied.

 5. For his part, Mr Mills handed up a statutory instrument in the form  of
    the Immigration Act  2014  (Commencement  Number  3,  Transitional  and
    Saving Provisions) Order 2014, SI Number 2771.   Ms  Rutherford  argued
    that in this case the decision to revoke indefinite leave to remain was
    made on 25th August 2015.  This postdated  the  appeal  regime  changes
    which were brought in by the Immigration Act 2014.  In accordance  with
    the transitional arrangements there was a right of appeal in this case.
     This is because Regulation 9 of the Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement
    Number 3, Transitional and Saving Provisions) Order 2104  states  that,
    "notwithstanding the commencement of the relevant provisions, the  save
    provisions continue to have effect, and the relevant provisions do  not
    have effect ...".

 6. Ms Rutherford submitted that the  Appellant's  offences  in  this  case
    predated 20th October 2014  and  thus  he  did  not  become  a  foreign
    criminal on or before 20th October 2014.  And in regard  to  Regulation
    11, which refers to a person who makes an application on or after  20th
    October 2014, Ms Rutherford submitted that whereas in the instant  case
    the Appellant did not make an application in the normal manner and  the
    Secretary of State did notify him of her intention to revoke indefinite
    leave to remain in July 2014, he responded by making representations on
    31st July 2014.  This meant that the Secretary of State's  notification
    and his response are the equivalent of an application and thus  as  the
    process began before 20th October 2014,  the  Appellant  in  this  case
    benefited from the transitional and saving provisions.  She also  added
    that the grant of permission was limited to whether or  not  the  judge
    was entitled to conclude that the decision to deport the Appellant  had
    invalidated his indefinite leave to remain.

 7.  In  Reply,  Mr  Mills  submitted  that,  if  one  has  regard  to  the
    transitional provisions of 2014 (number 2771), he would have to  accept
    that the reference there to the section  of  "transitional  and  saving
    provisions and appeals", at part 2 of the statutory  instrument,  deals
    with specific kinds of appeal, none of which apply in  the  Appellant's
    case, because they essentially refer to a situation on  or  after  20th
    October 2014, whereas the Appellant's appeal went  back  much  earlier.
    His appeal went back to 31st July 2014.  But this is not the end of the
    matter.  The reason is that there was no  human  rights  representation
    made on his behalf, so as to generate a right of appeal.

 8.  Moreover,  one  also  has  to  look  at  the  Immigration   Act   2014
    (Commencement  Number  4,  Transitional  and  Saving   Provisions   and
    Amendment) Order 2015, which is in the  form  of  statutory  instrument
    number 371.  What this did  was  to  amend  paragraph  9  of  the  2014
    transitional provision (SI number 2771)  which  had  stated  that  "the
    relevant provisions do not have effect".

 9. Under the 2015 order various categories of  workers,  such  as  Tier  1
    Migrant or Tier 2 Migrant or Tier 4 Migrant still benefit provided that
    they made their application before 6th April 2015, and the  old  regime
    still applies to them, where they complain about a refusal of variation
    of leave to enter or where they  complain  about  a  refusal  of  entry
    clearance.

10. But the Appellant is not covered by any of these exceptions.  He cannot
    therefore, have been granted a right of appeal by mistake,  where  none
    existed as a matter of law.  He had not made a human  rights  claim  at
    any stage.

My Consideration of the Appeal

11. Following the decision of Designated Judge Campbell on 5th April  2017,
    the unresolved  question  in  this  appeal  is  regarding  whether  the
    Appellant has a right of appeal against the  August  2015  decision  to
    revoke the indefinite leave to remain under Section 76 of the 2002 Act.
     I find that he has no right of appeal.

12. This is a case where the Appellant has  never  raised  a  separate  and
    distinct human rights appeal against the deportation  decision.   After
    his right to remain in the UK on the basis of the grant  of  indefinite
    leave to remain was revoked by the Secretary of  State,  the  Appellant
    raised a human rights argument within the revocation of that  right  to
    remain, but did not do so as a separate human rights application.   His
    human rights claim was considered by the judge below and dismissed.

13. He does not, however, have a right to an appeal if he had not raised  a
    human rights claim which generated such a right of appeal.

14. If such a right was given to him mistakenly, then the normal rule  that
    statute cannot be supplanted by  a  mistaken  exercise  of  discretion,
    applies and a no right of appeal does not turn into a right of  appeal.



15. In the circumstances, I dismiss the  claim.   There  is  no  right  of
    appeal.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and it fell to be set aside.  I remake  the  decision
    as follows.  This appeal is dismissed.

17. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th June 2017

