
IAC-AH-SAR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/30924/2014
                                                               IA/30925/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th May 2015                     |On 15th June 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                         (1) MRS SURJIT KAUR KAPOOR
                         (2) MISS ROSHNI KAUR KAPOOR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Wells (LR)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M A Khan promulgated on 8th December 2014, following a hearing at
    Hatton Cross on 12th November 2014.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeals of Mrs Surjit Kaur Kapoor, and her daughter  Miss
    Roshni Kaur Kapoor.  The Appellants subsequently applied for, and  were
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2.  The  Appellants  are  mother  and  daughter.   Both  are  citizens  of
    Afghanistan.  The first Appellant's husband,  and  the  father  of  the
    second Appellant, is a person by the name of Mr Gurmeet  Kapoor  Singh,
    and he is present and settled in the UK, having recently  been  granted
    ILR, following his lawful entry into this country.  Both appeal against
    the decision of the Respondent Secretary of State dated 15th July  2014
    and dated 17th July 2014 refusing their application to remain in the UK
    on a discretionary basis under Article 8 of the ECHR.

Submissions

 3. At the hearing before me on 29th May 2015,  it  was  agreed,  following
    submissions by Mr Wells, appearing on behalf of the Appellants, by  the
    Presenting Officer Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, that  the  determination  of
    Judge M A Khan did contain an error of law on account of  matters  that
    had been simply overlooked as clear, discrete, and individual claims on
    behalf of the Appellants.  Mr Wells had submitted that, the  Appellants
    being from Afghanistan, it was an important aspect  of  the  claim  put
    before Judge M A Khan, that if  returned  back  to  Afghanistan,  there
    would be risk of "indiscriminate violence" and that Article 15(c) would
    be engaged.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller  helpfully  submitted,  much  to  her
    great credit, that the Presenting Officer's notes in  the  file  before
    her had the entry "representative argued that the Appellant  could  not
    return to Afghanistan and relied on the objective  bundle".   I  notice
    from the Grounds of Appeal before Judge M A Khan that there  is,  under
    the heading "Single lone female", a statement that, "we seek to rely on
    the case of AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012]  UKUT  163,  which
    clearly states that lone women or female heads of households should not
    be expected to relocate internally".  Given that the  determination  of
    Judge M A Khan makes no reference whatsoever  to  this  aspect  of  the
    claim before the Tribunal, it was accepted by both sides that there was
    an error of law in the determination.

 4. Secondly, it was also accepted by both sides, that the judge's approach
    below had been predicated on the earlier  determination  of  IJ  Froom.
    That determination, however, was made on 5th November 2009 and was  the
    result of a previous appeal hearing by the first  Appellant's  husband,
    Mr Gurmeet Kapoor Singh, at the time when he was  here  unlawfully  and
    following which he had to leave  the  United  Kingdom,  but  the  judge
    proceeded nevertheless to  state  that,  "the  starting  point  is  the
    findings of the previous Tribunal decision"  (see  paragraph  32),  and
    then to have based his decision on paragraph 38 of what was said by  IJ
    Froom, which was to do with entirely different accounts  given  by  the
    Appellants in relation to their asylum appeal that  they  feared  being
    targeted by a commander in Afghanistan.

 5. The current case, however, was one  where,  with  the  position  of  Mr
    Gurmeet Kapoor Singh being no longer in jeopardy because  he  had  ILR,
    the situation had to be assessed on the basis  of  the  return  of  two
    women, one of whom, the second Appellant, was a young unmarried  woman,
    of a minority religious  group,  that  was  known  to  be  at  risk  in
    Afghanistan.  Yet, the failure to acknowledge at  any  stage  the  fact
    that Gurmeet Kapoor Singh had now been granted ILR, would  not  now  be
    returning back to Afghanistan with his wife and daughter,  altered  the
    basis of the appeal currently  before  Judge  M  A  Khan  to  what  had
    previously been before Judge Froom.

 6. It was accepted both by Mr Wells and Ms Brocklesby-Weller that this was
    a material error in that this change of circumstance in  a  significant
    way ought to have been specifically addressed by the judge.

 7. Finally, the judge  made  no  reference  to  the  Operational  Guidance
    because the OGN states, as the Grounds of Appeal before Judge M A  Khan
    made clear, that "unescorted  internal  travel  for  single  women  and
    female heads of households who do not have a male support  network  can
    be extremely difficult" (see paragraph 2.4.7).

 8. The judge's suggestion (at paragraph 35) that, "I do,  to  some  extent
    accept that a young woman of the second Appellant's age may  have  some
    problems moving about in Afghanistan but it would  not  be  impossible"
    amounts to an error of law for two reasons.  First, there is no rule of
    law that movement internally in a country like Afghanistan has to reach
    the level of not being impossible.  Second, the decision (at  paragraph
    35) is predicated on the assumption that Mr Gurmeet Kapoor Singh  would
    be returning back with these two Appellant women, and  that  cannot  be
    right, because he has now got ILR, in  fact  not  acknowledged  in  the
    determination.

 9. For all these reasons, it was accepted by all  sides  that  the  proper
    course of action was to remit this appeal back to a Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal, to be heard by a judge other than Judge M A Khan in a de
    novo hearing with no previous findings being preserved.

Error of Law

10. For the reasons I have given above, I am satisfied that the  making  of
    the decision by the judge involved the making of an error on a point of
    law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) such that I should set  aside  the
    decision.  Under Practice Statement 7.2(a), the Tribunal may remit  the
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal if the effect of the error  has  been
    to deprive a party before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing  or
    other opportunity for that party's case to be considered by the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  I deem this to have been the case here.

11. This matter is remitted back to a judge at Hatton Cross to be heard  by
    a Tribunal other than the  Tribunal  Judge  M  A  Khan,  at  the  first
    available opportunity.

Notice of Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    remitted back to Hatton Cross under Practice  Statement  7.2(a)  to  be
    heard by a judge other than Judge M A Khan in  a  de  novo  substantive
    hearing with no previous findings preserved.

13. No anonymity order is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    12th June 2015
