
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30571/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 December 2016                  |On 05 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Wilford of Counsel instructed by Premier
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State (the Appellant) against the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Heatherington, promulgated
    on 11 October 2016, allowing the appeal of  Mr  M  A  (the  Respondent)
    against a decision by the respondent to refuse him leave to  remain  as
    the spouse of a British national.

 2. The Respondent is a national of Pakistan, date  of  birth  26  February
    1986.  He applied for leave to remain on the basis of his relationships
    with his wife, whom he married on 13 May 2014,  and  his  stepchildren.
    The application was refused in a letter  dated  24  August  2015.   The
    Appellant refused the application, inter alia, on the  basis  that  the
    Respondent had used deception in  obtaining  an  ETS  English  language
    certificate in circumstances where it was alleged that a  proxy  tester
    had taken his place. The Appellant's decision accepted that there would
    be insurmountable obstacles to the family life continuing  outside  the
    United Kingdom as understood by  Appendix  FM.  This  was  because  the
    Respondent's wife had two children with her estranged partner  and  the
    children continued to have a relationship with  their  father.  If  the
    Respondent was removed and his wife required to relocate  with  him  in
    order to maintain their relationship her young children's  relationship
    with their biological father would be severed (the  Appellant  accepted
    that the Respondent's step-children maintained a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with their father, who had access rights).

3.   The Appellant was tardy in the extreme in  providing  support  for  her
    claim that a proxy tester was used and it was not until the date of the
    hearing itself that the Presenting Officer sought to produce statements
    from Peter Millington, Rebecca Collings, Manzoor Hussain and  Professor
    Peter French.  It is fair to say that the judge  was  unimpressed  with
    the Appellant's failure to comply with directions and  her  failure  to
    respond to two letters from the Respondent's solicitors, dated  12  and
    24 August 2016, requesting evidence in support of the allegation.   The
    judge noted that there was no application by either  party  to  adjourn
    the hearing. There was no evidence in the decision or on  the  Tribunal
    file that there was any objection to the new evidence  being  provided.
    The judge considered whether to admit the evidence under  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber  Rules
    2014.  The judge made reference to Rule 2:


    "(a) dealing with the case in  ways  which  are  proportionate  to  the
         importance  of  the  case,  the  complexity  of  the  issues,   the
         anticipated costs and the resources  of  the  parties  and  of  the
         Tribunal;


    (b)  avoiding unnecessary formality  and  seeking  flexibility  in  the
         proceedings;


    (c)  ensuring, so far as practicable, that  the  parties  are  able  to
         participate fully in the proceedings;


    (d)  using any special expertise of the Tribunal effectively; and


    (e)  avoiding delay, so far as compatible with proper consideration  of
         the issues."


    The judge indicated that he had examined all the factors identified  in
    Rule 2 and noted the responsibility on each party to  ensure  that  the
    hearing would proceed when it is  listed.  The  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant had more than enough time to  serve  the  statements  and  in
    these circumstances the judge refused to admit the extra  evidence  and
    was satisfied that he could do justice without it.  The judge  went  on
    at 7.2 to state thus:


         "The respondent asserts that  the  appellant  obtained  an  English
         language certificate by deception.  I have considered the  evidence
         as a whole.  I have considered paragraph  58  of  SM  and  Qadir  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden
         of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC). The Secretary of State has  failed
         to discharge the legal burden of proving dishonesty on the part  of
         the appellant.  Thus, refusal on suitability grounds  is  not  made
         out."


4.   The judge then  noted  that  the  Respondent's  wife  was  British  and
    recorded the Appellant's acceptance that her relationship  was  genuine
    and subsisting and that there were insurmountable obstacles  to  family
    life continuing outside the United Kingdom. The judge then went  on  to
    consider Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 which sets out public interest  considerations  that  have  to  be
    taken into account in the proportionality exercise. The judge concluded
    that the Respondent had stepped into the shoes of the children  of  his
    partner and that he had taken on a parental role to his step  children.
    The judge was satisfied therefore that it would be disproportionate  to
    remove the Respondent and allowed the appeal under Article 8.

5.   The Appellant  took  issue  with  the  judge's  refusal  to  admit  the
    statements from Peter Millington, Rebecca Collings, Mansoor Hussain and
    the report from Professor Peter  French.  She  argued  that  the  judge
    failed to give any reasons  for  his  conclusion  that  the  evidential
    burden had not been discharged by the Secretary of State  in  light  of
    his failure to  admit  the  documents.  The  Secretary  of  State  also
    complained of a material misdirection in law by the judge  relating  to
    his assessment of Article 8 and,  in  particular,  Section  117B(6)  in
    relation to his parental role with his stepchildren.

6.   Mr Wilford has invited  me  to  find  that  the  judge  acted  entirely
    rationally and fairly in excluding, in particular, the  two  statements
    of Mr Millington and Ms Collings.  He reminded me that there  had  been
    two requests for ETS evidence from the Respondent's solicitors but  the
    Appellant had not responded to these  requests.  He  reminded  me  that
    there was a failure to comply  with  the  standard  directions  and  he
    invited me to find that it would have been unfair for the judge to have
    allowed the evidence to be adduced at this stage even in the absence of
    any note of objection by Mr Aqeel's Counsel. The refusal to  admit  did
    not undermine the fairness of the decision.

7.   Whilst I have great  sympathy  for  the  judge  given  the  Appellant's
    failure to  comply  with  directions,  I  am  satisfied,  certainly  in
    relation to the statements from Millington and Collings,  that  he  did
    err in law in refusing to admit them. This is because  the  statements,
    albeit generic, were considered in detail by the President of the Upper
    Tribunal in SM & Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof)  [2016]  UKUT
    229.  There was little rational  basis  for  the  judge  not  admitting
    evidence that went to the very core of  the  Appellant's  decision  and
    upon which she relied in the ETS cases.  It made no sense for the judge
    to have refused to admit the evidence of those  two  individuals  given
    that he would have had to consider the same evidence  when  considering
    and applying the principle enunciated in SM  &  Qadir.  I  additionally
    take into account the absence of any evidence of  any  objection  being
    recorded to the admission of that evidence and to the  absence  of  any
    application  by   either   representative   to   adjourn.    In   these
    circumstances I find the judge was not  entitled  to  have  refused  to
    admit the two statements in question under  Rule  2  of  the  Procedure
    Rules. Given that the statements went to the core of the  issues  I  am
    satisfied there was procedural unfairness by the judge.

8.   Having "considered the evidence as a whole" (at  7.2)  the  judge  then
    found that  the  evidential  burden  had  not  been  discharged.  I  am
    satisfied that this conclusion was one the judge was  not  entitled  to
    reach in light of my finding that he erred in law in not admitting  the
    generic statements. Had the judge admitted the statements  it  is  very
    likely that the evidential burden would have been discharged  and  that
    the Respondent would have been required to provide an explanation.

9.   In these circumstances it is appropriate for the matter to be  remitted
    back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  a  judge  other  than   Judge
    Heatherington, to be considered in light of the  statements  and  other
    evidence adduced by the Respondent.


Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State for the Home  Department's  appeal  is  allowed;  the
matter is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal,  before  a  judge  other
than Judge Heatherington, to consider the evidence the  Secretary  of  State
sought to introduce relating to the ETS issue.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Respondent  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]                               04 January 2017

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

