
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30283/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12 March 2014                                |On 25 March 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              IHSAN ABDULRAHman

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Ihsan Abdulrahman, was born on 1 September 1977 and  is
    a male citizen of Iraq.  I shall hereafter refer to the  respondent  as
    the appellant as he was before the First-tier Tribunal; I  shall  refer
    to the Secretary of State for the Home Department as the respondent.

 2. The appellant had appealed against the decision of the respondent dated
    3 July 2013 to refuse to issue him with a Registration  Certificate  as
    confirmation of his rights of residence in  the  United  Kingdom  under
    European Community law.   The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Myers) which,  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  6
    January 2014, dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  EEA  Regulations  but
    allowed it in respect of Article 8 ECHR.  The Secretary of State sought
    permission from the Upper Tribunal which was granted by Judge Page  (22
    January 2014).  The appellant appeared in person at the Upper  Tribunal
    hearing at Bradford on 12 March 2014  together  with  his  partner  and
    mother of his two children, Ms Jasmonta, a citizen of Latvia.

 3. There are, in essence, two grounds of appeal.  The  first  takes  issue
    with the judge's finding [25] that there was "nothing to  suggest  that
    [the appellant] has been engaged in  crime  or  any  other  undesirable
    behaviour."  The grounds assert  that  the  appellant  had  engaged  in
    undesirable conduct by remaining in the United  Kingdom  in  breach  of
    immigration  control.   He  had  arrived  clandestinely  and   had   no
    legitimate expectation that he would be allowed to remain.

 4. The Home Office immigration history in the papers before  the  Tribunal
    indicates that the appellant was served with an  IS151A  form  in  2003
    ("for being a clandestine" (sic)).  In oral evidence before the  First-
    tier Tribunal, the appellant explained that he had claimed asylum which
    had been refused in 2004.  He had met Ms Jasmonta in 2009.

 5. I do not find merit in this ground of  appeal.   What  the  judge  said
    about the appellant not having  been  engaged  in  crime  was  entirely
    accurate and she was well aware of the appellant's immigration history.
     It could, perhaps, be said that the judge has given  undue  weight  to
    the failure of the Home  Office  to  remove  the  appellant  after  the
    refusal of his asylum claim (she refers to this more than once  in  her
    analysis) and has attached limited, if any, weight to  the  failure  on
    the part of the appellant to leave  voluntarily.   However,  viewed  as
    part of the judge's analysis overall and given that the Upper  Tribunal
    should hesitate before  reapportioning  weight  to  items  of  evidence
    properly considered by the First-tier Tribunal, I do not consider  this
    to be so serious an error as to undermine the determination.

 6. The second ground of appeal asserts that the judge had failed  to  make
    any proper findings regarding the "alternative remedy" available to the
    appellant and his partner, namely that of returning to her  country  of
    origin, Latvia, to continue their family life together.

 7. I note at [13], where the judge deals with the submissions made to  her
    by the appellant's representative, that it was argued on behalf of  the
    appellant that it was -

         clearly not in his family's interests to accompany him should he be
         removed to Iraq and neither was it in their interests  to  move  to
         Latvia as the youngest children have no links with that country and
         the elder ones are settled in the UK.  In any event it was doubtful
         the appellant would be  granted  entry  clearance  to  relocate  to
         Latvia.

     It is true that the judge makes little reference to that aspect of  the
    appeal in her own analysis; at [26] she deals with the  possibility  of
    the family being split by the appellant's removal to Iraq but makes  no
    mention of the family returning to live in Latvia.  On the other  hand,
    the judge has dealt  with  Article  8  ECHR  in  a  structured  manner,
    following the familiar sequence of questions posed by Lord  Bingham  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  Whilst it is arguable that  what  she  says  at
    [25] (that the appellant's removal is not  necessary  in  a  democratic
    society) indicates a misunderstanding of the jurisprudence,  the  judge
    has quite properly gone on to deal with proportionality at  [26].   Her
    analysis is informed by reference to relevant jurisprudence,  including
    that favouring the Secretary of State (for  example,  Konstatinov  ECHR
    16351/03, the judge noting  that  it  is  "an  important  consideration
    [their] family life was created at a time  when  the  persons  involved
    were aware that the immigration status of one  of  them  was  such  the
    existence of family life in the host country was  precarious  from  the
    outset.").

    From what the judge then says at [26] it appears that  she  has  agreed
    with the submission of the appellant's representative [13]:

         [The appellant] and his family now have  a  significant  connection
         with  the  UK.   Furthermore  under  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 an  assessment  of  a  child's
         best interest  must  be  a  primary  consideration  in  taking  any
         decision affecting a child and be accorded very significant weight.
          In employing the proportionality exercise I take  account  of  the
         fact that family life was created at a time when the appellant knew
         his immigration status was precarious, however  as  no  steps  were
         taken to remove the appellant after a failure of his  asylum  claim
         in 2004, he was left very much in  limbo  and  it  is  only  to  be
         expected that someone in those circumstances would have established
         family and private life in the intervening years.

 8. Allowing this appeal under  Article  8  ECHR  was  clearly  an  outcome
    available to  the  judge  on  the  evidence;  her  decision  cannot  be
    described  as  perverse.   Her  analysis  is,   in   places,   slightly
    problematic as is her failure to deal expressly with the possibility of
    the family relocating to Latvia.  However, the  Upper  Tribunal  should
    hesitate  before  interfering  with  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which has clearly been based upon the relevant facts and which
    is in accordance  with  the  jurisprudence.   Discussing  the  family's
    circumstances with the appellant and his partner at the hearing, I  was
    told that Ms Jasmonta has six children with her in the United  Kingdom,
    three by a previous relationship.  Her two children  by  the  appellant
    had been born in 2010 and 2011 respectively.  Further,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge does not appear to have been made aware that  the  child
    Roberts (age 12) is seriously visually-impaired.

 9. The question remains as to whether the judge's failure to consider  the
    family's removal to Latvia is so serious an error  as  to  require  the
    setting aside of her determination and the re-making of  the  decision.
    I find that the judge has given proper weight to the interests  of  the
    children and to their connections with the United Kingdom  and  to  the
    appellant as their father and stepfather.  After much consideration and
    whilst I accept that the judge may have erred in law for the reasons  I
    have detailed above, I am not in this instance prepared to disturb  her
    determination.  She has explained why she has found compelling  reasons
    to allow the appeal under Article 8 and her reasons are, in my opinion,
    sound.  In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

10. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 16 March 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
