
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal   Appeal Number: IA/30002/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

| Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5 June 2017                          |On 7 June 2017                   |
|                                        |                                 |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                             MR MOHAMMED WASEEM
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the appellant: Mr Muquit of Counsel
For the respondent: Mr Avery, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, born on 15 April  1976  appealed
      to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  decision  of  the  respondent
      dated 21 August 2015 to refuse his application for leave to remain  in
      the United Kingdom outside the Immigration  Rules  and  based  on  his
      family and private life in this country. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  R
      Cooper dismissed the appellant's appeal on 11 October 2016 relying  on
      the previous decision by Judge Ruth of the First-tier Tribunal.


   2. Permission to appeal that decision was initially refused by First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Grimmett and subsequently granted by a  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Rimington on 26 April 2017 who found  that  the  Judge  arguably
      erred in  relying  on  a  partial  previous  decision  of  Judge  Ruth
      dismissing the appellant's appeal and therefore the case of Devaseelan
      cannot effectively be applied to the appellant's appeal.


   3. Thus, the appeal came before me.


    The First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings


   4. The Judge made the following findings which  I  summarise.  The  Judge
      accepted the findings of First--tier Tribunal Judge Ruth in a decision
      dated 19 August 2013 under the principles  of  Devaseelan  and  stated
      that Judge Ruth dismissed the appellant's appeal on Article 8  grounds
      and under the Immigration Rules.


   5. The Judge  stated  that  Mr  Muquit,  the  appellant's  representative
      accepted that the starting point appeal is the decision of Judge  Ruth
      but asks that the Judge depart from the case of Devaseelan,  based  on
      the new evidence submitted to the First-tier Tribunal Judge which  was
      not before Judge Ruth.


   6. The Judge found that the appellant has not provided a very good reason
      for failing to adduce the documentary evidence earlier given  that  it
      relates to  evidence  some  20  years  ago  of  incidents.  The  Judge
      considered the findings of Judge Ruth found were to be  found  on  the
      alternative  pages  of  the  decision.  (The  full  decision  was  not
      available but only  alternative  pages)  Judge  Ruth  found  that  the
      appellant was not credible and found that the appellant's  claim  that
      he had lost contact with his family was not credible. The  Judge  also
      found that the appellant's evidence to have left Pakistan in 2000  and
      fear of his safety was "wholly false".


   7. Mr Muquit, the appellant's representative, accepted that although  the
      previous decision of Judge Ruth is and should be  the  starting  point
      for the First-tier Tribunal Judge but submitted that she  depart  from
      Judge's findings based on the new documentation provided.


   8. The Judge found that there is no reason to depart  from  the  findings
      made by Judge Ruth. The Judge was satisfied the documents  before  her
      which were not before  Judge  Ruth  in  2013  were  not  credible  and
      therefore the additional  evidence  produced,  could  not  change  the
      decision of Judge Ruth.


    Grounds of appeal


   9. At the hearing Mr Muquit, very sensibly, said that he does not seek to
      rely on the entirety of the grounds of appeal. The grounds  of  appeal
      complain that the Judge did not make certain findings when he did. The
      grounds of appeal, in my view, are a  cut-and-paste  from  some  other
      grounds of appeal for a different appeal,  which  has  been  submitted
      without due consideration.


    The hearing


  10. At the hearing, I heard submissions from both parties. Mr Muquit it in
      his submissions said that by relying on the  available  pages  of  the
      decision of Judge Ruth, fell into material error and  that  "it  is  a
      matter of process". He said that he asked for an  adjournment  at  the
      hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge for the full decision  of
      Judge Ruth to be produced but the adjournment was not granted. He said
      that no issue is taken with the Judge's consideration  and  evaluation
      of the documentary evidence in the decision. He emphasised that by not
      having the complete decision of Judge Ruth, that  the  Judge  breached
      process.
  11. Mr Avery on behalf of the respondent submitted that even if  there  is
      an error of law in the determination, it is not material. He submitted
      that there was nothing stopping the appellant from providing the  full
      decision of Judge Ruth and set out that the  appellant  had  not  said
      what was attributed to him by the First-tier Tribunal and the decision
      at paragraph 59 as alluded to by Mr Muquit in his submissions.


  12. Mr Muquit in  his  reply,  once  again  repeated  that  it  was  about
      "process" and that the appeal be sent back to the First-tier  Tribunal
      for the decision to be remade.


    Findings as to whether  there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination.


13. Essentially, the point been  taken  by  Mr  Muquit  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant is that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  have  the
    complete decision of Judge Ruth and therefore breached due  process  by
    relying on it in her decision.


14. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision  refusing  the
    appellant further leave to remain under Article 8  and  Judge  Ruth  in
    2013 found that there are no insurmountable obstacles for the appellant
    to return to Pakistan who can reintegrate in that country.  On  one  of
    the pages which was available of Judge Ruth's decision, the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge reiterated in his decision that Judge Ruth had found the
    appellant's claim that he was at risk in Pakistan was  "wholly  false".
    Judge Ruth also found  that  the  appellant  is  in  contact  with  his
    relatives in Pakistan.


15. In Justin Surendran Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00702 ('Devaseelan')
    guidelines were given on how a second adjudicator should  approach  the
    determination of another adjudicator who has previously heard an appeal
    by the same appellant.  It was stated at paragraph 39:

        '(1) The first Adjudicator's determination  should  always  be  the
        starting-point.  It  is  the  authoritative   assessment   of   the
        appellant's status at the time it was made.   In  principle  issues
        such as whether the appellant was properly represented, or  whether
        he gave evidence, are irrelevant to this.
        (2) Facts happening since the first Adjudicator's determination can
        always be taken into account by the second Adjudicator.   If  those
        facts lead the second Adjudicator to the conclusion  that,  at  the
        date of his determination and  on  the  material  before  him,  the
        appellant makes his case, so be it. The previous decision,  on  the
        material before the first Adjudicator and  at  that  date,  is  not
        inconsistent.
        (3) Facts happening before the  first  Adjudicator's  determination
        but having no relevance to the issues  before  him  can  always  be
        taken  into  account  by  the  second   Adjudicator.    The   first
        Adjudicator will not have been concerned with such facts,  and  his
        determination is not an assessment of them.'

  16. The basis of the appellant's claim before  Judge  Ruth  was  that  his
      exclusion from the  United  Kingdom  would  breach  his  rights  under
      Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.   This  was  the
      very same claim before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who  was  the
      second decision maker in his  appeal.  It  was  not  disputed  at  the
      hearing that the second First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  must  take  Judge
      Ruth's decision as the starting point and that it is the authoritative
      assessment of the appellant's status on the date it was made, which in
      this case was in 2013.


  17. That would therefore remain as the authoritative assessment unless and
      until the appellant provided further cogent oral  and  or  documentary
      evidence which suggest that the decision of Judge Ruth  is  no  longer
      safe and based on the additional evidence, which was  not  before  the
      original decision maker, a different decision is merited.


  18. The appellant provided further documentation which was  considered  by
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge, who found the  documents  provided  not
      credible given that they date back to some 18 to 20 years ago  of  the
      incidents. The Judge  found  that  the  documents  had  been  obtained
      recently and there was no explanation as to how  they  came  to  light
      more than 20 years after the incidents.  The  Judge  properly  applied
      the guidance in Tanveer Ahmed which stated that in  asylum  and  human
      rights cases, it is for an individual claimant to show the document in
      which he seeks to rely can be relied on. The  Judge  was  entitled  to
      find that there is no evidence as to the provenance of  the  documents
      submitted and how the appellant obtained them.


  19. The Judge did not find the medical report dated 7 April 1997  credible
      and stated that it does not clearly show it relates to  the  appellant
      as the name and date of birth on the document are illegible. The Judge
      further stated that in any event the document stated that  the  injury
      was sustained during a fight 18 years ago. The Judge also did not find
      the FIR document credible which purports to  state  that  in  1992,  a
      complaint was made that he had assaulted the bus driver with  a  metal
      pole. The Judge gave the same reasons for not  finding  this  document
      credible given that it is more than 20 years after the  incident.  The
      Judge also considered the document which purports  to  show  that  the
      appellant was elected as VP  of  the  Islamic  Student's  Organisation
      which he claims has come to light  some  20  years  later  without  an
      explanation as to how it came to light.


  20. Mr Muquit accepted at the hearing that there was no error  of  law  in
      respect of the Judge's evaluation and  conclusion  of  the  additional
      documents provided. Therefore, the documents provided did not take the
      appellant's case any further and the decision of  Judge  Ruth  remains
      the authoritative assessment of the appellant and his claim, as of the
      date of the decision by the second decision maker.


  21. The appellant did not give oral evidence at the hearing and  therefore
      there was no additional oral evidence for the Judge  to  consider.  Mr
      Muquit said that when his request for an adjournment  was  refused  by
      the First-tier Tribunal, he  advised  his  client  not  to  give  oral
      evidence at the hearing. He said that this was for a  tactical  reason
      because the appellant wishes to claim asylum and therefore he did  not
      want to compromise his clients evidence. I found that implicit in this
      submission  was  that  the   appellant   might   run   the   risk   of
      inconsistencies in his evidence at  the  hearing  and  at  his  asylum
      interview.


  22. I find that if the appellant was going to  be  truthful,  there  would
      have been no reason for him to use such tactics. Be that  as  it  may,
      the appellant's failure to give oral evidence meant that there was  no
      additional  oral  evidence  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   to
      consider.


  23. It  was  clear  from  the  decision  that  Judge  Ruth  dismissed  the
      appellant's appeal on the evidence provided  by  the  appellant,  both
      oral and documentary. There would have been no need for the first-tier
      Tribunal Judge to go into specifics because the same  claim  that  was
      before Judge Ruth to determine, was the same claim before  the  second
      Tribunal Judge to determine. I find there is no merit in the  argument
      advanced by Mr Muquit that it is about  "the  process".  The  starting
      point, as he accepted, was the decision of Judge Ruth  dismissing  the
      appellant's claim that he cannot return to Pakistan.  Therefore,  even
      if the full decision of Judge Ruth was not available to the First-tier
      Tribunal, it does not make a material difference  to  the  outcome.  I
      find no other differently constituted Tribunal would reach  any  other
      decision based on the evidence before it.


  24. The Judge found that there would be no  insurmountable  obstacles  for
      the appellant's re-integration into Pakistan for the same reason  that
      he found he cannot succeed  pursuant  to  Article  8.  The  Judge  was
      entitled to find on the evidence that the appellant lived the first 24
      years of his life in Pakistan where he attended  school  and  college.
      The Judge found that even if, the appellant has  been  in  the  United
      Kingdom for over 15 years,  he  still  retains  familiarity  with  the
      language, culture religion  and  social  norms  in  Pakistan  and  can
      reintegrate into that country.


  25. The Judge also found that the appellant is a very resourceful  because
      he has managed to live in this country without legal status for a very
      long time which shows he can draw on his resourcefulness and adapt  to
      life in Pakistan again. The Judge found  that  the  appellant  has  no
      family life in the United Kingdom and there is nothing  unusual  about
      his personal circumstances nor has he  demonstrated  any  particularly
      compelling circumstances that would mean it would not be possible  for
      him to enjoy family or private life if removed two Pakistan. These are
      all perfectly legitimate and well-reasoned findings on the evidence.


  26. I find that there is no material error of law in the decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal based  on  the  guidance  given  in  the  case  of
      Devaseelan as to how a  second  decision  maker  should  approach  the
      decision of a previous decision maker in respect of the same appellant
      and the same claim. The Judge was entitled to find that  the  decision
      of Judge Ruth was  an  authoritative  assessment  of  the  appellant's
      circumstances at the date of that decision it 2013 which  remains  the
      same unless and until some other evidence is provided for the Judge to
      depart from the decision made by Judge Ruth. The Judge was entitled to
      find  that  there  was  no  cogent  evidence  for  the   authoritative
      assessment of Judge Ruth to be disturbed.


  27. There must be finality in proceedings and the same evidence cannot  be
      the subject of several appeals by the  same  appellant  for  the  same
      claim. The appellant must demonstrate that there is additional  cogent
      evidence which was not considered by the previous decision  maker  and
      why it was not available earlier. The  appellant  cannot  continue  to
      appeal on the same evidence which has been litigated upon. There is no
      error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and it stands.
      This disposes of the appeal.

DECISION

First-tier Tribunal's decision stands. The appellant's appeal  is  dismissed
pursuant to the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the  European  Convention
on Human Rights.


Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S  Chana                                                Dated  this  6th
    day of June 2017
