
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30122/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 24th February 2016                    |14th March 2016                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         Miss Ernestina Ruth Tuffour
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Adama-Adams, Counsel instructed by Makanda Bart
& Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State to the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    relation to a Decision  of  Judge  Sweet  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on 18th August 2015.

 2. The judge was dealing with the Appellant  and  her  family  members  as
    dependants being her husband and three children.   The  three  children
    were born in 2005, 2010 and 2013.  They had applied under  Appendix  FM
    to remain in the United Kingdom.  The judge correctly  identified  that
    the only member of the family who could benefit under the Rules at  all
    was the child [P], that child being in the  United  Kingdom  throughout
    her life, so from 2005.

 3. The judge then on that basis considered in  extremely  brief  findings,
    indeed in relation to [P] it is three  lines,  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect her to leave the UK where she had  spent  all  her
    life, nor would it be reasonable for the rest of her  family  including
    the Appellant to leave the UK.  That finding is completely  unreasoned,
    particularly when you take into account the fact that [P] is one member
    of a family of five the other four of whom had no leave to  be  in  the
    UK.

 4. I therefore have no difficulty in finding in favour of the Secretary of
    State's grounds that the First-tier Judge made an error  of  law.   The
    error of law goes to the heart of the Decision because the only  reason
    the appeal would succeed was because of the Decision in relation to the
    child [P] and so it is to be set aside in its entirety.

 5. Mr Adams on behalf of the original Appellant does  not  seek  to  argue
    that the judgment can be saved.  It is fair to say that  the  Appellant
    did not have a proper hearing or a reasoned Decision before the  First-
    tier and therefore as it has to be  completely  reheard,  and  that  is
    accepted by both Mr Adams and Ms Sreeraman, the appropriate  forum  for
    rehearing is the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

I therefore allow the Secretary of State's appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
set aside the Decision of Judge Sweet and remit it to the First-tier  for  a
full rehearing on all issues.  The appeal should be heard  at  Taylor  House
as that is the appropriate venue for where the Appellant resides.

No anonymity direction was requested and I do not make one.






Signed                              Date 4th March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin




