
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30093/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 July 2014                               |On 30 July 2014              |
|Prepared 24 July 2014                         |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                Kamel Mecili

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Algeria born on 15 July 1981 appeals,  with
    permission, against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Beach who in a determination promulgated on 10 February 2014  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State not
    to grant him indefinite leave to remain on the basis that he had lived,
    without leave, in Britain for a period of fourteen years.

2.   At the hearing of the appeal before me there was no  appearance  by  or
    on behalf of the appellant.  I am satisfied from a perusal of the  file
    that the notice of appeal had been sent to the  appellant's  solicitors
    and also to  the  appellant  at  his  solicitor's  address.   In  these
    circumstances I considered it appropriate to  hear  and  determine  the
    appeal in the absence of the appellant.

3.   Before the judge the appellant and  two  friends  gave  evidence.   His
    friends, Mr Nour  Eddine  Mouaci  and  Mr  Abdelhamid  Boussoussa  gave
    evidence that they had known the  appellant  in  1998.   The  appellant
    relied on that evidence,  together  with  evidence  of  working  for  a
    restaurant called the Postofolio  Restaurant  here  over  the  relevant
    period as well as a letter from the Arab Advice Bureau stating that  he
    had registered with them in 1998.

4.   The judge considered  all  the  evidence  but  having  noted  that  the
    documentation from the restaurant gave the wrong name of the restaurant
    on the appellant's wages  slips,  HMRC  documents  and  the  employment
    contract found that she could place no weight  thereon.   Moreover  she
    considered that the appellant's friends were vague and that they  could
    give no reasons for being certain that they had met  the  appellant  in
    1998.  Similarly there was nothing to back  up  the  assertion  in  the
    letter from  the  Arab  Advice  Bureau  that  the  appellant  had  been
    registered with them since 1998 particularly as it appeared  that  they
    destroyed their records after six years.

5.   The judge therefore found that the appellant  had  not  discharged  the
    burden of proof upon him to show that he had lived in Britain,  without
    leave, for fourteen years.  She also considered that the appellant  had
    not shown that his  rights  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  would  be
    infringed by his removal.

6.   The  appellant  applied  for  permission  to  appeal.   Permission  was
    refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Brunnen on  9  April  2014.
    However the application was renewed and was granted by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Allen who stated that on balance he considered that there was "an
    arguable  challenge  to  the  findings  concerning  in  particular  the
    evidence of the appellant's two friends  is  made  out.   Arguably  the
    decision in respect of their evidence  in  particular  is  inadequately
    reasoned."  He went on to say that he  saw  less  force  in  the  other
    grounds of appeal.

7.   I noted that the application for permission to appeal  did  not  comply
    with the requirements of Rule 21(4) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 as  the  application  form  did  not  contain  the
    appellant's own address.  Leaving that, however, to  one  side  I  have
    considered the determination of the judge.  I  consider  that  she  did
    look at all the evidence before her  and  considered  it  holistically.
    Her comments regarding the documentary evidence  from  the  appellant's
    employer was clear and apt and entirely open  to  her.   Moreover,  she
    gave proper reasons for her conclusion that she could not place  weight
    on the letter from the Arab Advice Bureau.  She also clearly found that
    the appellant's friends' evidence was lacking in detail  and  that  the
    vagueness of the evidence meant that she could not  find  that  it  was
    sufficient for the appellant to have discharged the burden of proof.

8.   All her  findings  were,  I  consider,  entirely  open  to  her  and  I
    therefore find  that  there  was  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

9.   Accordingly her decision shall stand and this appeal  is  dismissed  on
    both immigration and human rights grounds.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

