
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/30293/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th November 2015                |On 4th December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                        MR Emmanuel Atitsogbui Nyani
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn issued on  15th  May  2015  allowing
    under the Immigration Rules the appeal of  the  Appellant  against  the
    decision of the Respondent made on 11th July 2014 to refuse a residence
    card under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as
    a confirmation of his right to reside in the United Kingdom.

 2. On 27th July 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge  Renton  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  He said:

         "The Appellant appealed a decision to refuse him a  residence  card
         as the spouse an EEA citizen exercising Treaty rights  in  the  UK.
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn  (the  Judge)  allowed  the  appeal
         because he was satisfied  the  Appellant  was  an  extended  family
         member  of  the  Sponsor  in  accordance  with  Reg  8(5)  of   the
         Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006, and  therefore  entitled  to  a
         residence card in accordance with Reg 17(4).  This is  an  arguable
         error  of  law.   Reg  17(4)  states  that  the  Respondent  has  a
         discretion to issue a residence card to an extended  family  member
         and therefore it is arguable that the Judge should have allowed the
         appeal only to the extent of referring the case to  the  Respondent
         for consideration of the exercise of discretion."

 3. The Judge clearly erred in allowing the appeal.  Regulation 17(4) is  a
    discretionary provision. It is for the Secretary of State to  make  the
    decision.

 4. The appeal should have been remitted to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    consideration and for a decision to be made.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted to the Secretary  of
State for her to exercise her discretion and make a decision.


Signed   Date: 26th November 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

