
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30422/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 August 2016                    |On 02 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                            MUHAMMAD EHTESHAM ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel, instructed by Addison & Khan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against a decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Sweet who in a determination promulgated  on  5
    February 2016 dismissed his  appeal against a decision of the Secretary
    of State to refuse his applications for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  1
    (General) Migrant and as a dependant of a Tier 4 Student.

2.   The allegation had been made by the Secretary of State,  when  refusing
    the  applications  that  the  appellant  had  used  deception  in   his
    applications in that he had claimed to have received quite considerable
    sums by way of salary from a company called Awdry  Enterprises  between
    February 2010 and January 2011.   The  appellant  had  put  forward  no
    evidence that that indeed was the case and the Secretary of  State  had
    before her considerable evidence that Awdry Enterprises was  a  company
    which had been involved in false payments for immigration purposes  and
    indeed a number of people had been prosecuted in that regard.

3.   It was for the judge to consider the issues  before  him  and  properly
    apply the burden of proof which in this case,  as  deception  had  been
    alleged, lay on the respondent.  Judge  Sweet  did  not  do  that.   In
    paragraph 24 he stated quite clearly that the burden of  proof  was  on
    the appellant.  That is a clear error of law.  Similarly the  terms  in
    which he set out the issues in this case and made findings in paragraph
    26 again indicated that he had placed the burden on the appellant.

4.   It is therefore necessary for me to set aside  the  decision  of  Judge
    Sweet. This is a case in which matters have moved on since the  hearing
    of the  appeal  to  the  extent  that  the  appellant's  wife  now  has
    indefinite leave to remain and indeed his children will be entitled  to
    apply for registration as they were born here.

5.   It  is  appropriate  in  these  circumstances  that  there  be  further
    findings of fact made  particularly on  the  issue  of  the  Article  8
    rights  of  the  appellant  and  accordingly  I  consider  that  it  is
    appropriate,  taking into account the  Senior  President  of  Tribunals
    Directions,  that this appeal be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a hearing afresh.



Notice of Decision

6.   My decision is that the appeal is allowed to the  limited  extent  that
    it is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing afresh.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

