
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30692/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8th September 2017                  |On 26th September 2017              |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                            mr matloob ahmed raja
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Phull sitting at Taylor House.  By way  of  a
    decision promulgated on 1st December the judge had  allowed  Mr  Raja's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse to vary  his
    leave to remain.   The  basis  of  the  rejection  of  the  Appellant's
    application by the Secretary of State had been well encapsulated in the
    judge's decision at paragraph 7 when she said the following:

         "The Presenting Officer relied on her written submissions that  the
         Appellant's English language test certificate was a false document.
          The Respondent has filed ETS data and two witness statements  from
         Home Office personnel in support.   The  Appellant  can  return  to
         Pakistan his appeal should be dismissed".

2.   Then the judge set out at paragraphs 11 and 12:

         "11. I do not have all the evidence from the Respondent to make  an
             assessment of the English language  certificate.   I  am  also
             concerned that the Appellant has not had  the  opportunity  to
             attend court and be tested on his evidence because I cannot be
             satisfied without more that he was  notified  of  the  hearing
             date by his representatives.  The Appellant has a right  to  a
             fair hearing this includes having the opportunity to  consider
             all the evidence the Respondent seeks to rely  on.   I  cannot
             make any findings on a document referred to in the refusal  or
             which the Respondent has failed to file because to do so would
             lead to unfairness to the Appellant.


         12.  In a recent decision  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Qadir  v
             Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ 1167 (20th  October  2016).
             The Respondent agreed that their appeal should  be  dismissed.
             The Respondent was relying on the generic evidence of  ETS  as
             alluded to at paragraph 9 above.  It is for the Respondent  to
             file all the evidence they seek to rely on in this case".

3.   The judge's decision is fair and well reasoned as far as  it  goes  but
    through no fault of hers, it appears that there has been  a  procedural
    error namely that although the documents that  the  judge  was  seeking
    were not part of the  file  presented  to  her,  it  appears  that  the
    Secretary of State had filed those very  documents  with  the  Tribunal
    Office. Unfortunately, those documents did not make their  way  to  the
    judge's file.

4.   When First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson  granted  permission  on  17th
    July 2017 she said in part as follows:

         "What is apparent from the Tribunal file is that the  evidence  was
         faxed to the Tribunal  by  the  Presenting  Officers'  Unit  on  17
         October 2016 but it does not appear to have found its  way  to  the
         file before the hearing  on  20  October  2016.   It  is  therefore
         arguable that there has been a procedural irregularity in that  the
         judge was  not  provided  with  the  evidence  which  was  in  fact
         submitted on behalf of the Respondent and that this  reflected  her
         assessment on the evidence pursuant to the guidance in SM and Qadir
         (ETS - Evidence - Burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 00229".

    5.   So the point is the evidence was there. It was filed late, but  it
         was  there.   Now  Mr  Walker  in  brief  but  clear  and   helpful
         submissions says he relies on the grounds of  appeal  but  he  also
         showed me the minutes that the Presenting  Officer  prepared  after
         the hearing before Judge Phull. Mr Walker says ultimately  this  is
         evidence that is used in ETS cases when there  is  a  proxy  tester
         allegation.  The generic evidence had  been  submitted.   The  Home
         Office Presenting Officer said it is not clear why  the  judge  did
         not ask for them.   It may well be that because of the date of  the
         decision in Qadir that this was all relatively new in terms of  the
         timing of the case law, but ultimately one simply cannot get around
         the fact that the Secretary of State did submit the evidence.


    6.   In the circumstances there is an error of law through no fault  of
         the judge.  It means that the decision has to be set aside.  I have
         considered as to what ought to happen next in terms of the  justice
         of the case. I am well aware of the state of ETS cases  but  in  my
         judgment even in such a case such as this where the  Appellant  has
         not appeared today and he did not appear on the  previous  occasion
         there has to be the opportunity for the Appellant to  have  a  fair
         hearing.  Therefore, albeit with  considerable  reluctance  I  have
         concluded that the  appropriate  course  is  for  the  case  to  be
         remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  There will be a rehearing  on
         all matters. None of the current findings shall stand.


Notice of Decision

       1. There is an error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal.
       2. The decision is set aside.
       3. There shall be a  re-hearing  on  all  issues  at  the  First-tier
          Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date 8 September 2017 [pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood






