
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/30623/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 3 March 2017                       |On 26 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                    THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                        Appellant

                                     And

                            DENTON ALWYN LINDSAY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Ms E Narh, Legal Representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Shiner (hereafter "the Judge")  promulgated  on  16
    September 2016 allowing the appeal of Mr Lindsay against the  Secretary
    of State's decision refusing his application for a Residence Card.

2.    While this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, I  shall  refer  to
      the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

3.    The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 22  September  1966.  It
      is not necessary to set out the Appellant's background in full, but it
      is germane to note that his application for a  Residence  Card  as  an
      Extended Family Member of an EEA  national,  namely,  his  partner,  a
      German national, was refused by the Respondent on 20 August 2015. That
      decision was not upheld by the Judge essentially because  he  accepted
      the Appellant and his partner were  in  a  durable  relationship,  and
      that, his partner was exercising Treaty rights in the UK.

4.    The First-tier Tribunal granted permission to  appeal  on  11  January
      2017 on the basis that it was arguable  the  Judge  erred  in  law  in
      finding that the Appellant had a right of appeal following  the  Upper
      Tribunal's decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT  00411
      (IAC).

5.    The Judicial head note  to  the  decision  in  Sala  (ibid)  reads  as
      follows: "There is no statutory right of appeal against  the  decision
      of the Secretary of State not to grant a Residence Card  to  a  person
      claiming to be an Extended  Family  Member."  At  the  outset  of  the
      hearing before me, the representatives agreed that in  light  of  this
      decision, the First-tier Tribunal had  no  jurisdiction  to  hear  the
      appeal.

6.    The decision in Sala is declaratory of the law as it currently  stands
      and must be applied notwithstanding that it was  a  decision  reported
      subsequent to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I  thus  apply
      that decision to this appeal. I find that the First-tier Tribunal  had
      no jurisdiction to hear the appeal as there  is  no  right  of  appeal
      against the Respondent's decision not to issue a Residence Card to  an
      applicant claiming to be an Extended Family Member.

Disposal

7.    The Appellant has no right of appeal. The First-tier Tribunal  had  no
      jurisdiction to hear the appeal. It erred in  law  in  doing  so.  Its
      decision is set aside. I substitute a decision that there was no valid
      appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                       Dated : 3 March 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

