

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number: IA/30564/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 5 June 2017                        |on 12 June 2017                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              PAVEENA CHIMPALEE
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: no appearance
For the Respondent: Mr Tarlow Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge M
        A Khan promulgated on 2 November 2016 in which the Judge  dismissed
        the appellant's appeal against refusal of the application for leave
        to remain on human rights grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Thailand born on 22  September  1971
        who entered the United Kingdom on 10 October 2004 with leave  as  a
        student extended to 30 January 2015.
     3. The application for leave on human rights grounds  was  refused  by
        reference to paragraph 322(1) of the Immigration Rules  as  it  was
        asserted that a TOEIC certificates submitted by the applicant  with
        an application dated 30 April 2013 had been obtained  fraudulently,
        by the use of a proxy test taker, and because  it  was  said  there
        were no compassionate factors to warrant a grant of  leave  outside
        the Rules. The appellant is  subject  to  a  removal  direction  to
        Thailand made pursuant to section 10  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
        1999.
     4. The Judge noted the appellant's case that she  entered  the  United
        Kingdom as a student and had completed 10  years  lawful  residence
        and that she  therefore  met  all  the  requirements  of  paragraph
        276B(i)(ii) and (v) of the Immigration Rules.
     5. The Judge's findings are set out from [20] of  the  decision  under
        challenged and can be summarised as follows:


   a. That the appellant's evidence was,  in  general,  straightforward  and
      credible [20].
   b. The appellant did take copies of a passport to the Life in the UK test
      but those copies were not accepted by the Test Centre [21].
   c. The appellant  has  lived  in  the  UK  for  over  10  years  and  has
      established some private life here [21].
   d. In relation to the allegation a proxy was  used  to  take  an  English
      language  test,  the  respondent's  evidence   composed   of   witness
      statements and an ETS SELT  datasheet  which  led  to  a  finding  the
      respondent had not established dishonesty on  the  appellant's  behalf
      and had not  established  that  the  TOEIC  certificate  was  obtained
      fraudulently by the appellant [24].
   e. The appellant has no basis for extending her stay in the UK other than
      her private life [25].
   f. The appellant entered the UK for a limited period with no  expectation
      that she had the right to settle here. The  appellant's  private  life
      involves having friends and being part of the community. The appellant
      has family including her parents and siblings in Thailand [25].
   g. The appellant's private life can continue in Thailand [27].
   h. The appellants leave in the UK has been for a limited period  of  time
      making her status precarious. Little weight is given to a private life
      formed when a person's immigration status is precarious [29 - 30].
   i. At [31] "the  appellant's  case  is  subject  to  consideration  under
      Section 117B(5). The whole of the appellant's time spent in the UK  is
      in the knowledge that they have no right to  settle  here.  I  see  no
      reason as to why her daughter could not return  to  Nigeria  with  her
      mother and resettle in the country of their origin".
     6. The appellant sought to appeal the decision in  relation  to  which
        permission was granted by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal.
        The operative parts of that grant in the following terms:


         2.   The appellant  says  the  Judge  should  have  considered  her
             application under paragraph 276A1 but she could appeal only on
             human  rights  or  protection  grounds,  had  not  passed  the
             necessary English language test and it does  not  appear  from
             the record of proceedings that the appellant's  representative
             pursued paragraph 276A1.


         3.   However, there are a number of errors of fact in the  decision
             which are set out at paragraph 10 of the grounds. There is  no
             reference to "both appellants" in paragraph  2  but  there  is
             reference to the appellant's son at paragraph  5  and  to  her
             daughter returning to Nigeria at paragraph 31. It is  arguable
             that such errors cast doubt upon the decision as a whole.


     7. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response which indicated she did not
        oppose the application.
     8. The matter was listed for hearing before  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
        notice of the time date and  place  of  the  hearing  sent  to  the
        parties. I am satisfied that has been valid service of that  notice
        in accordance with the procedure rules. Notwithstanding this  fact,
        both the appellant and her  representative  failed  to  attend  the
        hearing to prosecute her challenge to the decision in which she  is
        seeking to have that decision set aside and remade,  either  before
        the First-tier Tribunal or by the Upper Tribunal, as this  tribunal
        considers appropriate.
     9. No explanation for the appellant's  absence  was  provided  and  no
        adjournment request made. No indication was given by  the  Tribunal
        that the hearing was not going to proceed or that the attendance of
        either party was excused.
    10. Any indication that  has  been  made  of  a  party's  view  is  not
        necessarily binding upon the Tribunal and in this  case  Mr  Tarlow
        withdrew the content of the Rule 24 response on the basis that  the
        challenge has no arguable  merit  when  the  decision  is  properly
        considered.
    11. In light of the failure to attend and absence of proper explanation
        the Tribunal considered it to be in the interest of justice, and in
        accordance with the overriding objective, to  proceed  to  consider
        this matter in the appellant's absence.




Discussion



    12. The first point of comment relates to a matter which is not subject
        to a cross-appeal. That is the finding at [24] of the decision that
        the two generic witness statements relied upon by the Secretary  of
        State in ETS cases together  with  the  ETS  lookup  tool  are  not
        sufficient. The current case law, which was available to the Judge,
        finds that the combination of the generic statements together  with
        the ETS lookup tool are sufficient to enable the Secretary of State
        to discharge the initial burden upon her of proving  deception.  In
        this case, it is arguably clear that that was  the  nature  of  the
        evidence before the Judge which should have led the Judge  to  hear
        from the appellant to establish an  acceptable  explanation,  which
        may have meant the need to revert to the  Secretary  of  State  for
        further comment.
    13. As there is no cross-appeal by the Secretary of State and therefore
        no notice to the appellant that this specific issue was going to be
        the subject of challenge, this tribunal considers it unfair to make
        any specific  finding  in  relation  to  [24]  without  giving  the
        appellant notice, which would require an adjournment of the hearing
        which is not arguably necessary for the reasons set out below. This
        element of the decision shall therefore stand.
    14. The judge granting permission refers to [10] of the application for
        permission to appeal which is drafted in the following terms:


         10.  The  FTJ  also  made  an  error  in  dealing  with  the  other
             grounds/outside the rules on Human rights grounds. In  dealing
             with Article 8 claim, the FTJ did not give sufficient  reasons
             except  referring  to  the  legal  position  on   Article   8.
             Unfortunately that the FTJ made numerous errors of fact in the
             determination which is quoted below -


             i.   In paragraph 2 of the determination 'the  respondent  has
                  set  liability  to   removal   directions   against   both
                  appellants under section 10....' In reality, the appellant
                  is the only appellant in these appeal.


             ii.  In para 5 of determination 'The appellant states that her
                  son has lived in the UK for over 7 years and therefore  he
                  qualified under paragraph 276ADE' Neither the  grounds  of
                  appeal nor the appellant's  witness  statements  made  any
                  such claim ever.


             iii  In paragraph 29 of the determination, 'The  appellant  in
                  this case out of limited leave to remain as a visitor'. In
                  fact the appellant's immigration history from  the  reason
                  for decision shows that she has never been a visitor.


             iv.  The most  striking  error  can  be  found  in  concluding
                  paragraph 32 of the determination 'I see no reason  as  to
                  why her daughter could not  return  to  Nigeria  with  her
                  mother and resettle in the country of origin'.


             It seems  from  the  above  serious  factual  error  that  the
                  reasoning on dismissal of article 8 claim is based on  the
                  facts of unrelated case. As such the determination of  the
                  FT  J  does  not  disclose  clearly  the  reasons  for   a
                  tribunal's decision in accordance with the  principles  in
                  MK (due to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC)


    15. It is accepted  there  are  a  number  of  factual  errors  in  the
        decision, as set out in [10] above. In ML (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ
        844 there had been  substantial  errors  in  the  recollection  and
        record of the facts that were advanced in the case.   It  was  held
        that, even though  there  were  sound  reasons  for  rejecting  the
        appeal, a series of material factual errors can constitute an error
        of law. It is trite in not only the field of  judicial  review  but
        also statutory appeals and appeals  by  way  of  case  stated  that
        factual errors, if they are  significant  to  the  conclusion,  can
        constitute errors of law. The essential question  for  the  UT  was
        whether this appellant had the fair hearing.  As part of that  fair
        hearing, the finders of fact must listen to and take  into  account
        conscientiously the arguments that are  deployed  in  favour  of  a
        finding that the claimant is telling the truth  as  well  as  those
        arguments against.
    16. It has not been made out, nor even pleaded, that the appellant  did
        not receive a fair hearing in this case.
    17. The Judge considered those matters that relied  upon  by  both  the
        appellant  and  the  respondent   and   indeed,   albeit   arguably
        erroneously, found in the appellant's favour  in  relation  to  the
        TOEIC certificate and the alleged use of deception.
    18. The claim by the appellant that she satisfied the  requirements  of
        paragraph 276B has not been shown to have arguable  merit  for  the
        reasons identified by the judge refusing permission to appeal.
    19. In relation to the alleged factual errors, it is arguable the grant
        of permission to appeal  on  this  basis  is  itself  flawed  as  a
        detailed examination of the impugned decision does not reveal  that
        such errors disclose a misunderstanding of the  factual  matrix  of
        this case or misdirection of law. What they do disclose is  a  lack
        of care and/or attention to detail by the  Judge  in  checking  the
        judgment before sending the same for promulgation.
    20. The reference in the application  for  permission  to  [2]  of  the
        decision, where it is alleged  the  Judge  referred  to  a  removal
        direction been set against both appellants, is in fact a  reference
        to [3]. Although the Judge does refer to there being two appellants
        this makes no difference to those who  are  legally  subject  to  a
        removal direction and is not a finding, but  rather  an  inaccurate
        reflection of who is the subject of the removal direction.
    21. The reference to [5] in the application for permission alleging the
        Judge stated that the appellant and her son have lived  in  the  UK
        for over seven years and therefore he qualifies under paragraph 276
        ADE is noted. It is also accepted this is a matter  not  raised  by
        the appellant but has not been shown to be material as this, as  in
        the previous matter, appears  in  the  part  of  the  determination
        headed "issues under appeal" rather than the findings of  fact  and
        credibility in relation to which no decision was made regarding the
        inaccurate reference.
    22. The reference to [29] in the application for permission, where  the
        Judge claimed the  appellant  had  limited  leave  to  enter  as  a
        visitor, is noted. What is not challenged are the other findings in
        that paragraph that the appellant has lived in the  United  Kingdom
        since 2004, that the appellant's entry  and  leave  in  the  United
        Kingdom was granted for a limited period  of  time,  and  that  her
        status has always  been  precarious.   The  appellant  entered  the
        United Kingdom as a student on 10 October 2004 with  leave  granted
        to 30 April 2013. This  has  never  been  settled  status  and  the
        reference by the Judge to section 117B (5) and the decision of  the
        Upper Tribunal in AM (Malawi) [2015]  UKUT  260  are  the  relevant
        provisions the Judge was required to consider  when  assessing  the
        weight to be given to the appellant's private  life  formed  during
        the time her status has been precarious, which is little. The error
        is the description in relation to the  nature  of  leave  initially
        granted not the legal consequences and impact of  such  leave  upon
        the appeal.
    23. The reference to [29] in the application for permission  where  the
        Judge is stated to have referred  to  the  applicant's  country  of
        Nigeria is noted. This is, again, an example of sloppiness/lack  of
        attention to detail rather than legal error. The Judge is aware the
        appellant is a national of Thailand and that that is the country to
        which the respondent proposed to return her. This is clearly  noted
        in the removal direction and in the decision  under  challenge  the
        correct country is noted at [1], [16], [17], [18], and specifically
        at [27] where the Judge finds "On  the  balance  I  find  that  the
        appellant's private life can continue in Thailand".
    24. No arguable legal error material to the decision  is  made  out  in
        relation to the factual inaccuracies. It would have been preferable
        that they would not have appeared in  the  decision  in  the  first
        place.
    25. The appellant's appeal was against the refusal  of  an  application
        for leave to remain  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  pursuant  to
        article 8 ECHR. In Section 3 of the application form the  appellant
        confirms the application is for such purpose which  she  states  is
        because she would like to be in the UK to enable  her  to  complete
        the "Life in UK" exam which she had not taken at that time. This is
        noted in the rejection under the heading "Decision on Compassionate
        Factors" in which the decision-maker notes the exam  was  organised
        for 11 February 2015. The decision-maker, however, concluded "It is
        open to you to  return  to  Thailand  to  pursue  your  studies  or
        employment there. Alternatively, if you wish to  undertake  further
        studies or employment in the United Kingdom, it is open to  you  to
        make an application from Thailand under the appropriate  route.  It
        should be noted that you should have taken your Life in the UK test
        now therefore you can return to  Thailand.  It  is  noted  that  no
        further application for leave to remain in the UK has been raised".
    26. The appellant appeared to be seeking to use article 8 in  what  may
        argued to be an inappropriate manner. Article 8  does  not  give  a
        person the right to choose the country in which they wish to reside
        and is  not  designed  to  facilitate  an  individual  pursuing  an
        application under the Rules, per se,  for  their  convenience.  The
        purpose of article 8 is to prevent unwarranted  interference  by  a
        Contracting State to the ECHR in a protected right. The  right  the
        appellant  refers  to  appears  to  be  her  private  life  as  the
        application sought to enable her to take a test  to  allow  her  to
        continue to live in the UK.
    27. The finding by the judge that  the  appellant's  private  life  can
        continue in Thailand is  not  challenged  in  the  application  for
        permission to appeal. Those grounds assert the Judge erred for  the
        reasons set out, including at paragraph 10, which  has  been  dealt
        with above, and allege the Judge erred  in  failing  to  deal  with
        paragraph 276A1 of the Immigration Rules.
    28. The appellant has not made out there  was  a  specific  application
        under this provision of the Rules as the  application  was  clearly
        for leave outside the Rules and under  the  current  appeal  regime
        grounds of appeal are restricted. Although the appellant's  grounds
        assert the  respondent  acted  unlawfully  without  considering  an
        application it was not  specifically  claimed  that  the  appellant
        sought an extension of stay  based  on  long  residence  under  the
        Rules.  As noted by the judge granting permission  to  appeal,  the
        difficulty for the appellant in relation to this provision  of  the
        Rules is that the appellant did  not  pass  the  necessary  English
        language test and it does not appear  that  before  the  Judge  the
        appellant's representative pursued this issue. The respondent dealt
        with the application made  and  the  Judge  determined  the  appeal
        against the refusal of the application on that basis.
    29. Having the considered all matters, it is arguable that the decision
        by the Judge in dismissing the appeal for the reasons stated  is  a
        decision fully open to the Judge on the basis of the facts of  this
        case and one that  does  not  disclose  any  arguable  legal  error
        material to the decision to dismiss the appeal. The Judge adopted a
        structured approach, applied relevant legal provisions,  and  gives
        adequate reasons for the findings made.
    30. Accordingly, there is little point in doing other than dismiss  the
        appeal against the Judge's decision.  To do otherwise would not  be
        in accordance with the overriding objectives as  it  has  not  been
        made out that anything other than a decision dismissing the  appeal
        on article 8 ECHR grounds is likely to be made on  the  facts,  and
        considering the current provisions relating to  the  assessment  of
        human rights claims.


Decision

    31. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    32. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 9 June 2017











