
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/30608/2013
     IA/30605/2013
     IA/30606/2013
     IA/30607/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House,              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Stoke-on-Trent                       |                                     |
|On 10th November 2014                |On 17th November 2014                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COATES


                                   Between

              MR LIVERA MUDALIGE RAVINDRA SARATH KUM DE LIVERA
                     MRS SHARMILA VAJIRANI PERERA PERERA
               MISS LIVERA MUDALIGE CHATURYA YOHARI DE LIVERA
              MASTER LIVERA MUDALIGE THISARA DIREDRA DE LIVERA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka.  The first Appellant  is  the
    husband of the second Appellant and the third and fourth Appellants are
    their children.  In the remainder of this determination,  for  ease  of
    reference,  I  propose  to  refer  to  the  first  Appellant  as   "the
    Appellant".

 2. On 13th July 2013 the Appellant made a combined application  for  leave
    to remain as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant under the  points-based  system
    (PBS) and for a  biometric  residence  permit.   The  other  Appellants
    applied as his dependants.  The applications were refused on 7th August
    2013 and all four Appellants have exercised their right of appeal.

 3. The appeals were dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Broe  in
    a determination promulgated on 15th January 2014.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted to all four Appellants by Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal V A Osborne on 26th March 2014.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the First-tier Judge made an arguable error of  law  because
    throughout his determination he referred to the provisions of paragraph
    6A of Appendix A to the Immigration Rules which  relate  to  attributes
    for Tier 1 (Exceptional Talent)  Migrants  whereas  the  Appellant  was
    applying as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant.  The necessary  attributes  for
    Tier 1 (General) Migrants begin at paragraph 7 of  Appendix  A.   Judge
    Osborne concluded that the First-tier Judge's failure to  identify  the
    correct provisions of the Immigration  Rules  constituted  an  arguable
    material error of law because of the different requirements.  Thus  the
    matter came before me for an error of law hearing in the Upper Tribunal
    on 10th November 2014.

 6. The Appellant was present.  Representation was as mentioned  above.   I
    have before me all the  documents  which  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 7. The Respondent's representative has filed and served a  response  under
    Rule 24 dated 11th April 2014.  The response accepts  that  the  First-
    tier Judge erred by considering the Appellant's case  under  the  wrong
    part of Appendix A (6A rather than 18, 19  and  19-SD).   However,  the
    response also refers to paragraph 19(A) which states as follows:

         "In all cases, the applicant must provide at  least  two  different
         types of the specified documents in paragraph 19-SD(a) from two  or
         more separate sources as  evidence  for  each  source  of  previous
         earnings."

     It is clear from the determination that there  was  no  other  evidence
    which corroborated the Appellant's dividend payment and therefore  that
    provision could not be met.   The  Respondent's  representative  argues
    that any error is therefore not material.

 8. For the Appellant, Mr Kannangara argued that the First-tier  Judge  had
    applied the wrong Rules and the error was material  because  the  Rules
    which he applied differed from those which he should have applied.   Mr
    Kannangara referred to three specific documents which were submitted in
    support of the application.  These were a dividend  voucher  issued  by
    the Appellant's company (as opposed to his accountant), an accountant's
    report and a bank account.  These are three  items  which  are  allowed
    under the correct Rules.   Mr  Kannangara  drew  my  attention  to  the
    Appellant's application form where boxes  had  been  ticked  indicating
    that the application was correctly completed and those three items were
    clearly referred to.

 9.  At  the  end  of  Mr  Kannangara's  submission  I  indicated  that  my
    preliminary view was that the First Tier Judge had erred in law because
    the Rules relating to a Tier 1 (Exceptional  Talent)  Migrant  differed
    from the Rules which applied to a Tier 1 (General) Migrant.   In  those
    circumstances, the appropriate course was for the matter  to  be  heard
    afresh by a different judge in the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  for  the
    original application to be considered against the correct  Rule.   Miss
    Johnstone, for the Respondent, did not seek to dissuade me from  taking
    this course of action.  Having taken into account paragraph 7.2 of Part
    3  of  the  Practice  Statements,  I  am  satisfied  that  this  is  an
    appropriate case for remitting the matter to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a de novo hearing before a different judge.  I do not  consider  it
    appropriate to preserve any findings of fact.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of a material error on a point of law.  I set aside  the  determination  and
remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard  afresh  before  a
different Judge of the First-tier.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 13th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Coates

