
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30292/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd December 2015                 |On 7th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                         Mr Michael Anthony Anderson
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Padyna, Counsel instructed by Trott and Gentry
                    LLP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a  national  of  Jamaica,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of  the  Respondent  dated  9th  July  2014
    refusing him leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of
    private and family life under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  and
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.   Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Dean dismissed the appeal and the Appellant now  appeals  with
    permission to this Tribunal.

Background

 2. The background to this appeal is that  the  Appellant  claims  that  he
    lived in Jamaica for the first twelve years of  his  life.   He  claims
    that he does not remember his mother and he lived with his  father  but
    because his father was abusive he moved to live with a neighbour called
    Momma,  who  was  not  a  relative  but  a  respected  person  in   the
    neighbourhood with whom he stayed until things  calmed  down  and  then
    returned to his father. He said that before  he  left  Jamaica  he  was
    staying with Momma more or less all of the time.  He says that  it  was
    Momma who arranged his visits to the United  Kingdom  where  he  stayed
    with her daughter, Linda.

 3. The Appellant first came to the UK in 2001 and says that he returned to
    Jamaica after his 12th birthday.  He says that he then returned to  the
    UK on 3rd August 2002 with a visitor's visa valid  until  3rd  February
    2003.  However, he did not leave the UK when his visa expired  and  has
    remained here since.  In 2008 he was arrested in a routine police check
    when it was established that he had no leave to remain in  the  UK  and
    was served with a notice informing him that he was an  overstayer.   He
    was required to report regularly and when he reported on 25th July 2012
    the Appellant was detained and informed that he  would  be  removed  to
    Jamaica on 1st August 2012.

 4. Following an application for judicial review the  Respondent  cancelled
    the removal directions.  On 9th March 2014 the Appellant  was  arrested
    for possession of a class B drug and subsequently cautioned.   On  20th
    May 2014 an application was made on the Appellant's behalf for his case
    to be considered on human rights grounds.  This application was refused
    on 9th July  2014  and  fresh  removal  directions  were  issued.   The
    Appellant claims that some time after his arrival in the UK  he  became
    friends with a woman called Tina Glenville and her  sons  and  that  he
    went to stay with her.

 5. The judge considered the relevant provisions of  276ADE(vi)  which,  at
    the date of the decision provided that the requirements to be met by an
    applicant for limited leave to remain on grounds of private life in the
    UK are that, at the date of application, the applicant: (vi) is aged 18
    years or above, has lived continuously in the UK for less  than  twenty
    years but has "no ties (including  social,  cultural  or  family)  with
    country to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK".

 6. The judge considered the evidence and concluded that the Appellant  has
    ties in  Jamaica  and  therefore  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(vi).  The judge went on to consider Article 8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights outside of the  Immigration  Rules.
    In that context the judge considered the evidence of  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and Ms Glenville.  He stated at paragraph 25 that
    it was submitted that the close bond the Appellant has formed  with  Ms
    Glenville should be given significant weight.  However, the judge found
    that the claimed close bond was in fact tenuous and that  Ms  Glenville
    was an unimpressive witness and that her  evidence  lacked  credibility
    and the judge gave it very little weight.

 7. The judge heard evidence from one of Ms Glenville's sons but noted that
    the other  son  with  whom  the  Appellant  claimed  to  have  a  close
    friendship (the Appellant claimed that he was like  a  brother  to  him
    [27]), did not attend the  hearing.   The  judge  found  also  that  Mr
    Fisher, Ms Glenville's son who did attend  to  give  evidence,  was  an
    unimpressive witness and gave very little weight to his evidence.   The
    judge concluded that the  Appellant  has  established  a  very  limited
    private life in the UK and weighed that private life against the public
    interest and  found  that  the  Respondent's  decision  to  remove  the
    Appellant is proportionate in the circumstances.

Error of Law

 8. The Grounds of Appeal and Ms  Padyna's  skeleton  argument  make  three
    contentions.  The first ground is that it is contended that the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's decision is flawed in that the judge  found  that
    the Appellant still had ties to  Jamaica  and  that  this  finding  was
    contrary to the evidence before her.  It is contended that the  judge's
    finding that the Appellant had ties to his father and  "Momma"  has  no
    evidential basis whatsoever.

 9. Ms Padyna submitted that there was nothing in the decision to say  that
    the background facts were disputed  and  the  judge  made  no  contrary
    finding in relation to background.  She submitted that the  Appellant's
    evidence was that he arrived in the UK in 2002 and was in the  care  of
    Linda and was later taken into the care  of  Tina  Glenville  where  he
    lived since then.   She  submitted  that  the  evidence  was  that  the
    Appellant had no contact with anyone in Jamaica.   She  relied  on  the
    Appellant's witness statement, which at paragraph 2 imported an earlier
    witness statement, at paragraph 13 of which the Appellant  said  "I  do
    not know anyone in Jamaica so I would be all by myself".

10. She also relied on the witness statement of Tina  Glenville  where,  at
    paragraph 2 an earlier witness statement she  made  was  imported  into
    that witness  statement,  and  at  paragraph  15  of  which  she  said:
    "Michael's whole life is in the UK.  He has no contact with  anyone  in
    Jamaica.  Michael tells me that he has not spoken to his godmother whom
    he calls Momma since  arriving  in  the  UK."   She  referred  also  to
    paragraph 3 of Ms Glenville's witness statement, where she  imported  a
    further supplementary statement dated 26th July 2012, at paragraph 2 of
    which she said:

         "Michael does not know this yet but when I visited Jamaica in  2010
         and 2011 on holiday I tried to find any  family  Michael  may  have
         there.  I could not find any of his family.  I tried to go  to  the
         registrar's office but without any  authorisation  from  Michael  I
         could not get any information.  I also went to Michael's home  area
         and asked people there if anybody remembered or knew Michael or any
         of his family.  Nobody knew them.  Some  people  were  even  rather
         hostile to me asking this in the rather rough  area  where  Michael
         came from.  Life there seemed  very  hard  and  I  do  not  believe
         Michael would survive there.  I have yet to  tell  Michael  that  I
         have done this but I feel I now need to state this."

11. Ms Padyna submitted that no finding was made by the judge to contradict
    this evidence.  She submitted that it was clear from  paragraph  17  of
    the judge's determination that the judge considered that the  Appellant
    had ongoing contact with his father and Momma where he referred to  the
    Appellant re-establishing contact.  She submitted that  this  therefore
    implied that the judge  accepted  that  no  ongoing  contact  currently
    exists.

12. She submitted that there was no  evidence  adduced  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in support of the finding  that  the  Appellant's  father  and
    Momma continue to reside in Jamaica and that therefore the  finding  at
    paragraph 17 has no basis on the evidence  and  runs  contrary  to  the
    evidence before the Tribunal.  She submitted that there were no adverse
    credibility findings in relation to the Appellant in the  decision  and
    no finding in relation  to  the  evidence  given  by  Ms  Glenville  in
    relation to his relationships in Jamaica.

13. She submitted that the case law of YM (Uganda) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 and Ogundimu (Article 8 -  new
    rules) (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC) state that  there  must
    be a continued connection to life in the country to which the person is
    to be removed and that the mere existence of family is not  enough  and
    that the Tribunal must consider  what  sort  of  support  those  family
    members could provide and she submitted that there was  no  mention  of
    these sorts of considerations in this case.  She submitted that,  given
    the evidence of abuse from his father, it  does  not  follow  that  the
    Appellant could re-establish contact with his father or with Momma, who
    he said sent him away to the UK.

14. In relation to  this  issue  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  that  the
    Appellant in his witness statement at paragraph 2.13 had said  that  he
    does not know anyone in Jamaica and this is not the same as saying that
    he has no contact with anyone  in  Jamaica.   She  submitted  that  the
    statement from Ms Glenville  does  state  that  the  Appellant  has  no
    contact but does not explain how she has come to that conclusion.   The
    second part of paragraph 2.15 of Ms Glenville's statement says that the
    Appellant told her but she submitted this is important in light of  the
    judge's finding that Ms Glenville's evidence was lacking in credibility
    and attached very little weight to her evidence.   She  submitted  that
    anything that Ms Glenville  says  must  be  viewed  in  light  of  that
    negative credibility finding.

15. She submitted  that  there  is  very  little  in  the  Appellant's  own
    statement to demonstrate that he has no contact with anyone in Jamaica.
     In these circumstances the judge was entitled to conclude at paragraph
    17 that the Appellant's father and Momma are still in  Jamaica  in  the
    absence of  any  evidence  to  suggest  that  those  circumstances  had
    changed.  She also submitted that the findings have to be considered in
    the context of the Appellant's own evidence.  He says that he was given
    support by Momma and absent any evidence  from  the  Appellant  to  the
    contrary the judge was entitled to find that he could turn to  her  for
    support and to re-establish contact with her upon return to Jamaica.

16. She referred to the case of YM (Uganda) and submitted  that  the  judge
    was not relying on tenuous ties such as nationality in this case.  Here
    the judge has relied on a de facto parent and the judge was entitled to
    conclude that the Appellant has links to the community.  She  submitted
    that the judge undertook a rounded assessment, took  into  account  the
    ties and was entitled to reach the conclusions she did.

17. I have considered  the  submissions  in  relation  to  the  contact  in
    Jamaica.  The difficulty for the Appellant is that the judge really had
    very limited evidence in relation to this issue.  The  Appellant's  own
    statement says at paragraph 2.13  that  he  does  not  know  anyone  in
    Jamaica.   The  evidence  put  forward  by  Ms  Glenville,  which   was
    undermined by the judge's  credibility  findings  in  relation  to  her
    evidence as to the bond between her and the  Appellant,  was  that  the
    Appellant told her he had no contact with anyone in Jamaica (2.15)  and
    that she, without  authorisation  from  the  Appellant,  tried  to  get
    information  about  his  family  in  Jamaica.   This  evidence  is  not
    sufficient in my view to lead to a conclusion that the Appellant cannot
    re-establish contact with his family members or people to whom  he  was
    close in Jamaica.

18. In these circumstances I  consider  that  the  judge's  conclusions  at
    paragraph 17 that the Appellant's father and Momma live in Jamaica  and
    that the Appellant could re-establish contact with them  were  open  to
    her on the evidence.

19. I also note that the judge attached significant weight to the fact that
    the Appellant had spent twelve years in Jamaica and attended school  to
    the age of 10, which the judge stated were cultural and social links to
    Jamaica which were established during his formative years and have  not
    been supplanted during his time in this country (17).

20. The second Ground of Appeal contends that the judge erred at  paragraph
    16 in that she took into account an irrelevant matter where she said:

         "When he made his witness statement in 2012 he  was  living  at  an
         address in Brixton.  He  is  currently  living  in  an  address  in
         Peckham.  I take judicial notice of the fact that both these  areas
         have significant populations from  the  Caribbean  and,  while  not
         determinative, find that  during  his  time  in  this  country  the
         Appellant has not been divorced from the socio-cultural  milieu  of
         his country of origin."

21. Ms Padyna submits that whilst the judge points out that this  issue  is
    not determinative it does lend some indication to the Appellant's  ties
    and it indicates that the judge has acted contrary to the  guidance  in
    YM.

22. In the decision in YM (Uganda) Lord Justice Aikens cited with  approval
    the Upper Tribunal's conclusion in Ogundimu at paragraph 123:

         "The natural and ordinary meaning of the words 'ties'  imports,  we
         think, a concept involving something more than  merely  remote  and
         abstract links to the country of proposed deportation and  removal.
         It involves there being a continued  connection  to  life  in  that
         country; something that ties a claimant to his or  her  country  of
         origin.  If this were not the case then  it  would  appear  that  a
         person's nationality of the country of proposed  deportation  could
         of itself lead to a failure to meet the requirements of  the  Rule.
         This would render the application of the Rule,  given  the  context
         within which it operates, entirely meaningless."

23. Lord Justice Aikens went on to say:

         "51. The UT in that case went on to recognise that the test was  an
         exacting one. However, the exercise that had to be conducted was  a
         "rounded assessment of all the relevant circumstances", which  were
         not to be confined to "social, cultural and family" issues. The  UT
         concluded, on the facts, that Mr Ogundimu did not  have  ties  with
         Nigeria, the country to which he would have been deported. It noted
         that his father might have ties but they were not the  ties  of  Mr
         Ogundimu himself "or any ties that could result in support to [him]
         in the event of his return [to Nigeria]".

         52.  I agree with the analysis of the UT in Ogundimu. Whether  this
         is  a  "hard  -edged"   factual   enquiry,   or   a   question   of
         "evaluation", the question in this case  is:  what  ties  does  YM
         himself have with Uganda and would they support him in the event of
         a return there. Ties of other relatives, particularly YM's  mother,
         are irrelevant."

24. I am satisfied that the judge considered the matter of the  Appellant's
    social and cultural ties in the  round.   At  paragraph  17  the  judge
    considered the fact that  the  Appellant  had  spent  twelve  years  in
    Jamaica, had attended school there and could re-establish contact  with
    his father and with Momma there.  I also note that the judge had  noted
    at paragraph 15 that the Appellant had previously stayed  with  Momma's
    daughter in the UK.

25. I accept that, in taking judicial notice as to her understanding of the
    socio-cultural milieu in Brixton and Peckham, the judge may have erred.
     However, I do not consider that this is a material error in  light  of
    all of the other findings made by the judge.  The judge said that  this
    observation was not determinative and in my view the other findings can
    stand alone without this generalised statement.

26. The third Ground of Appeal is that the  judge  failed  to  give  proper
    reasons for her findings that Ms Glenville was "an unimpressive witness
    who is a stranger to the truth" [26].  Ms Padyna submitted  that  there
    is no clear link between paragraphs 25 and 26 and that it  is  entirely
    unclear how the judge reached the conclusion that Ms Glenville was  not
    credible.

27. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that paragraphs 25  and  26  have  to  be
    considered in the round and that  the  reasons  fro  not  accepting  Ms
    Glenville's evidence are clear from reading both of these paragraphs.

28. I am satisfied that, when read together,  paragraphs  25  and  26  make
    completely clear why the judge found Ms Glenville to be an unimpressive
    witness and decided that she lacked credibility and gave  her  evidence
    very little weight.  I consider that the phrase "is a stranger  to  the
    truth" adds nothing to the judge's assessment.  However,  it  is  clear
    from reading both of these paragraphs that the  judge  found  that  the
    claimed close bond between Ms Glenville and the  Appellant  is  tenuous
    because there was little evidence apart from the fact that she provided
    a roof over the Appellant's head that she had  done  anything  for  the
    Appellant.  The judge set out all of the reasons in full  in  paragraph
    25.

29. I am satisfied  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  Ms
    Glenville's evidence was exaggerated in relation to this matter  and  I
    am satisfied that the judge was entitled to conclude that the  evidence
    lacked credibility and to give it very little weight.

30. Looking at the decision overall I have considered the guidance given by
    the Tribunal in the case of  Bossadi  (paragraph  276ADE;  suitability;
    ties) [2015] UKUT 00042 (IAC).  I note that the Tribunal said  that  an
    assessment under 276ADE(vi) in force from 9th July 2012 until 27th July
    2014 and applicable in this case requires a rounded  assessment  as  to
    whether a person's familial ties could result in support to him in  the
    event of his return, an assessment taking into account both  subjective
    and objective considerations and also consideration of what lies within
    the choice of a claimant to achieve. I am satisfied that the  judge  in
    this case undertook such an assessment in relation to paragraph  276ADE
    of the Rules.  I am satisfied that the judge  considered  all  material
    factors in her assessment of Article 8.

31. In the circumstances I am satisfied that the judge reached a conclusion
    open to her.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision.
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 4th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 4th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
