
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
IA/30213/2015

                                                   IA/30214/2015

                                                   IA/30215/2015

                                                  IA/30216/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)        |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25th July 2017                        |  On 7th September 2017             |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     L Y
                                    C Y N
                                    R N N
                                    R R N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Edwards instructed by Saifee Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellants.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellants and to the respondent and a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellants are citizens of the Republic of China.   The  first  and
    second appellants are the parents of  the  remaining  appellants.   The
    dates of birth of the third and fourth appellants are  respectively  11
    January 2008 and 13 December 2013.  Consequently, at the  date  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  they  were  8   and   2   years   old
    respectively.

 3. On 24  August  2015,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  each  of  the
    appellants leave to remain in the UK based on their private and  family
    life under the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended)  and  outside  the
    Rules under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 4. The appellants appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 4 November 2016, Judge L Murray dismissed  each  of  the
    appellants' appeals.

 5. On 4 April 2017, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge M J Gillespie)  granted
    the appellants permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 6. On 20 April 2017, the Secretary of State indicated that she  could  not
    file a rule 24 response in the absence of a determination which was not
    attached to the grant of permission.

The Appellants' Case

 7. Mr Edwards, who represented  the  appellants,  indicated  that  he  had
    sought to  focus  the  somewhat  discursive  grounds  in  his  skeleton
    argument which he elaborated upon in his oral submissions.

 8. First, he submitted that the judge had failed to give sufficient weight
    to the third appellant's long residence in the UK and to the children's
    best interests.  He submitted that the third appellant had lived in the
    UK for at least seven years at the date of application and  over  eight
    years at the date of the judge's decision.  Applying the decision in MA
    (Pakistan) and others [2016] EWCA Civ 705, in  determining  under  para
    276ADE(1)(iii) and s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act (the "NIA Act 2002") whether it was reasonable for the children  to
    leave the UK, Mr Edwards submitted that the judge had failed to  accord
    the  required  "significant  weight"  to  the  third  appellant's  best
    interests.  The judge had failed to have proper  regard  to  the  third
    appellant's private life developed at a time when it  was  significant.
    He relied upon the Upper Tribunal decisions in Azimi-Moayed and  others
    (decisions affecting children; onwards appeals) [2013] UKUT  197  (IAC)
    and E-A Nigeria [2011] UKUT 315 (IAC).

 9. Secondly, Mr Edwards submitted that the judge had  failed  properly  to
    consider the issue of whether there were "very  significant  obstacles"
    to the first and second appellants living  in  China,  including  their
    social and economic circumstances and the  difficulty  for  the  second
    child who would not be registered and would  therefore  lose  privilege
    including access to, for example schools,  housing,  and  free  medical
    treatment.

Discussion

10. The appellants' claims based upon  their  private  life  rely  on  para
    276ADE(1)(iv) and (vi) of the Rules.  Those provide as follows:

         "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on  the
         grounds of private life

         276ADE (1) The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave  to
             remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at
             the date of application, the applicant:

             ....

             (iv)      is  under  the  age  of  18  years  and  has   lived
                  continuously in the UK for at least 7  years  (discounting
                  any period of imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable
                  to expect the applicant to leave the UK; or

             ....

             (vi)     subject to sub-paragraph (2), is  aged  18  years  or
                  above, has lived continuously in the UK for less  than  20
                  years (discounting any period of imprisonment)  but  there
                  would be very significant  obstacles  to  the  applicant's
                  integration into the country to which he would have to  go
                  if required to leave the UK."

11. Likewise, when considering Art 8 outside the Rules,  s.117B(6)  of  the
    NIA Act 2002 provides that:

         "(6)     In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

12. In MA and  others,  the  Court  of  Appeal  held  that  whether  it  is
    reasonable to expect a child (having been in the UK for seven years or,
    in the case of  s.117B(6)  alternatively  is  a  British  citizen),  in
    assessing "reasonableness" (at [45]):

         "... the court should have regard to the conduct of  the  applicant
         and any other matters relevant to the public interest ..."

13. The courts recognise that where the 7-year rule is satisfied that is "a
    factor of some weight leaning  in  favour  of  leave  to  remain  being
    granted" (at [45]) or "establishes  as  a  starting  point  that  leave
    should be granted unless there are powerful reasons  to  the  contrary"
    (at [49]).  The court also recognised that the child's "best interests"
    were not determinative  and,  in  assessing  reasonableness,  could  be
    outweighed by the  public  interest  reflected  in,  for  example,  the
    parents' circumstances and  their  immigration  history  (at  [42]  and
    [57]).

14. Mr  Edwards'  first  submission  is  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
    appropriate "significant weight" to the fact that the  third  appellant
    had lived in the UK for seven years (at the  date  of  application)  or
    eight years (at the date of hearing).

15. Judge Murray dealt with the best interests of  both  children,  but  in
    particular the  third  appellant,  in  a  number  of  passages  in  her
    determination as follows:

         "22.     The third Appellant was born in the UK on 11 January  2008
             and has spent 7 years in the UK at the date of the application
             and 8 at the date of the hearing.  It is argued that it  would
             be in her best interests to remain here because the family has
             nothing left to return to in China and she is doing well  here
             in education and has established friendships.  The  Appellants
             additionally stated for the first time in oral  evidence  that
             they could not return as the children were not registered with
             the Chinese authorities.  They have neither produced case  law
             nor background evidence in support of this claim."

16. Then, having cited at length the  head  note  in  AX  (family  planning
    schemes) China CG [2012] UKUT 00097 (IAC), Judge  Murray  continued  at
    paras 24-25 as follows:

         "24.     The Appellants have not  sought  to  present  evidence  or
             argue their case in relation to the  Chinese  family  planning
             laws and any effect this may have on the best interests of the
             third  Appellant.   They  also  have  clearly  not  considered
             registering the birth in the UK.  I conclude therefore that no
             risks or adverse treatment have  been  demonstrated  in  their
             case.  I did not find the first and second  Appellants  to  be
             witnesses of truth.  Initially they maintained that the second
             Appellant had not worked in the  UK  but  it  became  apparent
             through cross-examination that  he  did  work  in  return  for
             accommodation  and  food  and  the  payment  of  their  living
             expenses and they lived above a Chinese  restaurant.   I  find
             that the Appellants are prepared to change their  evidence  to
             suit their needs.  I do not accept that the first  and  second
             Appellants have lost all contact  with  China.   They  clearly
             have considerable financial support in the UK  as  the  second
             Appellant has not worked officially  since  2009.   They  have
             mobile phones, pay for child care and insurance  as  evidenced
             by the documents in  their  bundle.   Both  first  and  second
             Appellants are fit, capable of work and the  second  Appellant
             has worked as a chef.  There is no reason to  assume  that  he
             would not be able to find work in China to support his family.
              No evidence has been presented to show that he would  not  be
             able to or that the family would face destitution.  It is also
             reasonable to assume in the light  of  the  financial  support
             that are currently receiving if they had initial  difficulties
             those friends may help if they to return to China.

         25.  I assess the best interests of the third  Appellant  therefore
             against the background that the family would  return  together
             as a unit and I conclude  that  the  likelihood  is  that  the
             family would be able to support itself on return.  There is no
             doubt that the first and second Appellant are  loving  parents
             and so it would  be  in  the  best  interests  of  the  second
             Appellant to live with them.  The third Appellant has not  yet
             reached a critical stage of her education and at the age of  7
             at the date of the application  her  focus  would  be  on  her
             parents  and  her   immediate   family.    The   courts   have
             consistently said that 7 years from  the  age  of  4  is  more
             significant in terms of a private life than the first 7  years
             of life.  Further, the second Appellant stated  that  Mandarin
             is the language of the household and the first Appellant  said
             they spoke to their children in basic English.   I  find  that
             the third appellant is likely to speak fluent Mandarin and  as
             she is in the early stages of schooling would be able to learn
             to write without difficulty.   Further,  her  parents  have  a
             renewable connection with China and therefore  her  adaptation
             to life there is unlikely  to  be  problematic.   She  has  no
             health or other problems  which  would  present  difficulties.
             The Appellants have also not presented evidence in relation to
             the education system in China to show that  she  would  suffer
             educationally.  The basis advanced  in  the  letter  with  the
             application  for  remaining  here  was  the  quality  of   the
             education.  I accept that  she  is  doing  well  and  enjoying
             school on the basis of the reports provided.  However, here is
             clearly a functioning  education  system  in  China  and  even
             therefore according appropriate weight to the  length  of  her
             residence here I find that it would be in her  best  interests
             to return to China with  her  parents.   Even  if  I  were  to
             conclude it were in her best  interests  to  remain,  I  would
             consider it only to be marginally so."

17. Then, having cited a passage  from  MA  (Pakistan)  (at  [103]),  Judge
    Murray continued at para 27:

         "The first and second Appellant arrived in the UK in 2001 and  were
         granted successive periods of leave  as  students  until  30  April
         2008.  Since that point they have been  overstayers.   I  recognize
         the significance of seven years residence but taking account of the
         relevant  factors  in  the  proportionality  exercise,  the   third
         Claimant would return as part of a close and loving family unit  to
         a country which has been the first and second Claimant's  home  for
         over 25 years.  Both have been students in the UK which  is  likely
         to benefit them on return and I  have  found  there  would  not  be
         financially or other issues on return.  The consequences of  return
         are unlikely to be deleterious as she is not at a critical stage of
         her education and remains of an adaptable age.  The Court of Appeal
         acknowledged at paragraph 46 that the disruption will be less  when
         the children are very young because the focus of their  lives  will
         be on their families.  I consider in  the  light  of  these  cogent
         reasons and in the light of the weight that  must  be  accorded  to
         immigration control it would be  reasonable  to  expect  the  third
         Claimant to return under paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iv)."

18. At para 28, having concluded that the third appellant could not succeed
    under para 276ADE(1)(iv), the judge dealt with s.117B(6) at para 28  as
    follows:

         "As confirmed by MA (Pakistan) the  assessment  outside  the  Rules
         under  Article  8  requires  the   same   test   in   relation   to
         reasonableness to be addressed under s 117 (B) 6.   I  accept  that
         both first and second  Appellant  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child but I  find  that  it
         would be reasonable to expect her, at the age of 8 at the  hearing,
         to return to China for the reasons given."

19. I have not set out the judge's earlier citation from MA  (Pakistan)  at
    paras 18 and 19 of her determination.

20. It is plain that the judge correctly  directed  herself  in  accordance
    with the requirements of para 276ADE(1)(iv) and s.117B(6)  of  the  NIA
    Act 2006 as interpreted by the Court of Appeal in MA  (Pakistan).   She
    clearly recognised, as she said in para 27, that there must be  "cogent
    reasons" to outweigh the circumstances of the third appellant  who  had
    been in the UK for at least seven years.

21. Not only did the judge not misdirect herself in law, she clearly  -  as
    the extracts above make plain - considered all the  relevant  evidence.
    I do not accept Mr Edwards' submission that she in  "some  way,  failed
    properly to give appropriate or due weight to the circumstances of  the
    children, in particular the third  appellant."   She  was  entitled  to
    find, as the family would be returning to China together, that  it  was
    in the children's best interests to be with their parents.   I  do  not
    accept that the judge failed to have regard to the integration  of  the
    third appellant in the UK at the age of 7 (or 8  for  the  purposes  of
    s.117B(6)).  She noted that the third appellant was not at  a  critical
    stage of her education and she did not accept, given that  it  was  the
    language of the household, that the third  appellant  could  not  speak
    Mandarin.  Whilst Mr Edwards' reliance upon cases such as  Azimi-Moayed
    and others does  recognise  a  'sliding  scale'  reflecting  a  child's
    integration, particularly through education, as the child ages, it does
    not create any hard and fast rule.  Thus, as Blake J noted at  [13(iv)]
    in Azimi-Moayed:

         "... seven years from age 4 is likely to be more significant  to  a
         child than the first seven years of life.  Very young children  are
         focused  on  their  parents  rather  than  their  peers   and   are
         adaptable."

22. In his skeleton argument, Mr Edwards submitted,  in  effect,  that  the
    third appellant is not a "very young child" within the meaning given by
    Blake J.  There is a danger of  seeking  to  elevate  the  illustration
    given by Blake J to a yardstick by which to judge the  significance  of
    any interruption to a child's private life.  He  was  simply  observing
    that a child between the ages of 4 and 11 (covering primary school  and
    entry into secondary education) was likely to form a deeper integration
    and social ties than a child, for example, under the  age  of  4.   The
    third appellant, of course,  falls  almost  midway  on  that  spectrum.
    Common sense would suggest that she  would  have  a  greater  level  of
    private life and integration than a 4-year old child but,  perhaps  (as
    it can be put no higher than that) not as great an integration as an 11-
    year old or a teenager who has been in the UK  for  seven  years.   All
    must, necessarily, turn on the individual child's circumstances and  be
    fact-sensitive.

23. I see, therefore, no basis for Mr Edwards' submission that Judge Murray
    failed to have full regard to  the  third  appellant's  (and  also  the
    fourth appellant's) circumstances and  the  nature  and  depth  of  her
    private life in the UK.  The judge did  not  place  the  appellant,  in
    effect, in the same category as a 4-year old child.  Further, there  is
    no reason to believe that the  judge  was  not  aware  that  the  third
    appellant could not be said to understand  written  Mandarin  language.
    It is far from clear that this point was specifically relied on by  the
    appellants' (then) Counsel, nevertheless I do not accept  that  it,  in
    itself, would tip the scales in the third appellant's favour.

24. Finally, on this aspect of the appellants' case,  as  I  understood  Mr
    Edwards' submission  it  was  that  the  judge  was  wrong  (presumably
    irrational) in finding that the  parents'  immigration  history  was  a
    cogent or powerful reason to outweigh the circumstances  of  the  third
    appellant and therefore lead to a conclusion that it was reasonable  to
    expect her to leave the UK.  Mr Edwards submitted that  there  must  be
    something to take it out of the "paradigm" case which he postulated  to
    be where the parents were overstayers or illegally here.   He  gave  by
    way of an example where the parents had perpetrated fraud.

25. On behalf of the respondent,  Mr  Mills  did  not  accept  Mr  Edwards'
    categorisation of the 'paradigm case'.  He submitted that the  paradigm
    case when applying para 276ADE(1)(iv) or s.117B(6) of the NIA Act  2002
    could be a student studying with leave in the UK whose  leave  ran  out
    and who then relied upon Art 8.

26. There is nothing in MA (Pakistan) and others to temper the  application
    of the "reasonableness" test in para 276ADE(1)(iv) and s.117B(6) of the
    NIA Act 2002 so that powerful reasons must  fall  outside  a  'paradigm
    case'.  The balancing exercise is inherently  fact-specific.   Equally,
    any attempt to identify the paradigm  case  will  necessarily,  as  the
    competing submissions before me demonstrated, falter on  the  altar  of
    uncertainty.  I was shown no material to suggest that the Secretary  of
    State  or  Parliament  had  in  mind  a  'paradigm  case'   and,   more
    importantly, those which were beyond that sufficient to provide "strong
    reasons" when applying those provisions.  Of course, it is easy to  see
    how in carrying out the balancing exercise the public interest  may  be
    greater in, for example, a fraud case than  one  where,  to  borrow  Mr
    Mills' example, the parent is a student  whose  leave  simply  expires.
    Overstaying or illegality may, perhaps, fall somewhere between the two.
     But, as I have already emphasised, everything turns upon an assessment
    of the individual's circumstances and the public interest and balancing
    them against each other.

27. In this case, having directed herself in accordance with MA  (Pakistan)
    and others, Judge Murray recognised the public interest  on  the  basis
    that the parents have not had leave since 2008/2009.  It is simply  not
    possible, in my judgment, to conclude that the judge's balancing of the
    public interest  against  the  circumstances  of  the  appellants',  in
    particular the third appellant, was irrational.

28. As regards Mr Edwards' submission that in applying s.117B(6) the  judge
    had failed to take into account properly that the third  appellant  was
    aged 8 at the date of the hearing, that submission  cannot  stand  with
    the clear  words  in  para  28  of  the  judgment  where  Judge  Murray
    specifically took into account in assessing whether under s.117B(6)  it
    was reasonable to expect the third appellant to leave the UK  that  she
    was "at the age of 8 at the hearing".  Mr Edwards  submitted  that  the
    extra year and ten months that was reflected in the  third  appellant's
    age at the date of hearing was a significant time in  her  life.   That
    may well be the case.  However, the difficulty with the  submission  is
    that the judge considered the evidence concerning the  third  appellant
    that was before her, including the up-to-date  evidence.   Having  done
    so, I see no basis upon which it could be said that, even having regard
    to  the  third  appellant  being  a  little  older,  was   sufficiently
    significant  that  the  judge's  finding  that  the   public   interest
    outweighed the circumstances of the third appellant was irrational.

29. Turning now to Mr Edwards second submission, which was that  the  judge
    had failed properly to consider the issue of whether there  were  "very
    significant obstacles" to the first and second appellants returning  to
    China.  Mr Edwards relied upon changes in Chinese  society  since  they
    were last living there fourteen years ago.  However, as I  pointed  out
    to him during his submissions, any such contention  would  have  to  be
    supported by background evidence and Mr Edwards did not rely  upon  any
    particular evidence either that was before the judge or me  to  support
    that submission.

30. Mr Edwards also criticised the judge for taking into account in para 24
    of her determination that financial support which was  currently  being
    received in the UK would be  forthcoming  if  the  family  returned  to
    China.  He submitted that the support received in the UK was  tied,  at
    least in part, to the work carried out by the  second  appellant  as  a
    chef.

31. I have  already  set  out  the  judge's  reasons  in  para  24  of  her
    determination above.  In para 24, the judge found that  the  appellants
    were not witnesses of truth.  That  is  unchallenged  and  is,  in  any
    event, legally beyond challenge.  She also recognised that they  worked
    in return for accommodation and food together with  payment  for  their
    living expenses.  The  judge,  however,  noted  that  they  had  mobile
    phones, paid for child care and insurance and that the first and second
    appellants were "fit" and "capable of work".  Whilst it may be that the
    support in the UK was tied to  the  work  carried  out  by  the  second
    appellant in the UK, the essence of the judge's reasoning in para 24 is
    that the first and second appellants  have  the  ability  to  be  self-
    reliant on return to China.  That was a finding entirely  open  to  the
    judge on the evidence and, in my judgment, the reference  to  financial
    support from the UK was not material to that reasoning.

32. Mr Edwards also relied upon the impact of returning to  China  with  an
    unregistered second child.  Judge Murray dealt with this in paras 22-24
    of her determination.  Mr Edwards did not seek to argue any risk to the
    appellant based upon any "one-child" policy.  As Judge  Murray  pointed
    out in para 24, that was not part of the appellants' case  before  her.
    As regards the impact of having an  unregistered  child,  Judge  Murray
    noted in  para  24  that  the  first  and  second  appellants  had  not
    considered registering her birth in the UK.  Indeed, it is  plain  from
    para (viii) of the head note in AX that:

          "There are hundreds of thousands  of  unauthorised  children  born
         every year.  Family planning officials are not entitled  to  refuse
         to register unauthorised children and there is no real  risk  of  a
         refusal to register a child."

33. Judge Murray's rejection of the argument that there  would  be  adverse
    consequences or risks due to the second  child  being  unregistered  is
    entirely  consistent  with  the  country  guidance  that   unauthorised
    children would be registered on application.

34. Mr Edwards' submission went  no  further  in  challenging  the  judge's
    finding that the appellants could not succeed under para 276ADE(1)(vi).



35. Having rejected Mr Edwards' submissions, I am  satisfied  that  it  was
    properly open to the judge and not irrational for her to conclude  that
    the family would be able to establish itself in  China  and  would  not
    face destitution.  Despite the length  of  absence  of  the  first  and
    second appellants from China, they clearly retain ties  (not  least  in
    respect of language) and even without any extended family  it  was  not
    irrational to conclude that there were not "very significant obstacles"
    to their integration in the country in which they had both lived  until
    they were 25 years old.

36. For these reasons, Judge Murray did not err in law in  concluding  that
    the appellants could not succeed on the  basis  of  their  private  and
    family life under the Rules and under Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

37. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

38. The appellants' appeals to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed.



                                 Signed

                       [pic]

                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date: 6 September 2017



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Murray's decision, having been upheld, there can be no fee award.



                                 Signed

                       [pic]

                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date: 6 September 2017
