
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: Ia/30411/2013
     IA/30410/2013
     IA/30409/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20 November 2014                             |On 26 November 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                       Ul Aein Qurat (FIRST APPELLANT)
                      ZAHEER HUSSAIN (SECOND APPELLANT)
                        MD. KHIZAR (THIRD APPELLANT)
                         (anonymity Order NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    None
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The Appellants

 1. The Appellants are husband and wife born respectively in 1967 and  1980
    with their minor  child  born  in  2006.   They  are  all  citizens  of
    Pakistan.

 2. On 14 September 2010 the wife arrived with leave to enter as a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant expiring on 15  September  2011.   Her  child
    came with her as her dependant.  Later, on  14  May  2011  the  husband
    arrived with leave as dependent spouse.  The leave  of  each  Appellant
    was subsequently extended to 15 May 2012.

 3. On 14 May 2012 each Appellant  applied  for  further  leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules (IRs).  On 1  July  2013  the  Respondent
    refused each of those applications and made  decisions  to  remove  the
    Appellants to Pakistan by way of directions under  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 4. The Appellants appealed, asserting claims under the European Convention
    because on return to Pakistan they faced ill-treatment  on  account  of
    the fact the marriage of the husband and  wife  had  been  against  the
    wishes of the husband's family  and  the  wife  had  been  attacked  on
    numerous occasions.  Additionally,  it  was  asserted  that  since  the
    application had been made in May 2012, the Respondent should  not  have
    considered it by way of reference to paragraph 276ADE of the IRs.

 5. At the hearing on 14 May none of the Appellants attended nor was  there
    any legal representation.  Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Webb  noted
    by the mid-afternoon that there was no appearance by or for any of  the
    Appellants and decided to proceed in  their  absence.   The  Respondent
    produced a letter to show that the wife had been  asked  to  attend  an
    interview on 22 July 2014 in connection with her asylum claim  but  had
    failed to attend.  The Judge went on to  dismiss  the  appeals  on  all
    grounds in a determination promulgated on 24 September 2014.

 6. On 2 October the Appellants sought permission to appeal.  On 13 October
    2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Shimmin  granted  permission  to
    appeal stating that the grounds were  inordinately  prolix;  a  comment
    which is more than fully justified. The representatives who drafted the
    grounds for permission to appeal should have regard to what was said in
    VHR (Unmeritorious Grounds) Jamaica [2014] UKUT 00367.

 7. In his reasons Judge Shimmin distilled the grounds to  nine  assertions
    that the Judge had erred in law.

      1) These applications had the benefit of the  transitional  provisions
         in the IRs and should have been decided on the basis of  the  pre-9
         July IRs and not the 2014 IRs.

      2) Paragraph 245AA (evidential flexibility) of  the  IRs  should  have
         been considered.

      3) The Judge failed to deal with the original grounds of appeal.

      4) The Judge relied on speculation.

      5) He failed to  adopt  the  correct  approach  to  the  ties  of  the
         Appellants to Pakistan.

      6) The Judge's approach was irrational, "pre-judgmental" and perverse.

      7) He failed  to  consider  the  provisions  of  Section  117  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended by  Section
         19 of the Immigration Act 2014.

      8) The Judge's approach to the claim under Article 3 was incorrect and



      9) He failed to consider the best interests of the child Appellant.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. The hearing was set for 20 November.  On 19 November the wife wrote  to
    the Upper Tribunal requesting an adjournment on account of her being 21
    weeks' pregnant and having a suspected  urinary  tract  infection.   In
    support of the application  she  enclosed  a  National  Health  Service
    prescription dated 19 November and a statutory sick pay certificate  of
    the same date stating that she was not fit for work.

 9. I considered  the  application  which  Mr  Melvin  for  the  Respondent
    opposed.  The Appellants had not supplied any documentation  subsequent
    to the hearing  before  Judge  Webb  other  than  the  application  for
    permission to appeal and the adjournment request.  I did  not  consider
    the statutory sick pay certificate was proper  evidence  the  Appellant
    was unfit to attend court.  It simply stated she was  unfit  for  work.
    There was no explanation why a urinary tract infection which  from  the
    description would appear to  have  been  being  treated  by  medication
    should cause the Appellant not to  be  able  to  attend  court.  I  was
    satisfied proper notice of the place, date and time set for the hearing
    had been given in accordance with Procedure Rule 36. Having  regard  to
    the overriding objective in Rule 2 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 as amended I was satisfied it was just to  proceed
    in the absence of the Appellants or any  representative  for  them,  at
    least so far as the consideration  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination contained an error of law

10. For ease of reference I shall use the same numbering as used  by  Judge
    Shimmin in the grant of permission to appeal.

      1) The applications made by the  Appellants  were  for  further  leave
         outside the Rules.  The Judge made reference  to  the  judgment  in
         Edgehill & Another v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 402 at paragraph 37.

      2) Paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules  applies  to  Points-Based
         System applications.  These were applications for leave outside the
         Rules.

      3) The Judge dealt fully with  the  matters  raised  in  the  original
         grounds of appeal at paragraphs 31-35 of his determination.

      4) The grounds for appeal did not identify any instance of speculation
         and none is evident from a reading  of  the  determination.  Having
         decided it was  appropriate  to  proceed  in  the  absence  of  the
         Appellants or any representative the Judge  had  only  the  limited
         evidence which was in the Tribunal file before him on which to base
         his determination.  There was no indication the Appellants proposed
         to rely on any additional and as yet unfiled evidence.

      5) The grounds for appeal fail to identify any specific or  particular
         irrationality, prejudice or perversity.

      6) The determination does not expressly address the  matters  referred
         to in Section 117 of the 2002 Act as amended which was in force  at
         the date of the hearing.

      7) The Judge's approach to the claim under Article 3 in paragraphs  32
         and  33  together  with  the  lack  of  evidence  in  the  file  is
         sustainable fro the reasons given.

      8) At paragraphs 42 and 43 the Judge considered the  position  of  the
         minor Appellant.  Paragraph 42  expressly  referred  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal's jurisprudence on how to consider the best  interests  of
         children.

11. The Appellants' applications were for  leave  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  There was no claim that  the  Judge  had  wrongly  applied  the
    jurisprudence in Edgehill.

12. The Judge did not expressly mention the provisions of  Section  117  of
    the 2002 Act.  This was an error of law.  There was no evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal that the husband could speak English, that  the
    Appellants were financially independent or that the  husband  and  wife
    had a parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child  as  defined  by
    Section 117D.  Even if the Judge had expressly  addressed  the  factors
    listed in Section 117B, there was no evidence other than of the  wife's
    ability to speak English (by virtue of  her  educational  achievements)
    that the Appellants had shown that the factors  listed  were  in  their
    circumstances favourable to them.   Consequently  the  Judge's  failure
    expressly to take into account Section 117B of the 2002 Act was  not  a
    material error such as to vitiate his determination.  There is no  real
    prospect that a differently constituted Tribunal would have reached any
    other conclusion. Accordingly the determination shall stand.

Anonymity

13. There was no request for the First-tier Tribunal for an anonymity order
    and having considered the papers I  see  no  reason  why  an  anonymity
    direction was made in the first place or that it should be continued.

DECISION

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not  contain  an  error  of
law and shall stand with the effect that the appeals of the  Appellants  are
dismissed and the decisions of the Secretary of State are upheld.

Signed/Official Crest  Date 26. xi. 2014

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
