

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/30336/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 19 August 2014                        |On 19th Aug 2014          |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between


                              Mr ABIODUN OKONO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Youssefian, Authorised Representative
      (D J Webb & Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Page on 23 June 2014 against the determination of
           First-tier Tribunal Judge Fletcher-Hill who  had  dismissed  the
           Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  dated  4
           July 2014 to refuse to grant the Appellant leave to remain as  a
           Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the Immigration Rules  in  a
           determination promulgated on 5 June 2014.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, whose date of birth  was
           given as 25 December 1982.  He had entered the United Kingdom as
           a Tier 4 Student on 4 March 2008, which leave had been  extended
           until 3 May 2011.  He was then granted leave to remain as a Tier
           1 (Post-study Worker) Migrant until 17 June 2013.  He  had  next
           applied for further leave to remain as a Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
           Migrant.


      3.    Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
           Appellant was granted by Judge Page because he  considered  that
           it was arguable that the judge  had  failed  to  deal  with  the
           Article 8 ECHR private life claim which the Appellant had raised
           in his Notice of Appeal (in response to the section 120  notice)
           and had argued at the appeal hearing.




      Submissions - error of law


      4.    Mr Walker for the Secretary of State was content  to  adopt  the
           tribunal's preliminary view that this was a clear case of  legal
           error in relation to the Article 8 ECHR private life  claim,  as
           the grant of permission to appeal indicated.


      5.    Mr Youssefian for the Appellant agreed.






      The error of law finding


      6.    The tribunal indicated that it found that the judge  had  fallen
           into material error of law.   The  determination  recorded  that
           submissions had been made in relation to the Appellant's private
           life in the United Kingdom, but was silent as  to  any  findings
           and decision on that issue.   The  judge  had  been  correct  to
           dismiss the Immigration Rules appeal,  but  it  was  a  material
           error of law not to determine the Article  8  ECHR  claim.   The
           Article 8 ECHR decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside
           for material error of law.  The decision  had  therefore  to  be
           remade.  Both parties were willing for the rehearing to  proceed
           immediately,  as  this  had  been  foreshadowed  by  the   Upper
           Tribunal's standard directions.




      The rehearing


      7.    As the only live issue was Article 8 ECHR, the claim  needed  to
           be reheard on the basis of the facts  as  at  the  date  of  the
           rehearing before the Upper Tribunal.   Section 117  A-D  of  the
           Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applied.


      8.    Evidence in the form of a witness statement dated 12 August 2014
           made by the Appellant had been filed.  The Appellant stated that
           he was unable to attend the hearing  because  of  pressing  work
           commitments.  In summary the Appellant recalled his  immigration
           history  and  said  that  although  he  had  not  satisfied  the
           requirements of the Immigration  Rules,  he  had  established  a
           genuine business in the United Kingdom, from which he earned his
           living.  While studying for his Masters degree he had decided to
           make the United Kingdom his home.  He believed that his  company
           would succeed and contribute to the economy.  The Appellant  had
           friends in the United Kingdom and now had  little  contact  with
           anyone in Nigeria.


      9.    Mr Walker for the  Respondent  raised  no  specific  credibility
           challenge and submitted  that  the  Appellant  could  return  to
           Nigeria where he had  spent  most  of  his  life  without  undue
           difficulty.  The Appellant could  not  satisfy  the  Immigration
           Rules.  Gulshan (Article 8  -  new  rules  -  correct  approach)
           [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) applied.   His  personal  preference  to
           remain in the United Kingdom was not a  relevant  consideration.
           The Appellant had been in the United Kingdom  for  a  relatively
           short period of time.   He  had  come  as  a  student  with  the
           intention to return.   No  exceptional  circumstances  had  been
           identified.  The appeal should be dismissed.


      10.   Mr Youssefian for the  Appellant  submitted  that  although  the
           Appellant could not meet paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
           Rules, he had established  a  private  life.   Examined  against
           section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
           2002, the Appellant satisfied  the  factors  listed.   He  spoke
           English, was independent and not a burden on the  taxpayer.   He
           had always been in the United Kingdom lawfully.   The Respondent
           had failed  to  justify  the  decision  against  the  legitimate
           objective of immigration control.  There was no public  interest
           in his removal.   When all factors were considered,  the  appeal
           fell to be allowed under Article 8 ECHR.




      Discussion and fresh decision


      11.   There was no significant dispute of fact in  this  appeal.   The
           Appellant has successfully studied in the United Kingdom and now
           says that he  has  started  a  business  which  is  sufficiently
           profitable to support him.  The tribunal is prepared  to  accept
           that assertion for the purposes of this  appeal  although  there
           was no  evidence  of  actual  trading.   The  tribunal  is  also
           prepared to accept that the Appellant has friends in the  United
           Kingdom.  The problem is that the Appellant is unable to satisfy
           any relevant part of the Immigration Rules.  Although his  leave
           to remain continues by virtue of section 3C of  the  Immigration
           Act 1971, it is in fact doubtful that he has any leave to run  a
           business as his previous leave was as an employee in  the  Post-
           study Worker category of Tier 1.


      12.   Nasim and Others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC) applies  to
           the Appellant's limited private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom,
           which is of short duration.  There was no evidence  produced  to
           the tribunal to show that the Appellant's removal would lead  to
           unduly harsh consequences for him.  The Appellant's business was
           established at a time when he had no guarantee that he would  be
           able to stay in the United Kingdom beyond  the  period  required
           for the Secretary of State to decide his Tire  1  (Entrepreneur)
           application.  There was  no  evidence  that  the  Appellant  had
           purchased property in the United Kingdom or  had  otherwise  put
           down roots.


      13.   There was no factor in the Appellant's circumstances  which  the
           tribunal considers was such as to require the Secretary of State
           to  consider  the  exercise  of  her  discretion   outside   the
           Immigration Rules. The Secretary of State had  not  specifically
           considered the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR private  life  in  her
           notice of decision, but the effect of the service of the section
           120  notice  was  to  shift  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
           Tribunal: see  AS (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
           Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 1076.


      14.   The fact that the Appellant meets the factors listed in  section
           117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  does
           not create a right for him to stay in the United Kingdom.   They
           are merely factors which must be taken into  consideration,  and
           the tribunal has done so.


      15.   If that were a mistaken view for  any  reason,  the  live  issue
           applying the Razgar [2004] UKHL  27  tests  is  proportionality.
           The legitimate objective is immigration control, which  embraces
           many  related  matters.   An  important  aspect  of  immigration
           control for the purposes of  the  present  appeal  is  that  the
           decision as to which non citizens are permitted to settle in the
           United Kingdom is not a matter of private choice, whether or not
           there will be any measurable cost or indeed  potential  economic
           benefit  from  such  settlement.    There  has  to  be  a  rule,
           democratically determined, which applies to all.   Those  rules,
           already strict, were made far  more  strict  from  9  July  2012
           onwards, a process which continues.


      16.   In the tribunal's view, the proportionality balance  is  against
           the Appellant.  He is simply being required to resume  his  life
           in Nigeria, a familiar life which has been interrupted by  study
           and post-study work in the United Kingdom.  His removal  to  his
           home country cannot be regarded  as  unreasonable  nor  will  it
           create consequences which can sensibly be considered  as  unduly
           harsh for him.


      17.   Thus, however the Appellant's appeal is analysed, it must fail.


      18.   There was no application for  an  anonymity  direction  and  the
           tribunal sees no need for one.




      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision involved the making  of  an  error
on    a point of law.  The tribunal allows the onwards appeal to  the  Upper
Tribunal, sets aside the original decision to the extent that it  failed  to
deal  with the Article 8 ECHR claim and remakes that part  of  the  original
decision as follows:

      The appeal is dismissed under Article 8 ECHR

      Signed                                 Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




      TO THE RESPONDENT
      FEE AWARD


      The appeal was dismissed and so there can be no fee award


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
