
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30067/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 March 2016                              |On 13 April 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC



                                   Between

                               EDWARD ADEKOYA
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Fouladvand, Migrant Advisory & Advocacy
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kelly
    promulgated on 27 August 2015. It is brought pursuant to the permission
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett which identified as  an  arguable
    error of law the possibility that the judge erred in  failing  to  have
    regard to paragraph 117B(6) as no reference  was  made  to  it  in  the
    decision.

2.   The facts can be  shortly  stated.   The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Nigeria born on [ ] 1983 and he appeals against an order made  for  his
    removal from the United Kingdom. It is said  on  his  behalf  that  the
    removal would  constitute  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
    family life which he enjoyes in this country with his partner  who  has
    discretionary leave to remain and with his son, born in 2014,  a  child
    yet to be born whom his partner is carrying and with a stepchild who is
    some 7 years of age. I have used the word "partner"  because  that  was
    the word adopted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I have been told in
    oral submission that they are in fact married, the wedding having taken
    place at Willesden Register Office.  I have no reason to doubt that but
    the disposal of this appeal is not in any way affected by their marital
    status.

3.   The alleged error of law as advanced before me today  was  put  on  the
    basis that far too much  weight  was  given  to  the  appellant's  poor
    immigration history with insufficient weight being given to  the  close
    familial  bonds  that  exist  with  the  appellant's  partner  and  the
    children.

4.   The judge approached this case by  reciting  the  test  to  be  applied
    under the R v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  ex  parte
    Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27.   The  decision  of  the  judge  is  cautious,
    methodical and fulsome.  It recites evidence  heard  and  documentation
    reviewed and it deals  with  the  factual  background  particularly  in
    relation to the three children, one of which is unborn.  In  particular
    the judge devotes paragraph 29 to a discussion of the  appellant's  son
    and the role that the appellant plays in that child's life.

5.   In paragraph 30 the judge gives discussion to the unborn  born  and  in
    paragraph 31 the judge discusses the relationship between the appellant
    and his stepdaughter.

6.   In relation to  the  son,  the  finding  is  clear  that  child's  best
    interests would best be served  by  the  appellant  remaining  in  this
    country and continuing to be part of the same  household  and  that  is
    treated as a primary consideration.  In relation to the  unborn  child,
    similar considerations apply with the  judge  concluding  that  in  the
    absence of all other considerations it is clearly in the best interests
    of the child to  have  both  parents  involved  in  his  or  her  daily
    upbringing.

7.   Finally, in relation to the stepchild, the judge's conclusion  is  that
    her best interests would best be served by the appellant  remaining  in
    this country as a member of her immediate household.

8.   Having set out with great clarity  those  primary  considerations,  the
    judge proceeds to consider the countervailing factors which must  apply
    by dint of Section 117A and 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  These include reference to the very poor  immigration
    history which applies to this appellant and to the fact that it is  not
    appropriate for sustainable rights  under  Article  8  to  be  acquired
    whilst an individual's presence in the country is  either  unlawful  or
    precarious.

9.   There is no dispute about the  fact  that  the  appellant  has  a  poor
    immigration history and that he has  been  unlawfully  in  the  country
    whilst developing a relationship with  his  partner  and  the  relevant
    children. The complaint is made however that too much weight was  given
    to those factors and insufficient weight given to the closeness of  the
    familial tie, the Article 8 considerations of a father being  with  his
    children and the overall advantages of maintaining a family unit.

10.  Criticism is also made at the judge's suggestion that contact could  be
    made through social media and other means of communication.

11.  In paragraph 35 the judge says this:

         "I cannot help but conclude that  the  appellant  has  deliberately
         sought to put down roots in this country in an effort to thwart the
         efforts of the immigration authorities to remove him to his country
         of origin.  This I find must weigh heavily against him."

12.  It seems  to  me  that  the  judge's  carrying  out  of  the  necessary
    balancing exercise was undertaken with considerable care.  It  is  true
    that no express reference is given to Section 117A(6)  which  reads  as
    follows:
         "In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-
         (a)      the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and
         (b)      it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom"
13.  Whilst that statutory provision was  not  expressly  rehearsed  in  the
    course of the determination it is clear that the factor was nonetheless
    borne in mind by the judge in coming to a balanced and fair conclusion.
     Certainly it was not said that the mere fact that there is  a  genuine
    and  subsisting  parental  relationship  of  itself  and  without  more
    automatically gives rise to a right to remain.

14.  It seems  to  me  that  the  judge  has  weighed  in  the  balance  the
    significant factors affecting both the child,  the  stepchild  and  the
    unborn child, and has repeated in express terms  at  paragraph  36:  "I
    keep in mind at all times that the children should not be punished  for
    the actions of their parents" but at the end of the day the decision is
    one which the judge must make having regard to the evidence before him.



15.  Paragraph 40 to my mind is unimpeachable

         "I have carefully considered where the  balance  lies  between  the
         best interests of the children affected by the appellant's  removal
         and the  legitimate  interest  of  the  respondent  in  maintaining
         effective immigration control and deterring others from seeking  to
         establish family life in this country for immigration purposes.  In
         this case I have decided that  the  disruption  to  the  children's
         family life is  outweighed  by  the  public  interest  in  removing
         somebody who has chosen to remain in the country illegally and  who
         has deliberately started a family at a time when he knew he had  no
         right to be here.  Whilst I recognise that the appellant's  removal
         would cause emotional distress to the children affected, they  will
         nevertheless be able to remain here with their mother and  maintain
         a significant degree of continuity in their lives.   They  will  be
         able to keep in contact with the appellant using  modern  forms  of
         communication."

16.  There is no error of law on  the  face  the  determination.   It  is  a
    proper exercise of judicial discretion and it is a conclusion which was
    open to the judge. In all  those  circumstances  this  appeal  must  be
    dismissed


Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed        Mark Hill                 Date     2 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
