
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/30000/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated|
|On   1st September  2017                  |On 5th September 2017            |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mrs Sayuri Hatada
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr R Roberts, instructed by Cromwell Wilkes


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First Tier Tribunal, that is  Mrs  Hatada  as  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The appeal was pursuant to a decision dated 18th August 2015 to  refuse
    to grant the appellant leave to remain in the United Kingdom based upon
    her family life with her spouse.  The appellant brought the  appeal  on
    the basis of the new appeal  provisions  under  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, namely  that  it  violated
    her rights to family and private life under the ECHR.

 3. The appeal was heard on 13th September 2016 before First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hembrough who in the body of the decision  dismissed  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules (the Rules) but allowed  the  appeal  under
    Article 8.  At the end of the decision he allowed the  appeal  on  both
    grounds.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 4. The Secretary of State maintained that the judge erred in allowing  the
    appeal on both the Rules and under the ECHR.

 5. It was  conceded  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the  language
    requirements of the Rules and thus the appeal turned on the sole  issue
    of Article 8.

 6. As the permission application pointed out, both representatives were in
    agreement that the outcome of the appeal turned on whether  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside of  the  UK,
    [12].  The judge found at [25] that he was  not  satisfied  that  there
    were insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's family life continuing
    in Japan for the plethora of reasons given.

 7. Nonetheless he immediately proceeded to  consider  the  position  under
    Article 8 and outside the Rules.   First,  the  judge  was  obliged  to
    consider whether there were 'compelling circumstances'  to  go  outwith
    the Rules and any resulting considerations under Article 8 of the  ECHR
    failed to be considered through the  lens  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    There are none.

 8. The judge failed to afford sufficient weight to the expression  of  the
    'public interest' as expressed by the Rules.  Reliance was  placed,  in
    the permission application, on paragraphs 48 and 33 of SS Congo v  SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 317.  It was important to identify the degree of weight
    to be attached  to  the  public  interest  and  although  the  test  of
    exceptionality did not apply, compelling  circumstances  needed  to  be
    identified.   There was an  absence  of  these  findings.    The  judge
    identified nothing further than the  terms  of  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM.
    There were no features  of  the  relationship  requiring  consideration
    outwith the Rules.    Secondly,  reliance  was  placed  on  Rhuppiah  v
    Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ 803;  being able  to  speak  English
    and being financially independent were only neutral factors further  to
    Section 117 of the Nationality Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and
    could not enhance the claim.

 9. Permission was granted on the basis that it was arguable that the judge
    had failed to consider the compelling circumstances  and  further  that
    the ratio of Chen  (Appendix  Fm  -Chikwamba-  temporary  separation  -
    proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 was relevant.

The Hearing

10. At the hearing, Mr Nath submitted that the consideration of the  public
    interest  was  absent  and  he  expanded  on  the  grounds  within  the
    application supplying me with copies of Rhuppiah and SS  Congo  v  SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 317.

11. Mr Roberts submitted a Rule 24 response and  he  referred  me  to  that
    document.

Conclusions

12. The Supreme Court in Agyarko & Ors v SSHD [2017]  UKSC  11,  reiterated
    the approach the courts should take regarding article 8, observing that
    the boundary  between  cases  where  there  are  positive  or  negative
    obligations on the state to respect a persons'  right  to  respect  for
    private and family life is difficult to draw, but the ultimate question
    is whether  a  fair  balance  has  been  struck  and  the  question  is
    determined by the structured approach to proportionality which has been
    followed since Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL  11.   At  paragraph  [46]  the
    court found that the  Rules  are  statements  of  the  practice  to  be
    followed which  are  approved  by  Parliament  and  are  based  on  the
    Secretary of State's policy as to how individual rights under Article 8
    should   be   balanced   against   the   competing   public   interest.
    Importantly, the courts must bear in mind the Rules but it is  for  the
    courts to consider how the  balance  is  struck  [47].    The  test  of
    insurmountable obstacles set down by the Secretary  of  State  was  not
    considered to be incapable of compatibility with article 8 and  further
    that if the applicant  or  his  partner  would  face  very  significant
    difficulties in continuing their family life together  outside  the  UK
    which could not be overcome then the test would be met.    The  Supreme
    Court noted however at [48],

           'if that test is not met, but the  refusal  of  the  application
           would result in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences,  such  that
           refusal would not be proportionate, the leave  will  be  granted
           outside the Rules on  the  basis  that  there  are  'exceptional
           circumstances'.

13. The Court added at [56] that cases are not to be approached by a search
    for a unique or unusual feature and,  in  its  absence,  rejecting  the
    application without further examination.  'Rather... the test is one of
    proportionality' and the court  must  decide  whether  the  refusal  is
    proportionate on the  particular  case  before  it  and  'the  ultimate
    question is how a fair balance should be struck.

14. In this case there were a number of issues which were raised before the
    judge.  The applicant, a Japanese national entered the UK lawfully  and
    within the terms of her leave made an  application  for  variation  for
    leave as a spouse on 23rd May 2014.  It would appear at that point that
    the Secretary  of  State  took  control  of  her  passport.  Her  first
    application was refused  because  she  failed  to  meet  the  financial
    requirements and failed the language  test  (the  speaking  part).  Her
    appeal was allowed, however, before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  at
    which the appellant was not represented, and the matter was returned to
    the Secretary of State for a lawful decision.

15. The application was again refused on 18th August  2015  (after  further
    information  was  provided)  whereupon  the  Secretary  of  State   was
    satisfied that she met the financial requirements but this time  failed
    to provide the relevant English language test (she passed all  elements
    of the test save for the speaking).   Her  test,  however,  dated  from
    July 2014 (prior to the first refusal).

16. Submissions were made at the First-tier  Tribunal  by  the  appellant's
    representative that she was unable to provide an up to date  test  with
    the  further  evidence  provided  for   reconsideration   because   the
    Respondent had retained her passport. There was  no  issue  as  to  the
    finance and no issue as to the genuineness of  the  relationship.   The
    test she had provided was not from an approved provider.

17. The appellant gave evidence at the hearing before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hembrough and was cross  examined  in  English.  The  judge  also
    recorded within his findings that the appellant and  her  sponsor,  who
    had been granted refugee status from Iran, had a  child  born  in  June
    2016.  The father could not speak Japanese.   The  evidence  given  was
    that the sponsor had undergone an upheaval four  years  previously  and
    had settled and established a thriving business in the  UK  since  that
    time.

18. The judge accepted that owing to the family in Japan there would not be
    insurmountable obstacles to 'her' integration in  Japan  and  that  the
    sponsor could also integrate into Japan.

19. The judge then proceeded to consider the factors in relation to Article
    8.  He was aware that Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL  40  did  not  apply
    (the appellant had not in fact obtained  the  English  language  test).
    Albeit that the judge did  not  spell  out  the  words  of  'compelling
    circumstances', they were implicit in his findings.  He did  take  into
    account all the relevant factors,  in  accordance  with  Singh  v  SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 74 and at paragraph 32,  in  effect,  he  outlined  the
    substance of the compelling circumstances, not least the  existence  of
    the very young baby, by stating

           'The decisions in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008]  UKHL  40  and  Beoku-
           Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39 are of  limited  utility  since  the
           coming into force of Section 117B but I take account of the fact
           at even if the appellant had to return to Japan  for  a  limited
           time to retake an English test before being sponsored to  return
           to Japan by her husband this is likely to involve a  significant
           disruption to family life and in practice  would  man  that  she
           would have to take her son with her.  This would involve a  long
           flight both ways and exposure to a different  environment  which
           may be prejudicial to his welfare at least in  the  short  term.
           There would also be some disruption to her domestic and business
           arrangement in the UK'.

20. The judge also added at paragraph [33]

          'I also take into account the fact that she has effectively  been
          prevented from taking a further test in the  Uk  because  of  the
          respondent refusal to release her  passport.   I  note  that  her
          solicitors made such a request on 4th September  2015  which  was
          refused on 11th May 2016'.

21. It was evident as the judge recorded that the guidance issued by  IELTS
    was that an 'original and current passport' must be presented.  Clearly
    the passport had been retained by the  Secretary  of  State  since  she
    first applied in May 2014. The judge recorded that  the  production  of
    the original passport is required by all test 'providers'.  The  policy
    is only applicable 'prior to refusal' and  it  would  appear  that  the
    applicant in this instance had her case returned to  the  Secretary  of
    State for further consideration of the same application. She had had  a
    previous refusal.

22. From an overall reading of the decision, I do not accept that the judge
    was unaware of the  public  interest  and  failed  to  acknowledge  its
    importance.  He addressed the issue of the Immigration Rules  and  then
    cited in full, the relevant sections of Section 117 of the  Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which are specifically concerned  with
    the public interest.  Mr Nath rightly referred to Rhuppiah v  Secretary
    of State [2016] EWCA Civ 803 such that being able to speak English  and
    being financially independent are only neutral factors but, in my view,
    the judge addressed the issue of funds and English not  as  factors  in
    the  appellant's  favour  but  rather  to  show  that  they  were   not
    countervailing factors.  The reference to the public interest  was  not
    just in passing by the judge who assessed  the  weight  of  the  family
    life, through the lens of the Rules and factored in  the  circumstances
    of the family on temporary separation.  There  is  no  issue  that  the
    appellant has ever been in breach of immigration law and she was  found
    to be credible.

23. The existence of no insurmountable obstacles to integration on  return,
    as found here, is not, however, necessarily fatal to a claim  as  found
    in the head note of  R (on the application  of  Chen)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department) (Appendix FM  -  Chikwamba  -  temporary
    separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC)

           'Appendix FM does not  include  consideration  of  the  question
           whether it would be disproportionate to expect an individual  to
           return  to  his  home  country  to  make  an   entry   clearance
           application to re-join family members in the U.K. There  may  be
           cases in which there are no insurmountable obstacles  to  family
           life  being  enjoyed  outside  the  U.K.  but  where   temporary
           separation to enable an individual to make  an  application  for
           entry clearance may be disproportionate. In all cases,  it  will
           be for the individual to place before  the  Secretary  of  State
           evidence  that  such   temporary   separation   will   interfere
           disproportionately with protected rights. It will not be  enough
           to rely solely upon the case-law  concerning  Chikwamba  v  SSHD
           [2008] UKHL 40.

24. The paradox here is that it is temporary separation  rather  than  long
    term separation which is to be considered but  the  judge  appeared  to
    accept that the fundamentals of the Rules would be met  on  application
    from abroad but the key issue  is  proportionality  to  the  particular
    decision, as I have highlighted above,  and as set out in Chen at [39]

           'In my judgement, if it is show by  an  individual  (the  burden
           being upon him or her) that an application for  entry  clearance
           from abroad would be granted and that there would be significant
           interference with family life by temporary removal,  the  weight
           to be accorded to the  formal  requirement  of  obtaining  entry
           clearance is reduced'.

25. Had the parties been without  a  very  small  child  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision may be proportionate but the judge is obliged to  take
    into account the facts as  they  were  at  the  date  of  the  hearing.
    Against the background as outlined,  the  key  factor  in  the  judge's
    reasoning was that the appellant was caring for a three month old  baby
    and the appellant would have to make the flight with  that  very  young
    child back and forth to Japan.  The judge found that

           'in practice would mean that she would have to take her son  with
           her.  This would involve a long flight both ways and exposure  to
           a different environment which may  be  prejudicial  to  his  [the
           son's] welfare at least in the short term'.

    The judge was obliged to take into account the best  interests  of  the
    child under Section 55 of the Borders Citizenship and  Immigration  Act
    2009 and that is what he did.

26. The judge also clearly took into account the fact that

          'she has effectively been prevented from taking a further test in
          the UK  because  of  the  Respondent's  refusal  to  release  her
          passport.  I note that her solicitors made such a request on  4th
          September 2015 which was refused on 11th May 2016'.

27. That was a finding which was open to the judge.  Finally,  at  [36]  he
    viewed the matters in the round and considered that this was one of the
    rare cases where the refusal was  not  proportionate.   The  judge  was
    entitled on these facts to make that finding.

28. Whilst compelling circumstances may not have been  mentioned  in  terms
    there are clearly factors outlined  by  the  judge  which  fulfil  that
    requirement and it is not evident from reading the decision as a  whole
    that he has ignored the public interest.  Rather the interests  of  the
    child weigh heavily in the  overall  decision  as  against  the  public
    interest and when considering the Secretary of State's retention of the
    passport.

29. The judge made an error when appearing to allow the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules at the close of his decision but it is clear from the
    face of the decision that this part of the appeal was dismissed and the
    reference declaring the opposite is a  typographical  error.   To  that
    extent I correct and remake the decision only  and  the  decision  will
    read 'The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules'.

30. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hembrough, however, discloses
    no material error of law in respect of Article 8 and shall stand.


Signed                  Helen  Rimington              Date   1st   September
    2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
