
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal Number:   IA/30004/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                   |Determination Promulgated|
|On 30th June 2014                      |On 3rd July 2014         |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mohammad Zaman Noori
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ali, Counsel instructed by Adoni Beulah Sols


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Respondent is a national of Afghanistan date of  birth  18th
       September  1965.  On  the  16th  December  2013  the  First-tier
       Tribunal  (Judge  Crawford)  allowed  his  appeal  against   the
       Secretary of State's decision to refuse  to  issue  him  with  a
       permanent residence  card.   The  Secretary  of  State  now  has
       permission to appeal against that decision.

    2. The Respondent had made an application for a residence  card  on
       the basis that he  qualified  for  permanent  residence  as  the
       spouse of an EEA national who had been exercising treaty  rights
       in the UK for a continuous period of 5 years.  The  Respondent's
       wife is a Dutch national who has lived in the UK since 2006.

    3. The application was refused by way of letter dated the 1st  July
       2013. The Secretary of State found that the application form had
       not been filled in properly,  nor  all  the  necessary  evidence
       supplied, so was unable to accept that the EEA  sponsor  had  in
       fact been exercising treaty rights throughout her  time  in  the
       UK.  The refusal letter also noted that the  application  should
       have included evidence to show that the family had been residing
       in the UK throughout the applicable period, such as council  tax
       or utility bills.

    4. On appeal the First-tier Tribunal noted that at  the  outset  of
       the hearing the  Respondent  had  produced  a  folder  that  was
       "approximately one foot thick,  containing  hundreds  -  if  not
       thousands - of documents, which he submitted showed his wife had
       been exercising treaty rights in the UK since  10  April  2006".
       The First-tier Tribunal Judge very sensibly asked the parties to
       sort out these papers between them. The representatives returned
       to court and handed  in  a  document  explaining  what  the  EEA
       sponsor had been doing since 2006; this chronology was based  on
       the original documentary evidence in the one foot  thick  folder
       and was agreed by both sides.  The agreed  facts  included  that
       the Respondent's wife had worked full time from  April  2006  to
       June 2007, was on maternity leave from August 2007 to May  2008,
       was a student from September 2008 to date,  but  had  also  been
       working part-time from December 2012 to date.  On the  basis  of
       this agreed chronology, and  the  "overwhelming"  evidence  that
       there had been continuous lawful residence  in  accordance  with
       the Regulations,  Judge  Crawford  found  the  burden  of  proof
       discharged and allowed the appeal.

    5. The Secretary of State now has leave to appeal that decision  on
       the basis that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  make  any
       findings on whether the EEA sponsor had, during her  periods  of
       maternity leave or study, comprehensive medical insurance.


Error of Law

    6. Before me Mr Ali produced a Rule  24  response  which  raised  a
       preliminary issue as to whether  the  appeal  was  in-time.  The
       appeal was not lodged  until  the  2nd  January  2014  when  the
       deadline was in fact that 27th December  2014.    Mr  Ali  would
       appear to be correct. There is no indication that the  Secretary
       of State asked for an extension of time or that one  was  given.
       For the sake of completeness I proceed on the basis  that  there
       was a good reason to extend time and do so.

    7. The First-tier Tribunal can reasonably expect the refusal letter
       to raise all matters that are in issue, unless the letter states
       otherwise. It may be the Home Office Presenting Officer  on  the
       day of the hearing will seek to amend the grounds of refusal  to
       include another matter; sometimes  the  Tribunal  may  raise  an
       issue of its own motion. In either case the opposing party  will
       be given an opportunity to deal with the new point being raised.
       In this case the  refusal  letter  makes  no  reference  to  the
       application failing to establish that the EEA  sponsor  had  the
       relevant  medical  insurance  when  she  was  a  student  or  on
       maternity  leave.  I  have  read  Judge  Crawford's  Record   of
       Proceedings. It is quite apparent from this that the matters now
       raised in the grounds of appeal to this Tribunal were not raised
       before him.   Indeed the Record of Proceedings plainly indicate,
       as does the determination, that the factual matters which led to
       the appeal being allowed on the spot were agreed by Counsel  for
       the Secretary of State on the day. There is therefore absolutely
       no merit in these grounds, which seek to go behind the  reasoned
       findings of Judge Crawford and raise a completely new issue that
       has never been part of this case. If the Secretary of State  now
       seeks to raise this matter it is open to her to review the facts
       before granting a Permanent Residence Card; there is however  no
       error of law in Judge Crawford's decision.




Decisions

    8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law
       and it is upheld.





                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              30th June 2014







