
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30572/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 November 2017                           |On 11 December 2017           |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                             mr md sayful islam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Christie, Counsel, instructed by J S
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 10  August  1988.   He
    entered the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student on 21  January  2010  with
    leave to enter until 30 April 2013.  On 14 June  2013  he  was  granted
    further leave to remain until 30 August 2014.  On 24 September 2013  he
    applied for an extension of leave as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  which
    was refused on 26 August 2015 on the basis that the appellant had  used
    a proxy test  taker  to  undertake  the  speaking  part  of  the  TOEIC
    Certificate for Speaking and Reading  to  obtain  his  Confirmation  of
    Acceptance for Studies (CAS).  It was also alleged that  the  appellant
    had submitted forged certificates to obtain the CAS.

2.   The appellant appealed and his appeal came before  a  First-tier  Judge
    on 19 January 2017.  It was in issue as to whether  the  appellant  had
    taken the disputed test at Eden College International on 6  March  2013
    which the appellant denied.  The appellant relied upon  a  letter  from
    Colwell College showing the appellant had achieved  Level  B2  but  not
    confirming whether this was a speaking and writing exam as opposed to a
    listening and reading exam.

3.   The determination continues:

         "4.  The Respondent produces a schedule which  essentially  asserts
             that the Appellant on 15 January 2013 had undertaken  speaking
             and writing tests, also had undertaken the same  exam  at  the
             London College of Media and Technology  on  6  February  2013.
             Somewhat  curiously,  the  Colwell  College  letter  does  not
             provide the certificate number for the test which he  did  and
             similarly the scores  provided  for  Colwell  College  by  the
             Respondent show that the Appellant  had  failed  the  speaking
             test and had passed the written test.   In  contrast,  in  the
             test  carried  out  at  the  London  College  of   Media   and
             Technology, said to be  on  6  February  2013,  the  Appellant
             passed the speaking test and failed the written test.  In  any
             event, the scores listed for Eden College International  on  6
             March 2013 show the Appellant passed both tests."

4.   In  paragraph  6  of  the  decision  the  judge  notes  the  same  test
    certificate  number  appeared  on  the   Eden   College   International
    certificate as well as the Colwell College certificate which  he  found
    difficult to understand and raised serious doubts about the reliability
    of the certificate.

5.   The determination continues:

         "7.  It is clear that the Appellant presented the  certificate  for
             the speaking and writing test which shows scores in respect of
             each category of 200 out of 200 and the same  is  recorded  in
             the CAS material.

         8.   The Appellant gave a general description of  attendance  at  a
             testing centre in London at Alie Street, London E1 and that is
             the same as in the Colwell College confirmatory letter.   Such
             a description could be correct  whether  or  not  a  test  was
             taken.

         9.   The Appellant's recollection of the test itself  is  generally
             fairly vague although he recalls the travelling details to and
             from the college.

         10.  I am left in the position that the  Respondent's  evidence  is
             challenged as to the test centre attended by the Appellant  as
             indeed the use of a proxy test taker.

         11.  The Appellant also says that he did not pay the fee himself to
             take the test but used another's credit card, as  he  did  not
             have sufficient funds.  In the result, he does  not  have  any
             result or indeed any evidence of the payment at all.

         12.  The Appellant also asserted that he must have passed this test
             because within a few months after March  2013  he  had  passed
             other examinations, in particular one in relation to  speaking
             English 'with merit'.  It  followed  from  that  that  it  was
             reasonable to conclude that he had taken the test and had  not
             used a proxy test taker.  In considering this  matter  I  have
             taken into account the case law demonstrated by SM  and  Qadir
             [2012] UKUT 229, I Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167, Shehzad  [2016]
             EWCA Civ 615, MA [2016] UKUT 450 and Shen [2014] UKUT 236.  It
             seemed to me that there is no direct evidence  of  a  separate
             forged document as adverted to in the reasons for refusal  but
             rather, the underlying criticism is that the  CAS  letter  was
             obtained on the strength of a certificate which itself was not
             valid because a proxy test taker had been used.

         13.  I therefore do not find  that  any  separate  document  was  a
             forgery, so much as the Appellant had relied  upon  the  false
             certificate because a proxy test taker had been used.

         14.  Having weighed up the Appellant's explanation of these events,
             I have done so in the context of what is sometimes called  the
             'generic evidence' demonstrated and provided by the Respondent
             in the statements  of  Mona  Shah,  Peter  Milligton,  Rebecca
             Collings and Professor French.

         15.  It seems to me that the Respondent has established that  there
             is a case to answer in relation to first,  the  college  where
             the certificates  are  said  to  have  been  provided  by  and
             secondly, in relation to the use of a proxy test taker.

         16.  I concluded that the likelihood was that the Appellant had not
             shown there was an honest  explanation  for  the  position  he
             found himself in.  The Appellant may well  have  had  in  2013
             good English language skills but that is not the same thing as
             the confidence to pass a test, not least  with  its  attendant
             consequences, when he had previously had some difficulties  in
             that respect.

         17.  It also seemed to me that the evidence, even if it is generic,
             was particularly addressing the certificates  relied  upon  by
             the Appellant from Eden College International whose reputation
             had been seriously damaged by the T.V. expos� and  the  police
             investigation.  Similarly, Colwell College has also  been  the
             subject of  investigation  and  adverse  criticisms  of  their
             testing performance.

         18.  In the circumstances,  I  find  that  the  Appellant  has  not
             discharged the burden of proof upon a balance of probabilities
             that he took the speaking test himself.   He  may  have  taken
             other tests but I do  not  find  he  took  the  speaking  test
             himself.  No separate representations were made in relation to
             private life rights under the immigration rules or  Article  8
             and, in the circumstances,  it  appeared  that  there  was  no
             evidence particularly advanced in that matter.  Accordingly, I
             do not find they are engaged."

6.   The judge dismissed the appeal and grounds of appeal  were  settled  by
    Counsel (not Miss Christie) and permission to appeal was granted on  14
    September 2017.  A response was filed on 28 September 2017.

7.   Miss Christie settled amended grounds on 27  October  2017  which  were
    lodged with the Tribunal on that date.  Permission was sought  to  rely
    on these grounds.  Ms Ahmad had not seen the grounds and I put the case
    back to enable her to have sight of them.  She submitted it was  unfair
    to raise amended grounds at this stage and the grounds should have been
    lodged in the proper timescale.  Counsel submitted that the  respondent
    had suffered no prejudice as the  grounds  had  been  sent  some  weeks
    previously.  She referred to a guidance note in 2011  from  Mr  Justice
    Blake.  The issues raised had featured in the  original  grounds.   One
    point had been withdrawn.

8.   It appeared to me appropriate to permit the reliance upon  the  amended
    grounds.  I noted that some of the points had already featured  in  the
    original grounds and one of the  points  had  been  withdrawn  and  the
    grounds and the application had been  made  several  weeks  before  the
    hearing date.  However I offered  Ms  Ahmad  the  opportunity  to  take
    additional time should she require it.

9.    Counsel  submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  an   initial
    evidential burden to show that the test certificate had  been  procured
    by dishonesty and if satisfied the burden shifted to raise "a plausible
    innocent explanation" (Shehzad and Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615.   The
    evidential burden entailed a "comparatively modest threshold"  (see  SM
    and Qadir v Secretary of State (ETS  -  Evidence  -  Burden  of  proof)
    [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC) at paragraph 67.  If  the  appellant  satisfied
    the evidential burden the respondent was then required to discharge the
    legal burden of proving dishonesty on  the  balance  of  probabilities.
    The standard of proof belonged to the higher end of the balance of  the
    probabilities spectrum - Counsel referred to Muhandiramge  [2015]  UKUT
    00675 (IAC) at paragraph 89.  Reference was also made  to  Shen  (Paper
    appeals: proving dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 00236 (IAC) and  Mohibullah  v
    Secretary of State [2016] UKUT 00561 (IAC) at paragraph 79.   The  fact
    that the judge had not applied the correct burden and standard of proof
    was a clear material error of law - Counsel referred to MZ (Pakistan) v
    Secretary of State [2009]  EWCA  Civ  919  -  the  court  rejected  the
    submission that the misdirection was immaterial because the  judge  had
    simply disbelieved the appellant.  She referred to paragraph 18 of  the
    determination.  In addition to the amended grounds she had  prepared  a
    helpful note on the evidential burden and a chronology.

10.  Ms Ahmad submitted that it was clear from paragraph 8 that  the  First-
    tier Judge had  considered  the  appellant's  evidence  and  found  his
    recollection to be vague.  He had referred to the absence of a  receipt
    in paragraph 11 and had considered the generic  evidence  in  paragraph
    14.  The judge had  not  found  there  was  an  honest  explanation  in
    paragraph 16.

11.  Ms Ahmad accepted that paragraph 18 was not best worded but should  not
    be  looked  at  in  isolation.   It  would  be  wrong  to   subject   a
    determination to a very careful analysis which would overburden a First-
    tier  Judge.   The  Court  of  Appeal   had   encouraged   brevity   in
    determination writing.  The judge  had  applied  the  correct  approach
    concerning the initial burden and the conclusion that  the  appellant's
    explanation was not satisfactory was open to the judge.  Reference  was
    made to paragraph 57 of the decision in  MA  to  which  the  judge  had
    referred in paragraph 12 of his determination.  There were many reasons
    why an appellant might use  a  proxy  although  he  was  proficient  in
    English.  Paragraph 18 was not very well worded but paragraph 16 needed
    to be looked at and the judge  could  not  have  come  to  a  different
    conclusion.

12.  Miss Christie submitted that  the  judge  should  have  been  clear  on
    applying the correct burden and standard of proof and she was surprised
    by Ms Ahmad's submission.  The determination was not clear at all.  The
    evidential burden on the appellant was only a modest one.   It  may  be
    that the judge thought that the appellant had a legal  burden  on  him.
    Counsel referred to the evidential burden and the remaining grounds  of
    appeal and her note  on  the  evidential  burden.   The  appellant  had
    advanced a positive account denying fraud and unless -

         "the appellant is found to be  so  uncredible  that  no  reasonable
         judge could find his explanation to be truthful, the appellant will
         have discharged the evidential  burden  and  it  will  be  for  the
         respondent to prove fraud, on the balance of probabilities."

13.  Counsel also referred to what the judge had said in paragraph 60  about
    the appellant  previously  having  difficulties  in  passing  a  spoken
    English Language test without taking into account  the  discrepancy  in
    the spreadsheet put forward by the respondent about the  speaking  test
    taken on 15 January 2013 which recorded a different date of  birth  for
    the candidate which did not  correspond  to  the  appellant's  date  of
    birth.  While the judge had referred to discrepancies in the  dates  of
    birth in paragraph 5 of his  determination  this  was  not  taken  into
    account when relying on the test result as evidence of the  appellant's
    alleged difficulties.

14.  The judge had failed to consider points referred  to  in  the  relevant
    case law to which he had made reference in paragraph 12 of his decision
    which highlighted questions as to the  accuracy  of  the  ETS  testing,
    scoring and test checking processes.  Given the  clear  discrepancy  in
    the date of birth the judge should have considered the  reliability  of
    the ETS spreadsheet as evidence that the appellant had  previously  had
    difficulty in passing an English test.  No  proper  findings  had  been
    made  that  the  appellant  was  the  person  identified  in  the   ETS
    spreadsheet or that he had taken and failed a test on 15 January  2013.
    It was a question about the uncertainty and lack of evidence as to  how
    ETS had linked candidates' names with test  results.   No  reasons  had
    been given for preferring the mis-matching ETS spreadsheet extract over
    the appellant's multiple  educational  certificates  demonstrating  his
    academic achievements in the English  Language.   There  was  an  issue
    whether the judge could properly rely on the  spreadsheet  as  evidence
    that the appellant had failed a test  when  the  respondent's  position
    that it was "questionable" whether that test had in fact been taken  by
    the named person, or by a proxy test taker.   The  appellant  had  also
    given academic evidence of his ability after the date of the  allegedly
    fraudulent test certificate and the matter had not  been  given  proper
    attention by the judge.  In ground 4 it was submitted  that  the  judge
    had not properly noted the "multiple frailities"  identified  in  SM  &
    Qadir in the respondent's generic evidence.   This  evidence  had  been
    found to be insufficient to discharge the legal burden.  There  was  an
    issue of data being mis-matched and the possibility of  covert,  remote
    control mechanisms being used thereby a person using  another  computer
    could secure access to the computer being used by the candidate.  There
    had been no evidence specifically connecting  the  appellant  with  the
    invalid test result such photographs, for example.  The actual  results
    of the speaking tests had not been given,  preventing  any  statistical
    analysis of the scoring patterns, the judge had not  properly  assessed
    the paucity of the respondent's evidence in the light of  the  findings
    of the Tribunal in SM & Qadir and subsequent evidence identified in  MA
    and Saha.  The judge appeared  simply  to  have  given  weight  to  the
    respondent's generic evidence.

15.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved  my  determination.   I
    have carefully considered the material before me  and  the  submissions
    that have been made and I remind myself that I can only interfere  with
    the decision if there an error of law  in  it.   The  question  of  the
    shifting burden of proof in ETS cases is of course a complicated one.

16.  The respondent has an initial evidential burden  and  then  the  burden
    shifts to the appellant to show a plausible innocent  explanation.   It
    does not appear to me that the determination clearly explains  why  the
    appellant  had  not  put  forward  a  plausible  innocent  explanation.
    Counsel points out that while the appellant had put forward evidence of
    his English Language ability, besides referring  to  the  case  law  in
    paragraph 12 the judge  had  not  appeared  to  have  taken  that  into
    account.  Counsel points out to a discrepancy in  the  ETS  spreadsheet
    concerning the appellant's date of birth.   The  judge  had  noted  the
    issue of the date of birth but found it difficult to tell its relevance
    in paragraph 5 of his determination.  Counsel makes the point that  the
    evidential burden is a light  one  -  the  threshold  is  comparatively
    modest.

17.  Although the appellant's evidence is described as fairly  vague  it  is
    not clear how the judge reached the conclusion in paragraph 16 that the
    likelihood was that the appellant had  not  shown  that  there  was  an
    honest explanation.  As Counsel makes clear all the  appellant  had  to
    advance was a plausible innocent explanation.

18   Ms Ahmad accepts that paragraph 18 is not ideally  worded  but  submits
    that it would be wrong, in effect, to apply too critical an analysis of
    it.  I also take into account that in both counsel's amended grounds of
    appeal at paragraph 18 and in the skeleton argument at paragraph 10 she
    misquotes what the judge wrote in the first sentence of paragraph 18  -
    adding the word "legal" so that it reads: "In the circumstances, I find
    that the Appellant has not discharged the legal burden of proof upon  a
    balance of probabilities that he took the speaking test  himself."  The
    judge did not write this - I have set out the correct version above. On
    the other hand it is by no means clear that the judge was  not  dealing
    with the legal burden at this stage and if he was then  of  course  the
    burden was not on the appellant. Ms Ahmad does acknowledge  a  weakness
    in paragraph 18 as I have said.

19.  I accept the submissions made  by  Miss  Christie  that  on  issues  of
    burden and standard of proof where fraud is alleged it is  particularly
    important that it can be clearly demonstrated that the judge  had  gone
    through the proper steps when reaching his conclusions.  I do not  find
    that it is clear that the  judge  properly  directed  himself  in  this
    matter and accordingly in light of the  fact  finding  required  it  is
    necessary that his case should be remitted for a fresh hearing before a
    different First-tier Judge.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent indicated.

Anonymity Order

The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and I make none.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.




Signed                                  Date 8 December 2017


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

