
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/30978/2014

                                                   IA/30983/2014

                                                   IA/30989/2014

                                                   IA/30996/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |            Decision & Reasons     |
|On 11 March 2016                   |Promulgated                        |
|                                   |On 30 March 2016                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                    K B I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                             First Appellant
                                     S F
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                            Second Appellant
                                    I F O
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                             Third Appellant
                                    I O O
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                            Fourth Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr B Lams (counsel) instructed by The Legal Resource
Partnership
For the Respondent:  Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer





                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
   Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of any information regarding
   the proceedings which would be likely to lead members of  the  public  to
   identify the appellants. I do so, on the basis of  the  minority  of  the
   third and fourth appellants.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Thomas promulgated on 31 October 2014, which dismissed the
   Appellants' appeals on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellants are all members of the same family.  The  first  appellant
   was born on 11 March 1982. The second Appellant was born  on  22  October
   1970, but died on 23 February 2015 (there  is  therefore  no  longer  any
   appeal in relation to the second appellant). The third appellant was born
   on 24 September 2005. The fourth appellant was born on 6  May  2010.  The
   second appellant was the first appellants husband. The third  and  fourth
   appellants are their children. The appellants are Nigerian citizens.


4.  On  15  July  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellants'
   applications for leave to remain in the UK.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Thomas ("the Judge") dismissed the appeals against the Respondent's
   decisions.


6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 7  May  2015  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
   Allen gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "With  some  hesitation  I  grant  permission.  I  consider  that  the
      application was made in  time.  My  concern  is  with  regard  to  the
      evidence before the Judge of the  risk  potentially  faced  by  people
      suffering from Albinism in Nigeria, and at the same time argument  can
      be heard as to whether Mr Ash's statement can be allowed in on Ladd  v
      Marshall principles. Also relevant to this is  the  Article  8  issue,
      bearing in mind the fact that the child in question has been living in
      the UK for nine years. There is in addition now, the further point  of
      the suicide of the second appellant. This,  if  an  error  of  law  is
      found, is a material matter to the issue of risk on return"

7. (a) Mr Lams, counsel of the appellants, move the grounds  of  appeal.  He
   told me that although the respondent's decision related to an application
   for leave to remain in the UK on article 8 ECHR grounds,  parties  agreed
   that the appeal should proceed on consideration of the  appellants  claim
   to have a well-founded fear of persecution in Nigeria  because  of  third
   appellant's Albinism. He told  me  that  the  Judge  agreed  to  consider
   asylum, humanitarian protection and article 3 ECHR.

   (b) Mr Lams took me to [19] of the decision and was critical of  what  he
   said was the superficial treatment that the Judge gave to both expert and
   background information. He reminded me that the appellants relied on  two
   bundles before the First-tier. Those bundles contain more than 320  pages
   of evidence. He argued that inadequate consideration had  been  given  to
   the contents of the documentary evidence.

8.  I interrupted Mr Lam and started a discussion with both Mr  Lam  and  Mr
Tarlow (the Senior Home Office presenting officer). Parties'  agents  agreed
that consideration of the 1951 convention  was  contained  at  [19]  of  the
decision only. I drew parties agents attention  to  [17]  of  the  decision,
where the Judge relies on Edgehill & Ors v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ  402,  and
finds that paragraph 276 ADE and appendix FM of the  immigration  rules  are
irrelevant. Mr Lams told me that that was a clear error of law and  referred
me to Singh v SSHD: Khalid v SSHD  [2015] EWCA Civ 74.  Mr  Tarlow  told  me
that he could not resist the submission.

9. I asked parties agents about the adequacy of fact finding in relation  to
the 1951 convention and  whether  or  not  what  is  contained  at  [19]  is
sufficient to enable the Judge to decide to dismiss these appeals on  asylum
grounds. Mr Tarlow indicated that he could  not  make  any  concessions  but
would adopt a neutral  position  and  did  not  want  to  make  any  further
submission.

Analysis

10. It is a  matter  of  agreement  that  the  arguments  advanced  for  the
appellants include a claim that the appellants have a well-founded  fear  of
persecution because of membership  of  a  particular  social  group.  It  is
common ground that the First tier Judge was called on to determine  a  claim
under  the  1951  convention.  In  his  decision  the  Judge  dismisses  the
appellant's asylum claim.

11. Between [6] and  [10]  the  Judge  summarises  the  appellants'  claims.
Although the Judge records details of the  third  appellant's  albinism  and
the fear that the appellants have of treatment  that  they  may  receive  in
Nigeria because of the third  appellant's  condition,  the  Judge  makes  no
specific reference to the 1951 convention nor to  a  claim  for  asylum.  In
summarising counsel's submissions at [16], the Judge  dwells  on  article  8
ECHR, and only in the penultimate sentence indicates that it is  argued  the
third appellant ".... is also at risk of persecution  as  an  albino  and  a
member of a particular social group."

12. It is only at [19] that the Judge deals with the claim  that  the  third
appellant  has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution.  There,   there   is
inadequate analysis of the background  materials.  What  the  judge  records
amounts to little more than bold statements that  the  third  appellant  may
face discrimination and stigmatisation  but  not  persecution,  without  any
analysis of the evidence  from  which  the  Judge  clause  that  conclusion.
Despite the amount  of  evidence  placed  before  the  Judge,  there  is  no
meaningful analysis of that evidence nor is there an  adequate  fact-finding
exercise conducted to enable the Judge to reach the conclusions set  out  at
[19].

13. Although 19 is placed under a  heading  "findings",  what  is  contained
there amounts to conclusions. It is realistically that are  no  findings  in
fact relating to the appellants claim from asylum.

14. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

15. I find that the inadequacy of findings in  relation  to  the  claim  for
asylum amounts to a material error of  law.  I  consider  the  error  to  be
material because  had  the  Tribunal  conducted  a  properly  reasoned  fact
finding exercise, based on an analysis of the evidence,  the  outcome  could
have been different.

16. At [17] the Judge incorrectly places  reliance  on  Edgehill  &  others.
Parties' agents are agreed that the Judge should have  considered  paragraph
276 ADE and appendix FM of the immigration rules, and only then moved on  to
consider whether or not the  facts  and  circumstances  established  by  the
evidence merit  further  consideration  of  article  8  ECHR  (out-with  the
immigration rules).

17.  I  find  that  the  Judge  was  wrong  to  omit  consideration  of  the
immigration rules. That error is a further material error of law.

18. I therefore find that the decision is  tainted  by  material  errors  of
law. I must set the decision aside.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

19. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 a case may  be  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:


    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

20. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
of the nature and extent of the fact finding exercise necessary to  reach  a
just decision in these appeals. None of the findings of fact are  to  stand;
a complete re-hearing is necessary.

21. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Birmingham  to
be heard before any First-tier Immigration Judge other than Judge Thomas.

CONCLUSION

Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

23. I set aside the decision. The appeals are remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                                                              Date 15
March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
