
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/30428/2014
                                                               IA/30430/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th September 2016               |On 23rd September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

            DUNANJALI CHATHURIKA RAMAWICKRAMA (fIRST Respondent)
                  PRASANA KUMARA GAMAGE (sECOND Respondent)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondents:   Mr A Jafar, Counsel instructed by Liyon Legal Ltd.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondents and each of them are citizens of Sri Lanka whose  dates
    of birth are recorded as 12th January  1990  and  28th  September  1987
    respectively.   The  Respondents  are  partners.   This  matter  really
    concerns  the  First  Respondent,  the  Second  Respondent's  case  was
    entirely dependent upon the outcome of the  appeal  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal of the First Respondent.

 2. Application had been made by the First Respondent for leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom as a Tier 2 (General) Worker.  Leave was  granted
    on 6 December 2013 until 14 December 2016 but on  31st  July  2014  the
    leave was cancelled.  This  was  followed  by  a  decision  dated  24th
    October 2014 explaining why.  There was an  appeal  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Thomas,  sitting  at
    Newport on 8th January 2015.  In issue was whether the First Respondent
    had used a proxy when sitting an English language  test.   It  was  the
    Secretary of State's  case  that  that  was  what  had  occurred.   The
    Secretary of State relied on witness statements from Rebecca  Collings,
    a Home Office employee whose witness statement was dated 23rd June 2014
    and Peter Millington, Assistant  Director  and  employee  of  the  Home
    Office of the same date.  There  was  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as to the method of detection used by the Secretary  of  State
    in determining whether or  not  a  proxy  had  been  used.   The  First
    Respondent however asserted that he had actually taken the  test.  That
    was the issue to be resolved.  The  judge  found  in  the  Respondents'
    favour.

 3. Not content with the Decisions, by Notice dated 5th February  2016  the
    Secretary of State made application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  That permission was initially refused but in a renewed
    application dated 19th  July  2016  permission  was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Keki?, thus the matter comes before me.

 4. Mr Whitwell for the Secretary of State submits that the judge erred  in
    the application of the appropriate burdens which applied in this  case.
    It was Mr Whitwell's submission that in reliance  on  SM  and  Qadir  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden  of
    Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC) and on the case of Shehzad  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 615 there was an evidential burden on the Secretary  of  State  and
    that that burden had been met, the standard of proof being  balance  of
    probabilities and that the judge ought  to  have  approached  the  case
    sequentially by looking to the evidential  burden  that  was  upon  the
    Secretary of State and then, and only if the burden of proof  had  been
    discharged, look to the Respondent to establish whether  or  not  there
    had been  a  sufficient  explanation,  and  then,  dependent  upon  the
    findings made, look to the legal burden which would shift back  to  the
    Secretary of State.  The complaint made in this case is that the  judge
    erred in two ways.  Firstly, by simply placing the burden of  proof  on
    the Secretary of State without more, and by placing too high a standard
    of proof on the Secretary of State.

Was there an error of law?

 5. It is clear that the judge  did  not  set  out  his  reasoning  in  the
    sequential way contended for by Mr Whitwell but it is  perfectly  clear
    from reading the decision as a whole  that  the  judge  looked  at  the
    evidence upon which the Secretary of State relied and  the  judge  then
    clearly set against that evidence, the evidence of the  Respondent  and
    explained why in his/her view there was sufficient  evidence  from  the
    First Respondent  for  him,  the  judge,  to  be  satisfied  that  this
    particular Respondent (because these  cases  are  fact  sensitive)  had
    taken the test.

 6. Questions were put to the Respondent  at  the  hearing  and  the  judge
    carefully considered the answers given coming  to  the  view  that  the
    evidence taken as a whole was sufficient to satisfy  him/her  that  the
    witness was honest.  The judge finished with the burden being upon  the
    Respondent which was correct because that is  where  the  legal  burden
    lay.  In paragraph 42 the judge states, "the  Respondent  has  asserted
    dishonesty, a serious allegation; the burden is on  the  Respondent  to
    prove it".

 7. The complaint which the Secretary of State makes is that  the  standard
    of proof which was applied  was  too  high.   The  judge  does  say  at
    paragraph 42:

         "As stated in R(N) - v - Mental Health  Review  Tribunal  (Northern
         Region) [2005] EWCA Civ 1605, 'the more serious the allegation,  or
         its consequences then the stronger the evidence must be before  the
         court to support that the allegation has been proved on the balance
         of probabilities'."

    What the judge says at paragraph 42 follows a very careful analysis  by
    the judge of some of the authorities that deal  with  the  standard  of
    proof applicable.  It is clear that since the case of Re  B  (Children)
    [2008] UKHL 35 there is one  standard  the  civil  standard  (though  I
    observe in passing that in fact on the same day, albeit in  a  criminal
    case, the House of Lords appeared to recognise a "variable" standard: R
    v Davies (Appellant) (On appeal from  the  Court  of  Appeal  (Criminal
    Division)) [2008] UKHL 36, para 60. Even that case, however, would  not
    help the Secretary of State because it  goes  to  the  cogency  of  the
    evidence which is the point in his case.   In  my  judgment,  what  the
    judge was clearly pointing to when making any  observations  about  the
    standard of proof was that the evidence needed to be  more  cogent  the
    more serious the allegation.  That does  not  change  the  standard  of
    proof.  It goes to the quality of the evidence which is different.   In
    my view therefore this is a case in which the judge did not  materially
    err even if there was an error in  not  sequentially  setting  out  the
    standard and burden as they fell respectively upon the Respondent, then
    the Appellant and then the Respondent in the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. I make this observation as I have already done, these  cases  are  fact
    sensitive.  Each case turns on its own facts.  It may be that  had  the
    Secretary of State had more evidence  available  to  place  before  the
    judge then the judge would have come to a different view in this  case.
    I am concerned however only with the  evidence  that  was  before  this
    judge in this appeal in the First-tier Tribunal.  If of course on  some
    future occasion some further application is made by the Respondents  to
    this appeal in which the evidence which the Secretary of State may have
    is material then of course it will be a  matter  for  consideration  at
    that time but I am not concerned with it.   In  the  circumstances  the
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of State is dismissed and
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
