
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)       Appeal Number: IA/30048/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |   Decision & Reasons         |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 31 July 2015                               |   On 12 August 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           MR DAMANJEET SHAH SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr Tarlow, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:   Mr Nasim of counsel


          DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department.

 2. To avoid confusion we refer to the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department as "the respondent" and Mr Singh as "the  appellant",  their
    designations before the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. The appellant is a citizen of India and his date of birth is 9  October
    1994. On 18 June 2014 he applied for a Residence Card as a confirmation
    of a right to reside in the United Kingdom as an extended family member
    of an EEA National exercising treaty rights in the UK.  The  respondent
    refused his application for a residence  card  on  10  July  2014.  The
    reasons for refusal were that the appellant had not proved that he  was
    a partner of, and in a durable  relationship  with,  a  qualifying  EEA
    national as required by  Article  8(5)  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  ('the  Regulations')  and  that  the
    appellant had not proved that the EEA national was a  qualified  person
    under Regulation 6 of the Regulations.

 4.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge's Decision


 5. In a decision promulgated on 27 January 2015 First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Fowell ('the judge') allowed the appeal. By the time of the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeal hearing it was accepted  by  the  respondent  that  the
    sponsor was exercising treaty rights at the time of the application for
    the residence card. The substantive issue for determination before  the
    judge was whether the appellant satisfied the  requirement  of  article
    8(5) of the Regulations, namely that he was an extended  family  member
    of an EEA national. In this case that would be by  virtue  of  being  a
    partner of, and in a durable relationship with, the sponsor. The judge,
    having heard evidence from the sponsor and  the  appellant  and  having
    considered the documentary evidence, found that the  appellant  was  an
    extended family member of the sponsor and allowed  the  appeal  against
    the refusal to issue a residence card.




Permission to Appeal

 6. The respondent applied to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal against the decision on a single ground, namely that  the  judge
    should  have  remitted  the  case  to  the  Secretary  of   State   for
    consideration under Regulation 17(4)  of  the  Regulations  instead  of
    allowing the appeal outright. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper
    Tribunal Judge Deans sitting as a judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion

 7. At the hearing we heard submissions from Mr  Nasim  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant and Mr Tarlow on behalf of respondent.


Legal Framework

 8. The relevant provisions of the Regulations provide:
         Regulation 8 (Extended family member)

         (1) In these Regulations "extended family member" means a person
         who is not a family member of an EEA national under regulation
         7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the conditions in paragraph
         (2), (3), (4) or (5).

         ..................

         (5) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
         person is the partner of an EEA national (other than the civil
         partner) and can prove to the decision maker that he is in a
         durable relationship with the EEA national.

         ...

         Regulation 17 (Issue of residence card)

         ...

         (4) The Secretary of State may issue a residence card to an
         extended family member not falling within regulation 7(3) who is
         not an EEA national on application if-

         (a) the relevant EEA national in relation to the extended family
         member is a qualified person or an EEA national with a permanent
         right of residence under regulation 15; and

         (b) in all the circumstances it appears to the Secretary of State
         appropriate to issue the residence card.

         (5) Where the Secretary of State receives an application under
         paragraph (4) he shall undertake an extensive examination of the
         personal circumstances of the applicant and if he refuses the
         application shall give reasons justifying the refusal unless this
         is contrary to the interests of national security.

 9. Mr Nasim submitted that there was no error of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision. In essence  his  submissions  were  that  the  judge
    allowed the appeal solely on the basis  that  Regulation  8(5)  of  the
    regulations was met as that was the only matter before the  judge,  the
    respondent did not raise Regulation 17(4) at  the  hearing  or  in  the
    reasons for refusal letter. In adversarial proceedings it is  not  open
    to a party to introduce arguments not canvassed before the judge or  in
    the reasons for refusal letter in support of a  claim  that  the  judge
    made a material error of law. Mr Nasim referred to the fifth  paragraph
    in the reasons for refusal letter arguing that it states  clearly  that
    an extensive examination of personal circumstances is undertaken and  a
    decision made as  to  whether  it  would  be  appropriate  to  issue  a
    residence card. He submitted that it was clear that the decision  maker
    had matters at the forefront of his  mind  that  were  not  limited  to
    Regulation 8 and that there was nothing in the letter to  suggest  that
    the respondent had reserved the  position  with  regard  to  regulation
    17(4). He gave an example of recent Tier 1 cases where refusal  letters
    included a specific reference to the reservation  of  the  respondent's
    position in matters not dealt with in the letter. There was no error of
    law because regulation 17(4) was not an issue before the judge.


10. We asked Mr Nasim what he submitted the effect was of the appeal  being
    allowed and how the respondent should implement the  determination.  Mr
    Nasim did not contend that the  respondent  was  required  to  issue  a
    residence card but that a decision should be made on the basis  of  the
    findings on Regulation 8. We referred Mr Nasim to  the  fact  that  the
    appeal was against the decision itself, namely, a decision to refuse to
    issue a residence card. Mr Nasim's submissions were  that  the  refusal
    letter determines the focus and issues that will be before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

11. Mr Tarlow submitted that the judge ought to have remitted the matter to
    the respondent to exercise her discretion with  the  fact  findings  in
    place. Regulation 17(4) provided that the respondent had  a  discretion
    as to whether or not to issue a residence card. He relied on  the  case
    of Ihemedu (OFMs-meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 340  (IAC)  at  paragraph
    20. The judge ought to have allowed the appeal only on the  basis  that
    it was not in accordance with the law.



Error of Law

12. We find that there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge's decision. The appeal was against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse to issue a residence card. It  was  that  decision
    that was under appeal not the reasons  for  the  decision.  The  appeal
    against the decision was allowed. At paragraph 2 of  the  decision  the
    judge records that 'This is  an  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  the
    Appellant's application for a residence card...' The judge then went on
    to set out the reasons for the refusal.  Whilst  the  reasons  for  the
    refusal form the basis for the decision the appeal was not against  the
    reasons.


13. This difference may not be material in many appeals  but  it  is  clear
    from Regulation  17(4)  that  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department has a discretion as to whether or not  a  person  is  to  be
    granted a residence card, even  if  found  to  be  an  extended  family
    member.


14. The First-tier Tribunal in the Ihemedu case had made a finding that the
    claimant was entitled to a residence card. The  judge  in  the  instant
    case did not make such a finding but by allowing the appeal against the
    refusal to issue a residence card  the  judge  effectively  denied  the
    respondent the opportunity to  exercise  her  discretion  and  consider
    other relevant matters notwithstanding the finding on Regulation 8.  At
    paragraph 20 of Ihemedu the Upper Tribunal held:
         '..... In exercising that discretion matters  such  as  whether  an
         applicant has entered the UK  lawfully  or  otherwise  are  plainly
         relevant (although not necessarily determinative...). But  in  this
         case the Secretary of State had not yet exercised  that  discretion
         and so the most the IJ was entitled to do was allow the  appeal  as
         being not in accordance with the law leaving the matter of  whether
         to exercise the reg 17(4) discretion in his favour to the Secretary
         of State...'

15. Accordingly, the judge here erred by allowing the appeal in  full.  The
    proper course was to allow the appeal on the Regulation 8 issue leaving
    the matter of whether to exercise the Regulation  17(4)  discretion  in
    the appellant's favour to the respondent.


Conclusions

16. There was a material error of law such that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal is set aside to the extent that the appeal was allowed in
    full. The finding of the judge  that  the  appellant  was  an  extended
    family member of the sponsor and therefore satisfied the requirement of
    article 8(5) of the Regulations is maintained.


17. The respondent asked for the matter to be remitted to the Secretary  of
    State for consideration under Regulation 17(4) of  the  Regulations  if
    the appeal was successful. In Greenwood (Automatic  Deportation:  Order
    of Events) [2014] UKUT 00342 (IAC) the Upper  Tribunal  considered  the
    power of the First-tier Tribunal to 'remit' a matter to the respondent.
    At paragraph 16 the Upper Tribunal indicated as follows:
       16.     As I indicated above, there is a third possible error in
       paragraph 23 of the Tribunal's decision. In the second sentence, the
       Tribunal says:

         "Given the fundamental nature of the respondent's error, we remit
         the matter back to the respondent for the error to be remedied".



        17    Ignoring the pleonasm of "remit back" I think it is in general
        doubtful whether the First-tier Tribunal has jurisdiction to remit a
        matter to a decision-maker. It has a power to allow  or  dismiss  an
        appeal; and if allowing an appeal it has a power to give directions,
        with which the Secretary of State must comply. It does not  formally
        have the power to quash the decision under appeal, but  it  is  well
        understood that a decision of the Tribunal to the  effect  that  the
        decision was not in accordance with the law prevents  the  decision-
        maker from relying on it or acting on it, so  that  it  is  to  that
        extent of no effect. In those circumstances, if the decision is  one
        which results  from  an  application  made  by  an  individual,  the
        position is that the application is outstanding, awaiting  a  lawful
        decision. No remittal is necessary. Any circumstances  arising  from
        the fact that an application has not yet been decided  (for  example
        under s.3C of the 1971 Act, or s.77 of the 2002 Act) will  continue,
        and will be treated as not having been interrupted by  the  unlawful
        decision. If there is any doubt about  the  matter,  the  First-tier
        Tribunal, in allowing the appeal, can direct the  decision-maker  to
        treat the applicant accordingly.


18. We conclude that a direction is appropriate  rather  than  remittal  as
    requested. The respondent  is  directed  to  consider  the  appellant's
    application in accordance with the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal
    judge on Regulation 8(5).

19. We have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence we  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.


   Notice of Decision


   The appeal is allowed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  allow
   the appeal is set aside. The finding of the judge that the appellant  was
   an extended family member of the  sponsor  and  therefore  satisfied  the
   requirement of article 8(5) of the Regulations stands. The respondent  is
   directed to reconsider the application in accordance with the findings of
   the First-tier Tribunal Judge on Regulation 8(5).


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 6 August 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw




