
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/30732/2013
     IA/30734/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 July 2014                               |On 26 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                    MRS ANOMA DAMAYANTHI KUMARI THUPPAHI
              MR THUSHARA NIROSHANA HERATH MUDIYANSELAGE GEDARA
                           (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kannagara, Law Direct Immigration Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are wife and husband born on 5th August  1979  and  27th
    July 1976 and are Sri  Lankan  citizens.   They  appealed  against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 8th July 2013 to refuse to vary  their
    leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4  Migrant  and  dependent  and  to
    remove them by way of directions under Section 47 of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The first appellant was granted leave to enter  the  UK  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student until 30th August  2012.  On  30th  August  2012  the
    appellant submitted a Tier 1 Entrepreneur application for further leave
    to remain in the UK.  On 30th August 2012 her dependant partner and the
    second appellant submitted a Tier 1 Dependant application  for  further
    leave to remain.  Both these applications were withdrawn on  26th  June
    2013 at the appellants' request.

 3. Fresh applications for Tier 4 and dependent status  were  made  on  5th
    April 2013 and refused  by  the  respondent  on  8th  July  2013  under
    paragraph 322(1A) paragraph 322(2).   The  first   appellant  therefore
    also failed to meet the requirements of  245ZX(A)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

Reasons for Refusal by the Respondent

 4. It was stated that with the previous Tier  1  Entrepreneur  application
    the first appellant had submitted a bank letter  and  a  fixed  deposit
    certificate from  the  Regional  Development  Bank  but  the  documents
    submitted in support of the Tier 1 application had  been  checked  with
    the issuing body which confirmed it had not issued  the  documents  and
    confirmed they were forged.

 5. In addition the current Tier 4 application had failed to  disclose  the
    previous deception.  Question 16 on the application form  stated  "Have
    you ever knowingly used  deception  when  seeking  leave  to  enter  or
    remain, entered the UK  illegally  or  worked  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without immigration permission to do so contrary to your conditions  of
    stay?" and to this the appellants replied "no".

 6. As material facts were not disclosed in relation to the application  it
    was refused under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.

 7. Thus  the  application  was  refused  further  to  paragraph  245ZX(A),
    paragraph 322(1A) and paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules.

 8. For the above reasons the Secretary of State was  also  satisfied  that
    the appellants had used deception in the current application.

 9. First-tier Tribunal Adio heard  the  appeal  on  26th  March  2014  and
    dismissed the appeals in respect of the Immigration Rules.

10. An application for permission to  appeal  was  made  by  the  appellant
    because it was said although the judge accepted the letter from the Sri
    Lankan Savings Bank was genuine he refused to  accept  the  appellants'
    explanation and the further letter issued by the  Regional  Development
    Bank.  The discrepancies the judge found between the two Regional  Bank
    letters [24th August 2012 and 24th March 2014] were  not  correct.  The
    judge should have given weight to the appellant's explanation that  the
    difference in amounts in the letters was due to interest.   Further the
    judge had not identified that the letter of 24th March 2014 noted  that
    the Head Office of the Regional Bank had moved to a new building.

11. Application for permission to appeal was granted by Judge Heynes on the
    basis only that the grounds of appeal complain that the judge  made  an
    error of law in his treatment of the evidence.

12. The Home Office submitted a Rule 24 response that the grounds  advanced
    no material arguable error of law.  The appellant knew of  the  322(1A)
    refusal since July 2013 when the refusal was made but failed to put  in
    any form of rebuttal until the production of letters from the  Regional
    Bank dated 24th March 2014 those only being photocopies  and  this  was
    recorded at paragraph 10 of the determination as the appellant  claimed
    the original was with her father.  The respondent submits that based on
    the evidence before him and  in  the  inherent  contradictions  in  the
    rebuttal evidence as identified by the learned judge.  At paragraph  18
    and 19 it was reasonable and  open  to  the  judge  to  find  that  the
    respondent had judged the burden of proof to the requisite standard.

The Hearing

13. At the  hearing  Mr  Kannangara  relied  on  the  written  grounds  for
    permission to appeal.  He stated that the appellant had submitted a new
    application.  Her friend and business partner  had  been  reluctant  to
    give evidence in relation to having had his appeal  accepted.   He  did
    confirm that the judge had received no  documentary  evidence  to  show
    that he had his application  accepted.   The  documents  were  genuine.
    Unfortunately, the first  appellant  was  unable  to  produce  original
    documentation as she had sent her father to withdraw the sums  and  the
    documents were still in Sri Lanka.

14. The judge had accepted the appellant's evidence with regard to the  Sri
    Lankan documentation but has concluded that  the  Regional  Development
    Bank documentation was forged on the basis of  the  differing  maturity
    dates and the discrepancy in the funds  between  1,500,000  rupees  and
    1,700,000 rupees as indicated on the documentation.

15. Further the judge had relied  on  evidence  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager had clearly gathered in a previous application mainly that  the
    RGB Bank did not have a branch named City Service Point.  The judge had
    given the appellant the benefit of the doubt with regards  to  the  Sri
    Lankan  Savings  Bank  account  but  not  with  regards  the   Regional
    Development Bank because this document was in the name of the appellant
    alone.  This was incorrect thinking on behalf of the judge.  There  had
    not been sufficient time to have obtained the originals.

16. Miss Holmes submitted that there was no error of law.  Just because the
    judge accepted some evidence there is  no  reason  for  him  to  accept
    evidence in relation to the Regional Development  Bank  document.   The
    findings were open to the judge.  There was no error of law.

Conclusions

17. The appellant with her dependant partner made an application for a Tier
    1 Entrepreneur Migrant on 30th August 2012.   On  5th  April  2013  she
    wrote to the respondent stating

         "I would like to inform you that I no longer want to  apply  for  a
         Tier 1 Entrepreneur instead  applying  for  Tier  4  Student  visa.
         Please be kind enough  to  withdraw  my  application  and  pass  my
         relevant documents to the relevant department".

18. However with that application she submitted a letter from the  Regional
    Development Bank dated 24th August 2012.  The Secretary of  State  then
    proceeded to refuse the current application on the basis that  she  had
    previously submitted a bank letter and a fixed deposit certificate from
    the Regional Development Bank which were forged.

19. The refusal letter made no mention  of  the  Sri  Lankan  Savings  Bank
    documentation but did refer to the appellant submitting a  bank  letter
    and a fixed deposit certificate from the Regional Development Bank.

20. Judge Adio noted the letter from the Sri Lankan Savings Bank related to
    a joint account and  the  appellant  and  her  business  partner  a  Mr
    Mudiyanselage who had now been granted leave to remain in the UK on the
    basis of the same documents that were submitted in this case.   He  was
    prepared to give the appellant the benefit of the doubt with regards to
    the Sri Lankan Savings Bank letter.

21. Although the judge made reference to the Sri Lankan  Savings  Bank  and
    indeed there is a reference to in the document verification  report  to
    such a document also being false the judge centred his findings and his
    reasons  for  refusing  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the   Regional
    Development Bank letter.

22. However the judge rightly scrutinised the contents of  the  letter  the
    letter from the Regional Bank dated 24th August 2012 and also  compared
    that letter dated 24th August 2012 with a further letter  submitted  by
    the appellant at the appeal hearing  and  dated  24th  March  2014  and
    identified differing maturity dates  and  differing  amounts  of  funds
    held.  He made the following findings:

         "18. With regards to the second letter  from  Regional  Development
             Bank the issue here is that the date of withdrawal is given as
             28th December 2012.  However  the  date  of  maturity  on  the
             Regional Development Bank letter submitted to  the  Respondent
             gives a date of maturity of 15th November 2012.   I  therefore
             find there is  a  contradiction  between  the  newly  received
             letter from the Regional Development  Bank  dated  24th  March
             2014.  This gives the date of withdrawal as 28th December 2012
             and gives the reason for withdrawal as upon maturity.  However
             the Regional Development Bank letter dated  24th  August  2012
             which was submitted to the  Respondent  with  the  Appellant's
             application gives the date of maturity as 15th November 2012.

         19.  There has been no  explanation  for  the  discrepancy  in  the
             maturity date given  on  both  documents.   This  affects  the
             weight I attach to this letter and confirms that this document
             is  therefore  not  a  genuine  document  in   view   of   the
             contradiction of the  very  important  date  of  maturity  put
             there.  Furthermore the  fixed  deposit  amount  is  given  as
             1,500,000 rupees whereas in the body of the letter dated  24th
             August 2012 it states that the funds of  1,700,000  rupees  is
             held more than 90 days in  the  above  account.   I  note  the
             Appellant could not provide an explanation for the  difference
             other than thinking that it may well be the interest.  This is
             not obvious for the body of the letter.

         20.  I also note in the Document Verification Report  that  on  3rd
             January 2013 a Mr Siriwardhan who is the  general  manager  of
             the Regional Development Bank stated that  the  RGB  does  not
             have a branch named City Service Point at the  address  stated
             at 46 Naz Building Chamber, Hospital Street, Colombo 01.  This
             is quite  significant  and  this  was  not  addressed  by  the
             Appellant in her evidence.  Whilst I am prepared to  give  the
             Appellant the benefit of doubt with regards to the letter from
             the Sri Lankan Savings Bank more or less  on  the  basis  that
             this involved a business partner and the Respondent  does  not
             deal with this adequately in the reasons  for  refusal  letter
             and the business partner has also been granted leave to remain
             as a Tier 4 Student, the  same  benefit  of  doubt  cannot  be
             applied to the letter from Regional Development  Bank  because
             this document is in  the  name  of  the  Appellant  alone  and
             therefore, her business partner would not have used  this  for
             his own application.  Secondly there has been  no  explanation
             to the discrepancies I have found above.

         21.  I therefore find that the  Appellant  used  a  false  document
             namely the letter from Regional Development  Bank  dated  24th
             August 2012 when she was making her application  and  it  does
             not matter in this case that the investigation had  been  made
             after because there are other issues surrounding  that  letter
             which have not been dealt with by the  Appellant.   For  those
             reasons I find that the Respondent's decision is correct.   No
             other issue is dealt with in the Grounds of Appeal other  than
             the issue pertaining to the falsity of document.  I  therefore
             find that the Appellant's appeal fails  on  grounds  that  the
             Respondent has made out the case under  paragraph  322(1A)  on
             grounds that false representations have  been  made  or  false
             documents used in relation to an  application  and  322(2)  on
             grounds that the Appellant failed  to  disclose  any  material
             facts for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  leave  in  the  United
             Kingdom.  The appeal of the second Appellant is  dismissed  in
             line with that of the first Appellant."

23. As the judge recorded the appellant produced no  original  bank  letter
    dated 24th March 2014 and this later letter which purported to be  from
    the Regional Development Bank gave a different maturity date as at 28th
    December 2012.  Further the original  letter  dated  24th  August  2012
    referred not only to a fixed deposit of 1,500,000 rupees  but  also  in
    the body of  the  letter  to  sums  of  1,700,000  rupees.   The  judge
    identified that these were anomalies which was not adequately explained
    by the appellant by way of interest.

24. I find the judge was entitled to come to the conclusions that he did at
    paragraphs 18, 19 and 20 of his determination and these  were  adequate
    reasons to find that the document was false.

25. The judge also relied on the document verification  report  dated  25th
    January 2013 which stated that the documents  were  verified  as  false
    because RDB "does not have a branch near  City  Service  Point  at  the
    address stated above".  The appellant complained that the Judge had not
    taken into account the fact that the letter  of  24th  March  2014  had
    referred to the Regional Bank moving.

26. No original letter dated 24th March 2014 was produced by the  appellant
    either at the hearing before the Judge or at the hearing before me  and
    the judge was  entitled  to  rely  on  the  Verification  Report  which
    referred to a letter dated 21st December 2012 which confirmed that  the
    RGB did not have such a branch. Not least the judge recorded  that  the
    appellant gave evidence that the funds were withdrawn  on  5th  January
    2013 [10] of the determination. This date was  after  the  confirmation
    that there was no such branch.

27. There is an email chain within the documentation which  the  judge  did
    not refer to.  Even if this was an omission by the judge which I do not
    accept this could only work against the appellants. The email from  the
    Tier 1 Entrepreneur verifications of the Home  Office  dated  14th  May
    2013 to GM-RDB the General Manager  Mr  Siriwardhane  at  the  Regional
    Development Bank itemised the documentation submitted by the  appellant
    not least the  fixed  deposit  certificate  and  the  letter  from  the
    Regional Development Bank dated 24th August 2012 and the fixed  deposit
    certificate dated 15th May and referred to its "attached scanned  copy"
    and requested information as to whether this was  genuine.   The  reply
    received from a Mr R Siriwardhane general manager CEO of  the  Regional
    Development Bank and dated 15th May 2013 confirmed

         "This refers to your email on the above named and wish  to  confirm
         that we have not issued any of these documents and all of these are
         forged documents and we have  already  handed  over  to  Sri  Lanka
         Police Department to investigate and take legal action.   Therefore
         please do not process these applications".

28. It was open to the judge to rely on this email chain and  he  did  not.
    Nonetheless the judge's findings were open to him and he gave  adequate
    reasoning for finding the documentation submitted  in  the  appellants'
    previous application, albeit withdrawn, was false and therefore I  find
    there is no material error of law and the determination shall stand.


Signed                                  Date 21st August 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
