
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/30759/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 June 2017                               |On 6 July 2017                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                LAZARUS JERE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Muzira of Counsel instructed by Solomon
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith, who in a decision promulgated on  9
    November 2016 allowed the appeal by the Claimant who is a  national  of
    Zimbabwe, born on 8 September 1958.  The appeal focused on  whether  or
    not the Appellant met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  i.e.
    that there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration  in
    Zimbabwe.

 2. The Claimant arrived in the United Kingdom in July 1999  as  a  visitor
    and subsequently obtained leave to remain as a student until 31 January
    2002.  He then  made  no  further  applications  until  July  2009  and
    thereafter made further applications until he was given  the  right  of
    appeal with the refusal dated 15 April 2015.  The judge heard  evidence
    from the Claimant and submissions on his behalf and on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State.  The judge found the Claimant  to  be  credible  at
    [29]  and  at  [31]  and  stated,  "as  the  Appellant  has  not  lived
    continuously in the UK for twenty years he needs  to  show  that  there
    would be very significant obstacles to his integration  into  his  home
    country."  The judge then went on at [32] through to [35]  to  consider
    that aspect of the case in some detail and concluded the appeal  should
    be allowed.

 3. The Secretary of State made an application for permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal in time, on the  basis  that  the  judge  had  erred
    materially in failing to  appreciate  the  nature  of  the  test  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) which was about being able  to  return  to  the
    person's country  of  nationality  and  enjoy  a  private  life  there.
    Reference was made to the Home Office guidance in that respect  and  it
    was asserted that the judge had made her findings on the basis that the
    Claimant had no one to support him in Zimbabwe and  no  one  who  could
    send remittances from the UK.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew in
    a decision dated 26 April 2017 on the following basis:

         "I am satisfied there is an arguable error of law in  the  Decision
         in that the Judge found there was no one to support  the  Appellant
         in Zimbabwe or send remittances from  the  UK  and  that  this  was
         sufficient to meet the very significant obstacles test."

 5. A response which is in effect a Rule 24 response was submitted  on  the
    Claimant's behalf on 8 June 2017 and at  the  hearing  before  me  both
    parties sought to rely on the Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  on
    Family Migration at 8.2.3.4.

     Hearing

 6. I heard submissions from Mr Armstrong  first  on  behalf  of  the  Home
    Office who sought to rely on the grounds of appeal.  He submitted  that
    it was necessary in order to succeed under  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  that
    the Applicant distinguish himself from somebody else of  the  same  age
    living in Zimbabwe and that the Claimant had failed  to  do  this.   He
    further submitted that the guidance made clear that the  test  was  not
    met.

 7. In her response, Ms Muzira for the  Claimant  sought  to  rely  on  her
    response of 8 June 2017.  She submitted  that  the  grounds  sought  to
    oversimplify matters and that the Secretary of State had referred  only
    to the last three lines of paragraph 35 of the decision.  She submitted
    that the judge was acutely aware of the test she had to apply at  [31].
    The Home Office guidance was not before her and was not  relied  on  by
    the Presenting Officer but even if she had been required  to  take  the
    guidance into account she appreciated the nature of the test  that  she
    had to apply.  She drew my attention to [32] to [35]  of  the  decision
    and submitted that the issue was not  merely  about  whether  he  could
    obtain employment in Zimbabwe or had family there but the judge  looked
    at the background evidence and took into account the fact he had  spent
    a significant time in the United Kingdom.  It  is  the  case  that  the
    judge found that the Claimant's son was in Zimbabwe but at  [33]  found
    that he was dependent on his aunt for accommodation  and  that  neither
    were in employment.  She submitted that it is clear that  the  Claimant
    would be seriously inhibited from reintegrating into Zimbabwe and  that
    this would entail very serious hardship for him within the  meaning  of
    the guidance and the test under paragraph 276ADE(vi).

 8. In his reply, Mr Armstrong submitted that the Claimant has relatives in
    Zimbabwe in the form of a son and a sister-in-law and that the onus was
    upon him to show that he could not re-establish  himself  in  Zimbabwe.
    He submitted that the factors set out in the Home Office guidance, i.e.
    cultural, background,  family,  friends  and  social  network  and  the
    ability of financial support from  the  UK  meant  that  he  could  not
    succeed and could not distinguish himself from  an  equivalent  man  in
    Zimbabwe and that the judge had materially erred in failing to  address
    this.

     Decision and reasons

 9. I find no material error of law in the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Griffith and I announced my decision at the hearing.  I now  give
    my reasons.

10.  I  consider  that  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal   was
    misconceived and somewhat misleading.  It is  clear  from  the  judge's
    decision that she took into account a number of factors  in  concluding
    ultimately that there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Claimant's integration in Zimbabwe under paragraph  276ADE(vi).   Those
    factors are as follows.

      i) Firstly, at [32] the  background  evidence  which  showed  that  at
         various times  during  the  Claimant's  residence  in  the  UK  the
         Secretary of State recognised that it was not safe to return failed
         asylum  seekers  forcibly  to  Zimbabwe  because  of  the   serious
         deterioration in the country situation particularly associated with
         political issues and human rights abuses.

     ii) Secondly, the judge took account of the fact  that  the  background
         evidence showed in respect of 2016, an unemployment rate of 80%,  a
         shrinking economy and parts of the country suffering the effects of
         drought.

    iii) At [33] the judge found that whilst the Claimant has a daughter  in
         the United Kingdom that she is able to provide him with very little
         financial support owing to her own circumstances and "there  is  no
         evidence therefore that the Appellant has family members in the  UK
         who are able and willing to provide the level of financial  support
         to maintain him in Zimbabwe."

     iv) The Claimant's son  in  Zimbabwe  is  dependent  on  his  aunt  for
         accommodation and neither his son  nor  his  sister-in-law  are  in
         employment.

      v) At [34] whilst the Claimant had previously worked as a clerk before
         coming to the United Kingdom "given the  objective  evidence  about
         the general economic circumstances of the country and the level  of
         employment in particular I consider a  58  year  old  man  with  no
         recent  employment  history  would  find  it  difficult  to  secure
         employment or employment at a level such that  he  could  be  self-
         supporting".

     vi) The judge's decision concludes as follows at [35]:

             "I have taken into account the Appellant's long  residence  in
             the UK albeit that he has been here without leave since  2002,
             his  age,  education  and  employment  history,  the   country
             situation in Zimbabwe, in particular  the  worsening  economic
             situation and the  likely  means  of  support  that  would  be
             available to him (or the lack of  them).   As  I  consider  it
             unlikely the Appellant would be able to find  work  because  I
             cannot be satisfied that he would be adequately supported from
             family in the UK or family in Zimbabwe I find on a balance  of
             probabilities that despite having lived  in  Zimbabwe  for  40
             years his current  circumstances  and  the  country  situation
             cumulatively  mean  that  he  would  face   very   significant
             obstacles to integration in his  home  country.   I  therefore
             find he satisfies paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)."

11. I have considered, whilst this was not pleaded as a material  error  of
    law in the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal, whether if the judge
    had been taken to the Home Office guidance referred to above  it  would
    have made any material difference to her decision.   I  have  concluded
    that it would not.  I was taken to and have  had  regard  to  paragraph
    8.2.3.4 assessing whether there  are  "very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration into" the country of return.  The guidance provides at page
    42:

         "A very significant obstacle to integration means  something  which
         would prevent or seriously inhibit the applicant  from  integrating
         into the country of return... Very significant obstacles will exist
         where the applicant  demonstrates  that  they  will  be  unable  to
         establish a  private  life  in  the  country  of  return  or  where
         establishing a private life in the country of return  would  entail
         very serious hardship for the applicant."

    Further down the same page:

         "The decision maker must consider all the reasons  put  forward  by
         the  applicant  as  to  why  there  would  be  obstacles  to  their
         integration in the  country  of  return.   These  reasons  must  be
         considered individually and cumulatively to  assess  whether  there
         are very significant  obstacles  to  integration.   In  considering
         whether there are very significant  obstacles  to  integration  the
         decision maker  should  consider  whether  the  applicant  has  the
         ability to form an adequate private life by the  standards  of  the
         country of return - not by UK standards.  The decision  maker  will
         need to consider whether the applicant will be able to establish  a
         private life in  respect  of  all  its  essential  elements...  the
         decision maker must consider all relevant factors in  the  person's
         background and the conditions  they  are  likely  to  face  in  the
         country of return in making their decision as to whether there  are
         very significant obstacles to integration."

12. I consider when taken as a whole that the judge gave  consideration  to
    the factors material on the particular facts of  this  Claimant's  case
    and that her decision is properly in line with the Home Office guidance
    cited above.  For these reasons I find no material error of law in  the
    decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Griffith  and  I  uphold  that
    decision.

Fee Award

13. I also uphold the decision to make a fee award on the  basis  that  the
    appeal was allowed.  The judge says as follows:  "I do not consider the
    Respondent gave adequate consideration in the  refusal  letter  to  the
    Appellant's  circumstances  when  considering   the   requirements   of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  I uphold that decision.

14. No anonymity direction was made.





Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 5.7.17


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

