
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30082/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17 October 2017                       |On 27 October 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                              Malik Umer Javed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, Counsel, instrcuted by Law Lane
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senor Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Emerton (the judge), promulgated on 25 January 2017,  in
    which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.  That  appeal
    had been against the Respondent's decision of 7 August  2015,  refusing
    an application for further leave to remain in the United Kingdom.   The
    Respondent's decision was essentially based upon an allegation that the
    Appellant  had  fraudulently  obtained   a   TOEIC   English   language
    certificate from ETS.




The judge's decision

 2. The Appellant  did  not  attend  the  hearing  before  the  judge.   At
    paragraphs 4 to 7 the judge considered the issue of whether  he  should
    proceed with the hearing in the Appellant's absence.  He noted that ATM
    Law were then on record as being the  Appellant's  representatives  and
    that notice of hearing had been sent  to  the  relevant  address  (that
    being the address of the  representatives,  the  Appellant  not  having
    provided a home address of his own) on 12 September  2016.   The  judge
    noted that the appeal had been adjourned once before on  the  basis  of
    lack of court time.  The Presenting Officer had asked for  the  hearing
    to proceed in the Appellant's absence.  The judge concluded  that  this
    is what he would do.

 3. In paragraph 28 onwards the judge considers the merits of the case  and
    concludes that the Respondent  had  discharged  the  evidential  burden
    resting upon her.  In the absence of any evidence from  the  Appellant,
    the judge goes on to conclude that he had not  provided  any  plausible
    rebuttal of the Respondent's allegations.  In light of this  the  judge
    was  satisfied  that  the  Respondent  had,  in  a  sense  by  default,
    discharged the legal burden of proving that  the  Appellant  had  acted
    dishonestly by obtaining an English language  certificate  fraudulently
    and submitting it with a previous application.  In consequence of  this
    conclusion the judge goes on to decide that the  Respondent's  decision
    was proportionate with reference to Article 8.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. The grounds of appeal assert that  the  Appellant  had  never  received
    notice of the hearing because his previous  representatives  (ATM  Law)
    had failed to inform him of the relevant date, and that he had  not  in
    fact directly received a notice.  It is said that there was  procedural
    unfairness by the judge.  The second ground of appeal  relates  to  the
    ETS issue.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on
    22 August 2017 on the  basis  that  it  was  arguable  that  procedural
    unfairness had occurred.

The hearing before me

 6. At the outset of the hearing  I  indicated  to  Mr  Turner  that  there
    appeared to be little evidence from the Appellant  on  which  he  could
    potentially  make  out  his  ground  of  appeal  that  there  had  been
    procedural unfairness.  Mr  Turner  asked  for  time  to  take  further
    instructions and I therefore put the matter back in my list.

 7. When the appeal was called back on  later  in  the  morning  Mr  Turner
    confirmed that it was the Appellant's case that he had  never  received
    notice of hearing or been informed of the hearing date by ATM Law.   On
    instructions Mr Turner told me that the Appellant  had  himself  called
    the First-tier Tribunal (the Tribunal) in early January  2017  and  had
    been told that his hearing was not yet listed.  The Appellant had  told
    Mr Turner that he had in fact  later  received  the  Tribunal  decision
    himself.  Mr Turner referred me to the  Appellant's  witness  statement
    contained in the new bundle, in particular pages 28 and 29.

 8. Ms Ahmad submitted that the burden was on the Appellant to make out his
    ground of appeal and he had failed to do so.  The notice of hearing had
    been sent out in September 2016 to the only  address  provided  by  the
    Appellant, namely that of his former representatives, ATM  Law.   There
    was an inconsistency in what the Appellant now said as  to  whether  he
    called the Tribunal in January or February 2017.  In any event, it  was
    simply not plausible that the Tribunal would have misled the  Appellant
    by telling him that his hearing was not listed.  There was no  evidence
    of any contact with ATM Law as to the allegation that they  had  failed
    to inform the Appellant of his hearing date or  that  a  complaint  had
    been made against  this  firm.   I  should  not  take  the  Appellant's
    evidence at  face  value  as  regards  his  assertion  in  the  witness
    statement.  I was referred to Rules 28, 26 and  12  of  the  Tribunal's
    Procedural Rules.  In this case there had been no unfairness.

 9. In reply Mr Turner said the following.   The  Appellant  had  not  been
    obliged to provide the Tribunal with a home address and he  had  relied
    upon his former representatives telling him about the hearing date.  He
    had done all that he could.  It was suggested that the judge could have
    telephoned either the Appellant or his former  representatives  on  the
    day of the hearing to check that he (the Appellant) was  aware  of  the
    hearing.  Mr Turner suggested that it seemed as though  the  notice  of
    hearing had got lost in the post or that the former representatives had
    somehow mislaid it.  Mr Turner suggested that by using First-Class post
    there was always a danger that letters could  go  missing.   Mr  Turner
    emphasised that the Appellant had had nothing to  gain  by  failing  to
    attend his hearing.

10. I reserved my decision on error of law.

Decision on error of law

11. I conclude that the Appellant has not made out  his  challenge  to  the
    judge's decision  based  upon  procedural  unfairness.   There  are  no
    material errors of law in the judge's decision.   My  reasons  for  his
    conclusions are as follows.

12. First, fairness is  always  at  the  core  of  any  question  involving
    possible procedural irregularity.

13. Second, it is for the Appellant to make out an assertion that there has
    been material procedural unfairness in any given  case.  This  includes
    establishing the underlying factual basis of a challenge.

14. Third, there are a number of significant obstacles in  the  Appellant's
    path as regards his ability to show that unfairness in fact occurred.

      i) At the material time ATM Law were  on  record  as  the  Appellant's
         representatives;

     ii) The only address ever provided to the Tribunal (having checked  the
         file with great care) was that of ATM Law.  The Appellant had never
         provided a home address.  That  was  a  matter  for  him,  but  the
         consequence was that any notice of hearing would not have been sent
         to him at home;

    iii) The assertion in the grounds that he did not receive  a  notice  of
         hearing directly is therefore misconceived;

     iv) The notice of hearing containing the date of 17 January 2017  (that
         being the hearing date on which the judge proceeded to  decide  the
         appeal in the Appellant's absence) was sent out by First-Class post
         to the address on file (being that of  ATM  Law)  on  12  September
         2016.  There is nothing on file to suggest that notice was returned
         undelivered.  There was certainly no obligation upon  the  Tribunal
         to use  Recorded  Delivery.   It  is  clear  that  there  had  been
         compliance by the First-tier Tribunal with Rule 26 of the Procedure
         Rules, in conjunction with Rule 12(4);

      v) It is also clear that the judge was entitled to conclude that  Rule
         28(a) had been complied with;

     vi) There is no reliable evidence whatsoever  of  any  attempt  by  the
         Appellant, or indeed those now representing him, to contact ATM Law
         in respect of their alleged failure to inform the Appellant of  the
         date of hearing.  Such a failure would be a very serious matter and
         it is in my view significant that this firm has not been  contacted
         in any way and asked for a response to the allegations  now  relied
         upon  by  the  Appellant  (see  BT  (Former   solicitors'   alleged
         misconduct) Nepal [2004] UKIAT 00311);

    vii) The Appellant's assertion that he telephoned  the  Tribunal  itself
         only to be told that his hearing was yet to be listed is,  I  find,
         implausible and unreliable.  His instructions to Mr Turner  at  the
         hearing, namely that he called in early January  2017,  is  on  the
         face of it inconsistent with the assertion in paragraph 12  of  his
         statement that he called the Tribunal in  early  February  of  that
         year.  Further, it is highly improbable  that  the  Tribunal  would
         have so clearly misled the Appellant by stating that his appeal was
         yet to be listed when (if he  had  called  in  early  January)  the
         appeal was clearly listed and was pending at that time, or  (if  he
         called in February) to have failed to inform him  that  the  appeal
         had in fact already been heard.  There is  no  indication  on  file
         that any such communications took  place,  and  the  Appellant  has
         failed to provide any supporting evidence of his own in support  of
         his bald assertion;

   viii) There was clearly no obligation upon the  judge  to  telephone  the
         Appellant and/or ATM Law on the day of the hearing to enquire as to
         the Appellant's non-attendance;

     ix) The point made about the absence of  an  Appellant's  bundle  being
         supportive of the assertion that the Appellant was not aware of his
         hearing date is undermined by the fact that  his  appeal  had  been
         originally listed for 26 August 2016 but had  been  adjourned  just
         two days beforehand because of lack of court time.  A bundle  could
         and should have been prepared and served  prior  to  that  hearing.
         The failure to do so indicates that the Appellant was  not  engaged
         in the Appellate process at that time.  At most it  is  of  neutral
         affect;

      x) Mr Turner's suggestions that post may have got lost on route to the
         solicitor's, or that the notice may has been mislaid  by  the  firm
         once received, are all completely speculative.

15. I appreciate Mr Turner's  point  that  the  Appellant  might  not  have
    benefited in any particular way by failing to attend, but this point in
    and of itself does not take the Appellant's case very much  further  at
    all.  People would only very rarely indeed have anything to  gain  from
    non-attendance. It may that the Appellant decided not to attend because
    he believed he was going to lose his appeal  at  that  point.  That  is
    speculative, but at the same time not a material consideration for  me.
    I have to decide whether the judge acted fairly in  proceeding  in  the
    Appellant's absence.

16. The cumulative effect of all the matters listed in paragraph 14, above,
    point very firmly in the direction of a conclusion that there has  been
    no operative procedural unfairness in this case.

17. The judge's findings  and  conclusions  on  the  merits  were,  on  the
    evidence before him, entirely open to him.

18. There is no error of law in this case and the  judge's  decision  shall
    stand.

Postscript

19. On 24 October, a week after the  hearing  before  me,  the  Appellant's
    representatives sent in two items of new evidence to the Upper Tribunal
    correspondence team, asking for these to be considered by me  prior  to
    making my decision in this appeal.  There  was  no  indication  at  the
    hearing that any new material would be forthcoming.  I  had  not  given
    permission for this to occur. The new evidence was not  accompanied  by
    an application under rule 15(2A)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  Procedure
    Rules. Nor is there any indication that this evidence has  been  served
    on  the  Respondent.  Frankly,  I  am  distinctly  unimpressed  by  the
    representative's approach.

20. In these circumstances, in the first instance I refuse to admit the new
    evidence.

21. However, for the sake of completeness, I make it very clear  that  even
    if it had been admitted, it would make absolutely no difference to  the
    outcome in this case whatsoever.

22. The first item of new evidence is what appears to be an attendance note
    completed by somebody at the Appellant's current solicitors and dated 1
    February 2017. For reasons which are unexplained, large  parts  of  the
    note are redacted, a fact which clearly does  not  assist  the  overall
    reliability of the document's contents.

23. The note states that the Appellant had apparently telephoned the First-
    tier Tribunal during "the meeting" (the date, location, and purpose  of
    the "meeting" is omitted), and that he was told that his appeal had not
    been re-listed following an earlier adjournment.

24. I have already dealt with the issue of the telephone call previously in
    my decision. The note adds nothing of substance to this  matter.  Aside
    from the vagaries of the note and the unexplained redactions, there  is
    no statement of truth from the  author,  the  February  date  is  still
    inconsistent with what the Appellant told Mr Turner on the day  of  the
    hearing before me, and it remains highly unlikely (in  the  absence  of
    cogent evidence to the contrary) that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  would
    have so badly mislead the  Appellant  in  the  course  of  the  alleged
    telephone call.

25. The second item of  evidence  is  a  letter,  dated  24  October  2017,
    purporting to raise a complaint with ATM Law. This letter was obviously
    prompted by the complete absence of any such  correspondence  with  the
    previous  representatives  in  support  of  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. This belated attempt to fill the gap reflects poorly  on  the
    Appellant and adds nothing to his case.

Notice of Decision

There are no material errors of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal.  That decision shall stand.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is therefore dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]         Date: 21 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 23 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
