
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30481/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 July 2014                               |On 11 August 2014            |
|Oral determination given following hearing    |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                             Mr Teddy Efeizomor

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Hay, Counsel instructed by Samuel Louis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a citizen  of  Nigeria  born  on  4  March  1978,
    appeals against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson
    promulgated on 14 April 2014 following a hearing at Hatton Cross  on  2
    April 2014 in which the judge dismissed his appeal against the decision
    of the respondent refusing to issue him with a residence  card  as  the
    claimed  husband  and  family  member  of  the  sponsor,  Ms   Mabintou
    Diomanade, a French  national  to  whom  the  appellant  claims  to  be
    married.  The claimed marriage was a  proxy  marriage  carried  out  in
    Nigeria at which the parties were not present.

 2. The judge's findings can be summarised very shortly.  First, the  judge
    accepted that there was a valid marriage, supposedly in reliance on the
    decision of this Tribunal in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU  law)  [2014]
    UKUT 00024 although I will make observations on that finding below.

 3. However, the judge was not satisfied that Ms Diomanade had in fact been
    exercising treaty rights for reasons which he gave and  which  will  be
    discussed below.

 4. The judge  did  not  consider  whether  or  not  the  couple  may  have
    established that they were in a durable relationship which  might  have
    entitled the appellant to a residence card under Regulation 8  (if  the
    respondent chose to exercise her discretion in his favour) but,  as  Mr
    Jack submitted before me, in light of his finding that Ms Diomanade had
    not been exercising treaty rights in this country the  appellant  could
    not have been entitled to a residence card under Regulation 8 either.

 5. At paragraph 23 of his determination the judge found as follows:

         "23.  At  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  before  me,  I  gave
             indication that I considered that there was  no  human  rights
             appeal before the Tribunal, in the event  that  the  appellant
             were found not to be able to satisfy any of  the  requirements
             of the 2006 Regulations, even though Article 8 appeared to  be
             relied upon by the appellant.  I confirmed  that  my  view  in
             this regard was based upon the fact that no Section 120 notice
             had  been  served,  that  the  respondent  had,  consequently,
             indicated, in the relevant immigration decision,  the  limited
             grounds of appeal, and bearing in mind  the  judgment  of  the
             Court of Appeal in Lamichhane [2012]  EWCA  Civ  260.   Whilst
             [Counsel for the appellant] indicated that she had proposed to
             make submissions on Article 8, she did not  seek  to  disagree
             with my  indication;  nor  did  [the  representative  for  the
             respondent].  Thus, for the avoidance of doubt, I confirm that
             I am satisfied that there is no human rights appeal before the
             Tribunal."

 6. In the grounds of appeal a number of points are taken, which have  been
    pursued before me.  It is argued that the judge misdirected herself  in
    law in considering  that  "the  relevant  employment  was  the  current
    employment with Transworld" because it is suggested that  the  relevant
    employment at Ivory Mini Market Business Centre had not  properly  been
    taken into account.  This is a matter on which I  will  comment  below.
    It is also suggested that the "findings on Article 8 was  perverse  and
    irrational (sic)".

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Renton on  the
    basis that it might be arguable that the judge ought to have considered
    the appellant's Article 8 rights which had  been  relied  upon  in  the
    grounds of appeal.



The Hearing

 8. Before me I heard submissions which were advanced  on  behalf  of  both
    parties.  I am grateful both to Mr Hay for the succinct way in which he
    put his submissions which were at times difficult to maintain and to Mr
    Jack who also put the respondent's case succinctly but also precisely.

 9. I do not propose to repeat below everything which was  said  to  me  on
    behalf of the parties because  the  submissions  are  recorded  in  the
    Record of Proceedings in which I attempted to record  contemporaneously
    everything which was said to me during the course of  the  hearing.   I
    shall accordingly refer below only to such of the  submissions  as  are
    necessary for the purposes of these proceedings.

Discussion

10. I shall deal first of all with the argument that the  decision  of  the
    judge contained an error of law because he should have  found  that  Ms
    Diomanade was exercising treaty rights.  In my judgment this submission
    is not tenable.  At paragraphs 33 and 34 the judge gave his reasons for
    rejecting the evidence which had been before her relating to whether or
    not Ms Diomanade was exercising treaty rights as follows:

         "33. ...  The documentary evidence before me, in  relation  to  the
             question of whether the sponsor is currently exercising treaty
             rights in the United Kingdom, is sparse indeed, and  comprises
             one  original  payslip  relating  to  the  sponsor's   claimed
             employment by Transworld Business UK Ltd ('Transworld').  That
             payslip is dated 31 March 2014.  It does not give an  accurate
             figure for the hours worked by the sponsor during that  month,
             as it  indicates  that  she  worked  1.00  hour,  whereas  the
             sponsor's oral evidence before me was that  she  works  twenty
             hours per week.  Additionally, the payslip shows no deductions
             for income tax and indicates that the sponsor's salary is paid
             into her bank via BACS.  However, there are no bank statements
             of the sponsor before me and, indeed, in  her  oral  evidence,
             the sponsor said that she is paid in cash,  which  is  clearly
             inconsistent with the method of salary payment referred to  in
             the single payslip produced by her.

         34.  I bear in mind that it is  the  sponsor's  evidence  that  she
             commenced employment at Transworld several months ago, and yet
             there is no reasonable explanation before me as to why earlier
             payslips  have  not  been  produced.   Further,  there  is  no
             contract of  employment  available  and  no  letter  from  the
             sponsor's claimed current employer.  I bear in mind  that,  in
             the respondent's RFRL, the respondent  specifically  indicated
             that it was not  accepted  that  the  sponsor  was  exercising
             treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

         35.  Whilst I have taken  into  account  the  fact  that  the  oral
             evidence of the  appellant  and  the  sponsor,  regarding  the
             sponsor's current  place  of  work,  was  broadly  consistent,
             nevertheless, I find the absence of  documentary  evidence  to
             support  the   existence   of   that   employment,   and   the
             inconsistencies referred to in the payslip produced, to be  of
             concern, such that I find that the requisite  burden  has  not
             been discharged, in terms of establishing that the sponsor  is
             currently exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

         36.  Consequently, and for the reasons I  have  given,  I  conclude
             that it has  not  been  established  that  the  sponsor  is  a
             qualified person, with reference to Regulation 6 of  the  2006
             Regulations."

11. In my judgment whether or not the sponsor had previously been  employed
    by Ivory Mini Market Business Centre is not relevant to  this  part  of
    the decision because as at the date of the judge's decision  which  was
    the relevant date for the purposes of this appeal it was not  suggested
    that she was still working for this organisation.  So  when  the  judge
    considered whether or not at the time that was relevant the sponsor was
    exercising treaty rights he was entitled to find that she was  not  for
    the reasons he has given.

12. This part of his decision is adequately reasoned and the reasoning  was
    open to him.  As  he  noted  there  were  inconsistencies  between  the
    documents produced and the oral  evidence  given  which  had  not  been
    explained.  The judge was entitled for the reasons that he gave not  to
    accept the case advanced on behalf of the appellant  that  the  sponsor
    was exercising treaty rights in this country, and accordingly any claim
    under Regulation 7 could not succeed.

13. I would add just one other  matter  with  regard  to  the  claim  under
    Regulation 7, and  that  is  that  the  judge's  understanding  of  the
    decision in Kareem was not in fact correct because it  is  quite  clear
    from that judgment that in order to establish that a proxy marriage  is
    valid for the purposes of  an  application  for  a  residence  card  an
    applicant has to establish not just that the marriage is valid  in  the
    country in which it was said to have taken place but also  that  it  is
    recognised as valid in the country of nationality of the  EEA  national
    from whose treaty rights the right to residence is said to derive.   In
    this case that means that it would be necessary for  the  appellant  to
    establish that this alleged marriage  would  be  regarded  as  a  valid
    marriage in France.

14. There was no evidence before the Tribunal to this effect, and  had  the
    appeal turned on this point I would have had no hesitation  in  finding
    that the judge had made an error of law insofar  as  he  found  in  the
    appellant's favour on this point.  However, it is not necessary for  me
    to do so because the judge's finding that the sponsor had in any  event
    not been exercising treaty rights in this country is unimpeachable.

15. It may have been open to the  appellant  to  argue  that  consideration
    should have been given to whether or not he was entitled to a residence
    card under Regulation 8 as someone who is  in  a  durable  relationship
    with an EEA national exercising  treaty  rights  but  in  view  of  the
    finding that the sponsor was not exercising treaty rights this was also
    unarguable and so an appeal cannot succeed on this basis either.

16. I turn now to consider whether or  not  an  appeal  can  succeed  under
    Article 8.  It is fair to say that it is not entirely clear whether  or
    not in circumstances where an application had been made under  the  EEA
    Regulations for a residence card and where an appeal against a  refusal
    has been dismissed the judge should then go on to consider an Article 8
    application which has been made.

17. There is a proper basis for arguing that an article 8 appeal should not
    then be considered by the Tribunal because the  grant  of  a  residence
    card does not of itself confer any rights  but  merely  recognises  the
    rights which an applicant would have.  The refusal of a grant is not an
    immigration decision and does not of itself have the  consequence  that
    removal will necessarily follow.

18. I do, however, recognise that there is also an argument  which  can  be
    made the other way and that this may be an issue which will have to  be
    determined by another Tribunal in another  case.   However,  I  do  not
    propose to  express  a  definitive  view  on  this  issue  within  this
    determination because it is not necessary for  me  to  do  so  in  this
    appeal for the reasons which I now give.

19. The reason why I consider that it is not necessary in this case for  me
    to give a formal decision as to whether or not the judge was right  not
    to entertain an Article 8 appeal is because it is quite clear  that  in
    the circumstances of this case on the evidence  which  was  before  the
    judge an appeal under Article 8 (even if the judge had entertained  it)
    could not possibly have succeeded.

20. In fairness to Mr Hay,  who  did  argue  robustly  in  support  of  the
    arguments which he felt might have some  chance  of  success,  even  he
    recognised that he was in difficulty in arguing  the  Article  8  point
    after the Tribunal had informed him that his arguments in  relation  to
    whether or not the sponsor  was  exercising  treaty  rights  could  not
    succeed.  In his words "the pyramid begins to crumble".

21. The difficulty in this case is that in light of the  finding  that  the
    sponsor was not exercising treaty rights at the relevant time there  is
    really no basis upon which an Article 8 claim can properly be  founded.
    It is not suggested that the appellant has any freestanding  Article  8
    claim and his claim would seem to be entirely dependent on that of  the
    sponsor.

22. Although there is some dispute as  to  whether  or  not  the  appellant
    originally entered the United Kingdom illegally and has  remained  here
    unlawfully ever since or as the appellant asserts he arrived originally
    lawfully with the benefit of a six  month  visit  visa,  it  is  common
    ground that ever since he has been here without  lawful  leave  and  he
    appears to have made at least three applications for a  residence  card
    in 2008, 2009 and 2010, all of which were refused.

23. It seems clear having considered the  appellant's  immigration  history
    that other than such rights as he might  derive  through  this  or  any
    other sponsor he might find, he has no Article 8  argument  capable  of
    succeeding.  As his current sponsor was  found  not  to  be  exercising
    treaty rights there was no alternative basis upon which his  Article  8
    claim could possibly succeed and accordingly whether or not  the  judge
    might have entertained such an application  could  not  have  made  any
    difference at all.

24. As the courts have made clear in recent jurisprudence such  as  in  the
    decisions of the Administrative Court in Nagre  and  this  Tribunal  in
    Gulshan it is not necessary in cases where an Article 8  appeal  cannot
    possibly succeed for the Tribunal to dot every i and cross every  t  to
    show why it cannot succeed.

25. It follows that this appeal must be dismissed and I so find.



Decision

There being no material error of law in the determination of the  First-tier
Tribunal this appeal is dismissed.


Signed:

     [pic]

Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                       Date:  11 August 2014


