

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30735/2013;
IA/30737/2013;
     IA/30740/2013; IA/36568/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20th March 2014                            |On 25th March 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                    ALPHONSA VADAKUMCHER VAREEDKUTTY + 3

                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal judge on the
      grounds that the appellants did not meet the requirements of the
      Immigration rules - Mrs Vareekutty had applied for further leave to
      remain as a Tier 4 student with her husband and two children as her
      dependants - and on human rights grounds.
   2. Evidence had not been provided of adequate funds and thus the
      application and the appeal failed under the Rules. Permission to
      appeal was however granted on the grounds that the First-tier Tribunal
      had arguable erred in law in finding that Article 8 was not engaged
      and that the First-tier Tribunal judge had failed to consider the best
      interests of the children.


   3. The first appellant entered the UK 30th January 2010 as a student. Her
      husband and the oldest child (born 13th January 2001) entered on 17th
      August 2010 and the youngest child was born in the UK on 2nd January
      2012.

   4. The application for variation was refused in a decision dated 4th July
      2013; at the same time a decision was made pursuant to s47 Immigration
       Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 to remove them from the UK.

   5. In a determination promulgated on 15th January 2014 the First-tier
      Tribunal judge found that the appellants did not meet the requirements
      of the Rules as regards maintenance and the appeal must thus fail. The
      judge went on to consider their appeal on human rights grounds. He
      surveyed the evidence before him namely that although the first
      appellant had been in the UK since 2010 she had yet to embark on a
      course of study; there was no evidence of the family's hobbies or
      interests or friends or community involvement or the degree of
      permanency of their home. Both the appellant and her husband had been
      working prior to coming to the UK.

   6. He balanced the public interests of the respondent and the evidence
      before him and found that Article 8 was not engaged.

   7. This turn of phrase is unfortunate. The judge had earlier correctly
      identified the steps to consider but appears to have conflated them.
      It is however clear, when the determination is read as a whole, that
      his overall finding was that on the basis of the evidence before him
      the appellants' removal was not disproportionate.

   8. It is clear  that  the  judge  did  not  give  separate  and  specific
      consideration to s55. However a failure to refer  to  s55  of  the  UK
      Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 specifically does not in
      itself render the  decision  not  in  accordance  with  the  law.  The
      relevant consideration is the substance of the decision not  its  form
      and the obligation to act in a way that promotes the  welfare  of  the
      child and treated its interest as a primary consideration  had  to  be
      viewed in this context. (Mime [2011] EWHC 2337  (Admin);  AJ,  SP,  EJ
      [2011] EWCA Civ 1191).

   9. Short periods of residence and/or the presence of very young  children
      are unlikely to give rise to private life deserving of respect in  the
      absence of exceptional factors (Azimi - Moayed [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC))

  10. The respondent in her decision clearly considered the impact  of  s55.
      The First-tier Tribunal judge had evidently read the documents  before
      him which included the consideration by the Secretary of State of  the
      impact on the children and he specifically drew attention to the  lack
      of evidence as to the impact on the  children.  The  judge  cannot  be
      expected to reach a decision on the basis  of  evidence  that  is  not
      produced before him.

  11. Although the first appellant before me spoke of the  difficulties  her
      oldest child would have returning to India and of her  fears  for  the
      health of the baby, particularly given her oldest daughter's  previous
      health problems in India (Dengue fever); these matters were not before
      the judge.

  12. In conclusion although the judge did not specifically  refer  to  s55,
      the evidence before him was not such as to call into question anything
      other than that the best interests of the children were served by  the
      two children remaining living  with  their  parents;  that  the  whole
      family had only been in the UK for four years, that there was no basis
      upon which the family could legitimately be said  to  have  a  private
      life such that it would be unduly harsh to remove them. There were  no
      identified   special   circumstances   that   would   render   removal
      disproportionate. It is inconceivable that another  judge  faced  with
      the same evidence would not have reached the same conclusion.

          Conclusion

  13. I am satisfied that there is no error of law in the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal such that the decision be set aside to be remade.

  14. I dismiss the appeal.

  15. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  stands,  namely  the  appeal
      against the decision to refuse to vary the leave of the appellants and
      the decision to remove them is dismissed.







                                    Date 20th March 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
