

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/30185/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |     Determination           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 4th June 2015                              |     On 9th June 2015        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SUSAN PITT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR. HUSSAN LAL

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. Mills; Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. Muman; Counsel instructed by SKB Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against a  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge V A Lowe promulgated on 31 October 2014, in which she  allowed
       an appeal under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006.


    2. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department  and
       the Respondent to this appeal, is Mr. Hussan Lal.  However for  ease
       of reference, in the course of this determination we shall adopt the
       parties' status as it was before the First-tier Tribunal.  We  shall
       in this determination, refer to Mr. Lal as  the  Appellant  and  the
       Secretary of State as the Respondent.


    3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Levin
       on 16th December 2014.  The  matter  comes  before  us  to  consider
       whether or not the determination by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  V  A
       Lowe involved the making of a material error of law, and if  so,  to
       remake the decision.


    Background


    4. The appellant originally entered the United  Kingdom  on  a  working
       holidaymaker visa valid from 30 April 2009 until 30 April 2011.   He
       then made a series of applications for an EEA residence  card.   The
       fourth and most recent such application was dated 30  May  2014  and
       relied upon the appellant's relationship with his partner, with whom
       the appellant claimed he was in a durable relationship.


    5. On 16 July 2014  the  respondent  issued  a  notice  of  immigration
       decision referring to the application for  a  residence  card.   The
       Respondent  had  considered  the  application  in  accordance   with
       Regulation 8(5)  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  and
       refused the application on the basis that the respondent had  failed
       to prove that he was in a durable relationship with an EEA national.
       That refusal  was  the  subject  of  the  appeal  before  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge V A Lowe.


    6. As to the relationship between the  appellant  and  his  partner  Ms
       Paulina Paradowska, First-tier Tribunal Judge  V  A  Lowe  made  the
       following finding;


           "... I accept that looking at the evidence in  the  round,  they
           are in a durable relationship which is akin to marriage and that
           they cohabit in a family unit with Ms  Paradowska's  daughter.";
           [24]


    7. It is to be noted  at  this  stage  that  the  respondent  does  not
       challenge this finding.  What the respondent does challenge, is  the
       way in which First-tier Tribunal Judge V A Lowe went on  to  resolve
       appeal before her, and her decision to allow the  appeal  under  the
       immigration for the reasons set out in subsequent paragraphs of  her
       determination.


The Ground of appeal


    8. The respondent advances one ground.  That  is,  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge V A Lowe was not entitled to allow the appeal as she has,  and
       that the proper course of events was to allow the appeal  but  remit
       the matter to the Secretary of State for her to consider whether the
       discretion  vested  in  her  under  Regulation  17(4)  of  the  2006
       Regulations, should be exercised in favour of the appellant.


Discussion


    9. Before turning to our consideration of the sole ground of appeal, it
       is it useful to set out the material paragraphs of the determination
       of First-tier Tribunal Judge V A Lowe.  She stated;


           "that leaves the issue of  the  SSHD's  discretion.   The  ECI's
           state that if there is evidence of a durable  relationship,  the
           decision maker must consider whether the  decision  would  deter
           the EEA sponsor from exercising free movement rights....  In  my
           opinion, the decision brings the realistic possibility  that  Ms
           Paradowska's Free movement rights would be impeded."; [25]


           "In weighing up the competing factors  in  issuing  a  residence
           card, the SSHD this has nothing to gain by refusing  to  do  so.
           The appellant is in a genuine relationship,  is  a  "stepfather"
           and is shortly to become a father. He is very familiar with life
           in the UK and can speak English,  the  common  language  of  the
           couple, and presumably has  work  skills  as  a  former  working
           holidaymaker.  He made his  original  application  when  he  had
           leave, and although it has been  subject  to  legal  tussles  on
           technical points, he does not have a poor  immigration  history.
           His many letters of support indicated that he is seen as  a  man
           of good character. The Tribunal exercises the discretion in  his
           favour as YB indicates is intra vires." [26]  [our emphasis]


   10. In YB (EEA Reg 17(4) - proper approach)  Ivory  Coast  [2008]  UKAIT
       00062 the Upper Tribunal  set  out  the  three-stage  approach  that
       should be adopted by decision-makers in deciding whether to issue  a
       residence card to an extended family member of an EEA national under
       regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations.  The Tribunal stated;


           "Reg 17(4) only applies if it is first of all  established  that
           the person is an extended family member as defined in Reg 8;  if
           that is not established, the decision maker goes no  further..."




   11. That is in fact what  had  happened  in  this  case.  The  respondent
       refused the application made by the appellant on the basis  that  the
       appellant had failed to prove that he was in a  durable  relationship
       with an EEA national.  That being so the question as to  whether  the
       respondent should exercise any discretion under regulation 17(4), did
       not arise.


   12. The correct approach in cases where the Secretary of  State  has  not
       yet considered the exercise her discretion is  to  be  found  in  the
       decision of the Upper Tribunal in SSHD -v- Ihemedu [2011] UKUT  00340
       (IAC).  In that case, the Secretary of State refused  an  application
       for a residence card because she did not accept  that  the  applicant
       was related to the extended family member,  as  claimed.   The  Upper
       Tribunal found that the immigration judge below, had erred in finding
       that the applicant was entitled to a  residence  card  for  the  sole
       reason that he was an extended family member as claimed.   The  Upper
       Tribunal held;


           "..Regulation 17(4) of  the  2006  Regulations  confers  on  the
           decision-maker discretion as to whether a person found to be  an
           OFM/extended family member is to be granted a residence card. In
           exercising that discretion matters such as whether an  applicant
           has entered the UK lawfully or otherwise  are  plainly  relevant
           (although not necessarily determinative: see YB (EEA reg 17(4) -
           proper approach) Ivory Coast [2008] UKAIT  00062  and  Aladeselu
           and Others (2006 Regs - reg 8) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00253 (IAC)).
           But in this case the Secretary of State had  not  yet  exercised
           that discretion and so the most the IJ was entitled  to  do  was
           allow the appeal as being not in accordance with the law leaving
           the matter of whether to exercise the reg  17(4)  discretion  in
           his favour to the Secretary of State: see Yau Yak Wah [1982] Imm
           AR 16; MO (reg 17(4) EEA Regs) Iraq [2008] UKAIT 00061...."


   13. At the hearing before  us,  Mr  Muman  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
       submitted that a careful reading of the determination of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal here, does not in fact disclose an error  of  law.   He
       submitted that the appellant's reading of the determination of First-
       tier Tribunal  Judge  V  A  Lowe  was  not  that  she  had  exercised
       discretion in favour of the respondent, but that the decision of  the
       First-tier Tribunal was such that the matter would be remitted to the
       Secretary of State, for her to consider the exercise of discretion in
       favour of Mr Lal.  In effect, Mr Muman appeared to concede that First-
       tier Tribunal Judge V A Lowe did not have jurisdiction  to  determine
       whether, in the circumstances of  this  case,  discretion  should  be
       exercised in favour of the appellant.


   14. Mr Muman was  right  to  make  of  that  concession  based  upon  the
       authorities that  we  have  had  regard  to  above.   We  reject  his
       submission that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  can  be
       read in the way that he  contends.     At  paragraph  26,  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge V A Lowe expressly states "The Tribunal exercises  the
       discretion in his favour.".


   15. For the reasons we have set out, it is clear to us that the Secretary
       of State has not yet undertaken the task that the Regulations require
       of her, in light of the  finding by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lowe
       that the appellant and his partner are  in  a  durable  relationship.
       That was a finding open to the judge.  However, it was  not  open  to
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Lowe to exercise any discretion  in  favour
       of the appellant.

          Decision:


   16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
       making of an error on a point of law.


   17. We set aside the decision and re-make the  decision  in  the  appeal,
       allowing the appeal against the Secretary of State's decision, as not
       being in accordance with the  law,  but  leaving  the  matter  as  to
       whether to exercise the Reg 17(4) discretion in favour of Mr Lal,  to
       the Secretary of State.





Signed:                                            Date:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





