
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30635/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th March 2017                            |On 6th July 2017              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                mrs zoya Riaz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Hashim (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Miss R Pettersen, (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Frankish promulgated on 19th May 2016,  following  a  hearing  at
    Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent on 16th May 2016.  In the  determination,
    the judge allowed the appeal of the Appellant, to the limited extent of
    enabling her to obtain a valid  English  language  certificate  and  to
    submit it to the Respondent Secretary of State for her  decision.   The
    Respondent Secretary of State has subsequently  applied  for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 4th May  1989,  and  is
    female.  She is the wife of Azizur Reman, who is present and settled in
    the UK.  She appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 27th
    August 2015 refusing her further leave to remain as  the  spouse  of  a
    person settled in the UK.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she went to a test  centre  and  sat  her
    English language test.   She  subsequently  discovered  that  the  test
    centre had been engaged in malpractice.  She did not  submit  her  test
    certificate.  Instead she applied for limited leave to be given time to
    submit another test certificate.   During  this  time  she  did  obtain
    another test certificate from  another  centre.   However,  before  she
    could submit this latest test certificate, the  test  centre  was  shut
    down as well.  The Respondent in the refusal letter reasoned  that  the
    Appellant took her English language test at a test centre which ETS now
    conceded in an administrative  review  was  one  that  was  engaged  in
    deception.  At the  hearing  before  Judge  Frankish,  the  Appellant's
    representative conceded that the best he could hope for from the appeal
    was to achieve what was actually applied for, namely, limited leave  to
    afford the Appellant time  within  which  to  re-sit  her  test  at  an
    approved centre, and then to submit  the  test  certificate  from  that
    centre.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge applied the strictures in SM and  Qadir  (ETS  -  Evidence  -
    Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229, which highlighted the tendency to the
    use of generic evidence which the Secretary of State had relied upon to
    date in all ETS cases, such that this has been held to be  insufficient
    to discharge the legal burden of proof on the Secretary of State.   The
    judge also, however, had regard to an expert report by Professor French
    from York University, dated 20th April 2016, which was  to  the  effect
    that the rate of false positives would be very substantially less  than
    one percent.  The judge took the clear view here that "the  new  report
    does not justify  my  departure  from  applying  the  guidance  in  SM"
    (paragraph 10).  The judge heard evidence that, as far as the choice of
    test centres was concerned by the Appellant, "there  was  nothing  more
    sinister in this then this centre in question being her  nearest.   She
    has retaken the test in another centre which was, in turn, closed  down
    in similar circumstances" (paragraph 10).   In  the  circumstances  the
    judge took the view that the case that the  Appellant  had  cheated  or
    needed to cheat was not made  out.   He  observed  that  all  that  the
    Appellant had done now was to apply for limited leave to enable her  to
    retake the test at a yet third centre,  this  time  one  to  which  the
    Respondent does not take exception.  Under Appendix FM,  the  Appellant
    was entitled to limited further leave  pursuant  to  S-LTR.1.1  to  the
    extent of  having  sufficient  time  to  demonstrate  the  one  missing
    ingredient from a prospective further leave  application,  namely,  the
    production of a TOEIC certificate (see paragraph 10).

 5. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge  had  misconstrued  the
    law.  The witness statements, the  spreadsheet  and  the  professor  of
    French report provided necessary evidence to demonstrate on the balance
    of probabilities that the Appellant did employ deception, and the judge
    failed to heed this.  The reliance upon paragraph S-LTR.1.1 of Appendix
    FM is misconceived because that provision is limited  to  circumstances
    in which an application is to be refused.

 7. On 27th September 2016, permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis
    that the judge may have allowed the appeal on the basis of  Article  8,
    outside of the Immigration Rules, to afford the  Appellant  opportunity
    to obtain a test certificate.  If that was  the  case  then  the  judge
    should have demonstrated a proper  balancing  exercise  required  along
    with the Razgar lines.

The Hearing

 8. At the hearing before me on 15th March  2017,  Miss  Pettersen,  relied
    upon the grounds of application.  She submitted that the permission  to
    allow the appeal was on a very narrow basis and she would rely upon the
    grounds of application.  If the appeal had been allowed to the  limited
    extent of allowing the Appellant to obtain and submit a  valid  English
    language certificate then the decision was not understood  because  the
    Appellant had made an application for further  leave  to  remain  as  a
    spouse and submitted it on the appropriate FLR(M) form.   The  Tribunal
    could only allow the appeal if it was satisfied that the  decision  was
    unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act, as being incompatible
    with the Appellant's rights under Article 8 ECHR.  This was  not  shown
    by the Tribunal.

 9. For his part, Mr Hashim submitted that the position here was  that  the
    Appellant sat the first test, but had no certificate given to her,  and
    the college was intervened by the Secretary  of  State,  and  was  shut
    down.  The second test that the Appellant sat, did lead  to  her  being
    granted a certificate by the college, but then the college  was  denied
    its licence, but the important thing to recognise  was  that  when  the
    application was made by the Appellant the licence was validly in  place
    for the college.  The application was  for  further  leave  to  remain.
    However, the wrong date of 28th January 2014 was inserted, whereas  the
    application was dated 29th January 2014, and in  this  application  the
    Appellant stated that, "I applied for extension as I have  been  unable
    to pass, and so apply for extension ...".  If there was  an  error,  it
    was not a material error of law.

10. In reply, Miss Pettersen submitted that paragraph  13  of  the  refusal
    letter does confirm that the test scores taken on 5th February 2014 had
    been cancelled, and Mr Hashim interrupted to say that no further  tests
    were being issued after this date.

11.  Following  the  Hearing,  at  the  end  of  the  day,  I  dreafted  my
    determination.

Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

13. First, the grounds of application state that, according to paragraph 10
    of the refusal letter, "your scores from the test taken on 5th February
    2014 had been cancelled" and this can only mean that the Appellant  did
    supply a fraudulently obtained English language certificate to the Home
    Office.  This is, I find, incorrect.   The  correct  position  is  that
    stated at paragraph 13 of the refusal letter which was  that,  "because
    the validity of your test results  could  not  be  authenticated,  your
    scores from the test taken on 5th February  2014  had  been  cancelled.
    You are specifically considered a person who has sought leave to remain
    in the United Kingdom by deception ...".  The Appellant then  undertook
    another test at another test centre, and having passed that,  and  also
    having been issued with a test certificate,  she  submitted  this  test
    certificate, which was dated May 2014.  If, it is the case, that at the
    time of the submission of the test certificate, the second test  centre
    was still with a valid licence, then it would have been  a  valid  test
    certificate.  At the very least,  there  is  absolutely  no  basis  for
    suggesting that the Appellant had submitted a fraudulent application or
    that she had cheated.

14. Second, however, it does remain the case that that second college  also
    had its licence withdrawn, such that the  tests  were  then  nullified.
    The Appellant has applied then for  limited  leave  to  enable  her  to
    retake the test at a third test centre.

15. Third, in these circumstances, it was  wrong  for  the  judge  to  have
    allowed the appeal by reference to paragraph S-LTR.1.1 of Appendix  FM,
    because that provision is inapplicable except in circumstances where an
    application is to be refused.  If the judge did  allow  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds, then this is plainly not sufficiently  reasoned  and
    there is no balancing exercise carried out along the lines of Razgar.

16. That being so, I now  proceed  to  remake  the  decision  (see  Section
    12(2)(ii) of TCEA 2007).

17. Under Practice Statement 7.2(b) the nature or extent  of  any  judicial
    fact-finding which is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal
    to be remade  may  be  such,  that  having  regard  to  the  overriding
    objective, it is appropriate  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I so conclude here.  This appeal is  remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be  determined  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Frankish with specific regard to these balancing factors under  Article
    8, for a decision to be made in that regard.





Notice of Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed to the extent that  it  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, to be heard by  a  judge  other  than  Judge  Frankish  under
    Practice Statement 7.2(b).

19. No anonymity order is made.

20. This appeal is allowed.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 6th July 2017




