

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30888/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 May 2017                        |On 14 June 2017                      |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Jakaria Khan
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Ahmed, instructed by Eurasia Legal Services
(Birmingham)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The SSHD appeals with  permission  against  the  decision  and  reasons
    statement of FtT Judge Pooler that was issued on 21 July 2016.

 2. After hearing the competing arguments of  Ms  Aboni  and  Mr  Ahmed,  I
    decided there was an error of  law  in  Judge  Pooler's  decision  that
    required me to set it aside.  However, on the  findings  made  and  the
    concessions in the reasons for refusal letter, I  remade  the  decision
    and allowed the appeal because the SSHD's decision that was the subject
    of the appeal was unlawful under s.6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998
    because it violated the respondent's right to family life under article
    8 ECHR.

 3. I reserved my reasons, which I now give.

 4. The respondent (Mr Khan) appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against
    the refusal of his human rights claim that was made on 28 August  2015.
    Because by that time s.15 of the Immigration Act  2014  had  come  into
    force, the respondent could only appeal against that  decision  on  the
    ground of appeal provided in s.84(2) of the Nationality Act 2002, which
    specified that the decision was unlawful under s.6 of the Human  Rights
    Act 1998.  Thus, Judge Pooler was  charged  to  determine  whether  the
    SSHD's decision of 28 August 2015 violated his  right  to  private  and
    family life as protected by  article  8  ECHR.   Because  both  parties
    accept that Judge Pooler did not carry  out  this  function,  which  is
    evident from his decision and reasons statement of 21 July 2016, I must
    find that Judge Pooler erred  in  law  by  not  completing  the  appeal
    process.

 5. It fell to me to decide whether I could remake the decision or  whether
    the appeal needed to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh
    hearing.  After hearing submissions and after discussing the situation,
    I decided I should remake the decision myself.

 6. It is evident from paragraphs 49 of the reasons for refusal  letter  of
    28 August 2015 that the SSHD conceded that the respondent  has  genuine
    and subsisting relationships with his wife and their  daughter  in  the
    UK, both of whom are British citizens.  It is  also  conceded  that  it
    would be unreasonable to expect either of  them  to  leave  the  UK  to
    continue family life with the respondent in Bangladesh.

 7. The SSHD thereafter tries to justify removal of the  respondent  either
    on his own and thereby splitting the family  group  or  to  expect  the
    respondent's wife and daughter to join him in  Bangladesh  even  though
    that is deemed unreasonable.  Regarding the latter point,  I  add  that
    although the SSHD  couches  that  option  in  terms  of  a  choice  the
    respondent's  wife  would  have  to  make,  the  mere  fact  that   the
    immigration decision forces such a challenging choice  interferes  with
    the existing family life rights of those affected.  Presenting a couple
    with a choice does not, of itself,  absolve  the  UK  of  its  duty  to
    respect family life.

 8. I find the SSHD's reasoning to be  wholly  defective.   Because  it  is
    accepted the respondent has genuine and  subsisting  relationships,  to
    justify splitting the family group, the SSHD would  have  to  establish
    some significant factor in the public interest.  Similarly,  to  expect
    the respondent's wife and daughter to give up their lives  in  the  UK,
    would require proof  that  there  is  some  significant  countervailing
    factor in the public interest.  The factors relied upon by the SSHD  to
    justify interfering with the  family  life  that  exists  is  that  the
    respondent previously used deception to remain in the UK  lawfully  and
    that he has previously overstayed.

 9. When I consider the public interest under s.117B of  the  2002  Act,  I
    acknowledge that expulsion of the respondent is  justified  because  he
    has failed to respect legitimate immigration control by using deception
    and by overstaying.  These are strong factors that would undermine  his
    case to remain except for the fact he  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child.  That is a strong factor
    in the respondent's favour.

10. Of itself, the fact the  respondent  benefits  from  s.117B(6)  is  not
    enough (see R (MA (Pakistan) & Ors) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705,  [2017]
    Imm AR 53).  But in this case, there are  other  factual  matters  that
    mean the balance between his right to respect for his family  life  and
    the public interest falls in his favour.  The other factors  relate  to
    the fact the  respondent  did  not  employ  deception  in  relation  to
    securing leave to remain based on his relationships.  The deception was
    employed to secure leave to remain as a student some years  ago.   That
    distance is a significant feature  that  weakens  the  SSHD's  position
    because  to  rely  on  what  the  respondent  did  in  very   different
    circumstances is not proportionate.

11. In addition, as Ms Aboni acknowledged, the policy of  the  SSHD,  where
    British citizen children would be affected by the outcome, has not been
    properly applied in this case.  It would be contrary to that policy for
    the SSHD to expect - directly or indirectly -a British citizen child to
    leave the UK.  The SSHD would  have  to  demonstrate  good  reasons  to
    separate a child from the care of both parents because such care, where
    available as here, is in the child's best interests.   The  failure  to
    consider and apply the policy undermines the justification given in the
    reasons for refusal letter.

12. Ultimately, it is evident that the disruption that  would  result  from
    the  family  group  being  separated  is   unjustified   in   all   the
    circumstances.  For this reason, I remake the decision  and  allow  the
    original appeal.



Decision

The decision and reasons statement of FtT Judge Pooler contains an error  on
a point of law.

I set his decision aside.

I remake the decision and allow the appeal of Mr Khan  against  the  refusal
of his human rights claim dated 28 August 2015.



Signed                              Date     12 June 2017


Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
