

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/30707/2014
                                                               IA/31206/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 August 2016                         | On 12 August 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       jayminbhai vikrambhai amin (1)
                              bharti raviya (2)
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Bhachu, instructed by JBR Morgan Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant Secretary of State appeals with permission to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against the decision and reasons of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Andrew that was promulgated on 11 September 2015.  Judge Andrew allowed
    the appeals in the belief that the Secretary of  State  had  failed  to
    show there was an evidential  basis  for  suspecting  the  respondents'
    marriage to be one of convenience.

 2. Although I heard from both representatives at length, in my opinion the
    case turns on one relatively narrow issues.  Mr  Mills  indicated  that
    Judge Andrew was wrong in paragraph 3 to find, "The  marriage  had  not
    been referred to the [Secretary of State] by the Registrar."

 3. Mr Mills's argument was developed as follows.  At  paragraph  4,  Judge
    Andrew referred to having seen the  "interviewers  comments"  and  this
    could only be reference to the "Interview Summary Sheet" that the  Home
    Office had sent to the Tribunal in April 2015.  Half way down the first
    page of that four-page document are several  references  to  s.24.   Mr
    Mills submitted they are references to section 24  of  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999, which is directed to marriage registrars and makes
    provisions for them to report suspicious marriages.

 4. Mr Mills went  on  to  identify  (using  the  immigration  instructions
    provided by Ms Bhachu with her  skeleton  argument  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal) that the Home Office  could  arrange  an  interview  where  a
    marriage registrar had made such a report.  He  acknowledged  that  the
    same instructions suggested that an interview  would  not  be  required
    where there was evidence of cohabitation, as here, but argued  that  in
    light of there being mixed sources (such as  evidence  of  cohabitation
    and a report of a suspicious marriage) it was open to the Secretary  of
    State to  investigate,  for  example  by  calling  the  parties  to  an
    interview.

 5. Mr Mills also submitted that it was open to the Secretary of  State  to
    call any person for interview.  Given the reasons for my  decision  set
    out below I need not decide this general issue.

 6. It follows from what I have said at [4] that the Secretary of State had
    a reason to call the couple to be interviewed and this  undermined  the
    conclusions reached by Judge Andrew.

 7. Ms Bhachu accepted this argument.  At no time had she sought to mislead
    either Tribunal.  She had not been aware that the mention of S24 in the
    Interview Summary Sheet was evidence that  a  report  of  a  suspicious
    marriage had been made until Mr Mills explained its meaning.  The  fact
    that I had been ignorant of this fact, as had Ms  Rands  who  presented
    the case on behalf of the Secretary of State before Judge Andrew, leads
    me to accept that there had been no attempt to mislead.

 8. Ms Bhachu suggested that even with this knowledge any error  could  not
    be material because the evidence regarding cohabitation was  extensive.
    Recent judgments of the Court of Appeal, namely Agho and Rosa indicated
    that the burden lay on the Home Office to show that a marriage  is  one
    of convenience and in light of all the evidence the  outcome  would  be
    the same.

 9. Although I might have some sympathy for pragmatic reasons with such  an
    approach, it is not one I can condone in law.  The upshot of  the  fact
    that the registrar had reported the marriage to the Home Office  was  a
    reason  for  them  to  question  whether  the  marriage  was   one   of
    convenience.  Although current jurisprudence indicates that it  is  for
    the Home Office to prove a marriage is one of convenience, it is  trite
    law that to do so all the available evidence must be considered.

10. The approach taken by Judge Andrew may have been  sustainable  but  for
    the fact that she was unaware  of  the  relevance  of  the  mention  of
    section 24 in the interview summary sheet and no one brought it to  her
    attention.  As a result, she erred in her approach  and  prevented  the
    Home Office from mounting its  case  in  full.   The  only  appropriate
    remedy is to put the parties back in the situation they were and  remit
    this appeal for a fresh hearing  during  which  all  the  evidence  and
    arguments can (and no doubt will) be mustered by both sides.

Decision

The decision and reasons of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  contains  an
error of law and must be set aside.

The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing
before any judge other than Judge Andrew.

It will be for the First-tier Tribunal to set any directions.



                               Signed                     Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
