
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30393/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 January 2015                             |On 20 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                          mr Segun Jeremiah Adekoya
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs A Sobande, OA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and background

1.   This appeal is  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Ransley who, on 6 October 2014,  decided  the  present  appeal  on  the
    papers.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  is  to  determine  whether  the   appellant   has
    identified a material error of law.

2.   The  appeal  before  Judge  Ransley  and  the  application  before  the
    Secretary of  State  previously  had  been  to  determine  whether  the
    appellant was the partner of an EEA  national  who  was  in  a  durable
    relationship with that EEA national.  It  was  not  simply  a  case  of
    establishing that the parties lived under the  same  roof.   It  was  a
    requirement of the Regulations, specifically under regulation  8(5)  of
    the EEA Regulations 2006 (the EEA Regulations), that  they  were  in  a
    relationship akin to  marriage  in  the  sense  that  they  had  to  be
    partners, meaning sexual partners.

Consideration of the merits of the present appeal

3.   Judge Ransley determined the  case  on  the  papers  because  that  was
    requested on the appeal form by the appellant.  There is  no  lower  or
    higher standard of proof which  applied  to  cases  decided  without  a
    hearing.  It was open to either party  to  submit  witness  statements,
    which would not, without holding an oral  hearing,  be  challenged.  It
    would also have been open to either party to  rely  on  any  documents.
    Specifically it would  have  been  open  to  the  appellant  to  submit
    documents to confirm his cohabitation with the sponsor at the  latter's
    home.  The issue had to be determined on the balance of probabilities.

4.   I have carefully read Judge  Ransley's  decision.   It  is  unfortunate
    that the Judge appears to have conflated the requirements of Regulation
    8(5) with those of Regulation 7. Regulation 7 enables a  family  member
    of an EEA national, including a spouse or civil partner, to establish a
    right to reside in the UK  with  a  person  qualifying  under  the  EEA
    Regulations. Regulation 8 (5) on the other  hand  requires  the  person
    relying on that relation to show that he is in a  durable  relationship
    with an EEA national.

5.    Having  carefully  considered  Judge  Ransley's  decision  and  having
    considered the submissions made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  at  the
    hearing I  am  not  satisfied  that  that  the  error  which  has  been
    identified  is  material  one.  The  Judge  enjoyed  a  wide  ambit  of
    discretion in terms of which evidence she accepted and rejected as well
    as what weight she attached to that evidence. I have concluded that she
    was entitled to conclude on the written  documents  supplied  that  the
    appellant did not qualify under Regulation 8(5) because he was not in a
    durable relationship with an EEA national. I have looked  carefully  at
    the documents relied on by the appellant. None of those documents refer
    to  the  parties  living  at  the  same  address  at  the  same   time.
    Furthermore residence in the same property does not necessarily connote
    a relationship or partnership akin to a sexual partnership. A copy of a
    tenancy agreement, which had been supplied to the Secretary  of  State,
    was produced before the Judge.  I am not sure that all the  Immigration
    Judge's concerns about that document were justified, but the judge  was
    entitled to take into account the  fact  that  it  did  not  state  the
    commencement date for the payment of rent or the correct  rent  day  in
    each month, which would be very basic omissions  from  such  a  legally
    enforceable document.  The tenant's signature appears not to have  been
    witnessed. It is therefore a document that the Judge was entitled to be
    sceptical about. There were  sufficient  concerns  over  the  documents
    produced to  conclude  that  it  had  not  been  established  that  the
    appellant was living  with  the  sponsor  in  a  relationship  akin  to
    marriage or civil partnership for the  period  claimed,  even  if  they
    lived at the same address.

6.   It was very easy for the appellant and the sponsor to  claim,  as  they
    did, that rent for the property where they claimed to live was paid  in
    cash each month, but no bank statements were  produced  to  corroborate
    the payments of rent. Given that the tenancy had been in existence  for
    four years at the date of the hearing before the judge one would expect
    some evidence of payment of rent. One would also have expected  to  see
    evidence of payment of joint bills at the property concerned.

7.   It is not for this Tribunal to substitute its  view  of  the  case  for
    that of the Immigration Judge.  It may  well  have  been  that  were  I
    hearing this appeal I would have found in favour of the appellant, with
    whom I sympathise, but unfortunately that is not the issue  before  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Despite  the  cogent  and  helpful  arguments  of  Mrs
    Sobande, I have concluded that there was no material error  of  law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

8.    It  is  possible  that  if  the  appellant  were  to  submit  a  fresh
    application based on his fuller evidence it may be successful.

Additional evidence

9.   There is an application to  adduce  fresh  evidence  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal but Mrs Sobande has not placed any reason before the  Tribunal
    as to why those new documents were  not  supplied  in  support  of  the
    original application and they were not before the Immigration Judge and
    therefore she cannot be criticised for not taking  them  into  account.
    The only document that I do think might have been of relevance  is  the
    document which is a joint bank statement.  As I say, it may be  that  a
    fresh application can be made which  is  supported  by  that  document.
    However no adequate reason was  given  for  failing  to  produce  these
    documents before the First-tier Tribunal and I can see no proper  basis
    for admitting them at this stage.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the  FTT  under  the  EEA
regulations,  alternatively,   on   human   rights   grounds   is   disused.
Accordingly, the respondent's decision to refuse to recognise the  appellant
as an extended family member of an EEA national stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 20 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 20 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

