
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: iA/30042/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Judgment given orally at hearing              |On 29 July 2016               |
|On 16 May 2016                                |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               DRITAN KRASNIQI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Denholm, Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal ("the FtT"). First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Griffith  ("The
    FtJ") heard the appellant's appeal  on  22  September  2015  against  a
    decision by the respondent to refuse  leave  to  remain  on  Article  8
    grounds and to  make  a  removal  decision  under  section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. It is convenient to start with the decision of the FtJ.   She  referred
    to the appellant's immigration history, the appellant  having  come  to
    the UK as an illegal entrant from Kosovo in August 2000  aged  16.  His
    asylum claim based on his Roma ethnicity was refused on  7  March  2002
    but he was granted a period  of  discretionary  leave  until  his  18th
    birthday.

 3. The respondent's decision rejected the contention  that  the  appellant
    was able to meet the requirements of the relevant Article 8 Immigration
    Rules, in particular with  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE.   The  FtJ
    summarised the respondent's decision.

 4. She heard evidence  from  a  Ms  Yvonne  James  and  from  three  other
    witnesses who were present in support of the appeal. They adopted their
    witness statements. The appellant apparently has a partner but she  was
    unable to attend as their child was unwell.

 5. There was an issue before the FtJ about whether the appellant had  been
    an absconder for five years or for three years, the Secretary of  State
    saying that it was for five years but the appellant contending that  it
    was three years.

 6. The FtJ recorded the appellant's account of his relationship in the  UK
    and of apparent discrimination in Kosovo because he  was  dark  skinned
    and was identified as a  gypsy.   The  appellant  gave  evidence  about
    speaking English and attending no Kosovan activities or cultural events
    in the UK.  There was evidence of some  work  that  the  appellant  had
    undertaken in the UK.

 7. The submissions on behalf of the respondent before the FtJ were to  the
    effect that the appellant was not able to meet the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules and that  there  were  no  significant  obstacles  to
    integration in Kosovo.  Reference was made to  the  appellant's  asylum
    appeal having been dismissed. It was contended that the  appellant  has
    no family life as his partner is not British and he  entered  into  the
    relationship when there was no lawful basis for  him  to  remain.   The
    appellant's partner is Albanian and arrived in the UK in October 2014.

 8. The FtJ's findings start from [41] of her decision.  She said  that  it
    was not in dispute that the appellant had been in the UK  since  August
    2000, a period of just over 15 years, and that he was 16 years  of  age
    on arrival. She referred to the fact that she had not seen a full  copy
    of the determination of the  appellant's  asylum  appeal,  that  asylum
    appeal having taken place on 25 January 2005 before an Adjudicator,  Mr
    J McMahon.  At the hearing I was provided with a complete copy  of  the
    Adjudicator's determination which was not in the papers before the FtJ.
     The FtJ said that she did not know  whether  any  adverse  credibility
    findings were made at that hearing.

 9. It is as well at this point to note that the Adjudicator found that the
    appellant is of mixed ethnicity, his  father  being  Albanian  and  his
    mother Roma. He also found that on return the appellant would not  seek
    to assert the Roma part of his  ethnicity  and  would  be  accepted  by
    others as Albanian. He did accept however, that the appellant's  mother
    was killed in June 2000 during an outbreak of violence in the  town  of
    Mitrovice. He accepted that the appellant  and  his  family  lived  all
    their lives in Mitrovice. The decision letter  in  this  case  asserted
    that the  Adjudicator  found  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  of  Roma
    ethnicity incredible, as was his claim that he came from Mitrovice.

10. The FtJ identified discrepancies in the evidence  given  to  her.   She
    described a small discrepancy between the appellant's written and  oral
    evidence in that he stated in his witness statement  that  he  attended
    school for three years whereas his  oral  evidence  was  that  he  only
    received six months' primary school education. There was also  said  to
    be what the FtJ described as a small discrepancy between  his  evidence
    and that of Ms James concerning the outcome of the enquiries made in an
    attempt to trace the appellant's family in Kosovo.  The appellant  said
    that a reply had been received from the relevant agency whereas it  was
    Ms James's evidence that  no  response  had  been  received.   The  FtJ
    concluded that those discrepancies were not material and she said  that
    she accepted the truthfulness of the appellant's evidence about what he
    has been doing during his stay in the UK and his present circumstances.



11. At [42] she said that the appellant is now aged 31 and  she  considered
    whether he could bring himself within paragraph 276ADE (vi) in terms of
    no ties including social, cultural or family ties with Kosovo. She then
    referred to the current amended Immigration Rule which speaks  of  very
    significant obstacles to integration into the country to which he would
    have to go if returned.

12. Moving on, at [43] she referred to the appellant's  evidence  that  the
    main language he speaks is English, that he has no ties or  links  with
    Kosovo, participates in no Kosovan activities or  cultural  events  and
    that he said in evidence  that  he  was  becoming  more  English.   His
    evidence about his life in the UK was supported by the evidence  of  Ms
    James and the other witnesses who attended the hearing.  The  FtJ  said
    that she accepted Ms James' evidence that she has known  the  appellant
    for a substantial period of time and that he is a close friend  and  is
    treated like one of the family.  The FtJ said that  she  considered  Ms
    James was in a good position to give an opinion  about  what  ties  the
    appellant might still have with Kosovo and the level of his integration
    into British society. She said that she had attached  "due  weight"  to
    her evidence.   Whilst  that  phrase  is  in  some  respects  vague,  I
    interpret it to mean that the FtJ found her evidence to be credible  in
    that respect.

13. She went on to note that the appellant had spent almost half  his  life
    in the UK and had grown up here and been educated here. She noted  that
    he had worked in the UK, albeit illegally, also referring to  the  fact
    that the appellant appeared to have paid tax.

14. The FtJ  concluded  that  although  there  was  no  up-to-date  country
    information about present day Kosovo it was reasonable to  assume  that
    the Kosovo of today is not the same Kosovo the appellant left  in  2000
    where he spent his childhood and early teenage years.   She  said  that
    there was no evidence to suggest that he has maintained any  continuing
    connection with Kosovo or that there are any factors tying him  to  his
    country of origin beyond those early years  which  were  not  a  "happy
    experience".  She said that it was to his credit that with the help  of
    Ms James he had attempted to find his family some eight years  ago  but
    without success.  She concluded at [46] with reference to the  decision
    in Ogundimu (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT  00060  (IAC)
    that the appellant had no meaningful  ties  to  Kosovo  and  given  the
    length of his absence and the extent of his integration in the UK there
    would be very significant obstacles  to  his  integration  into  Kosovo
    without family or friends there to support him.

15. She then said that it was not therefore necessary to go on to  consider
    Article 8 but if she  had  done  so  she  would  have  found  that  the
    respondent's decision was  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
    appellant's Article 8 rights.

16. The respondent's grounds as pleaded take issue with the FtJ's findings.
    It is contended that the onus was on the appellant to  show  why  as  a
    national of Kosovo he could not return there. Reference is made to  the
    fact that he has no health problems, speaks the language and given that
    he had spent the first 16 years of his life there,  must  be  aware  of
    cultural  norms.   The  grounds  contend  that  the  very   significant
    obstacles test is a high one and the appellant would need to show  good
    reasons as to why he would not be able to establish a private  life  on
    return.

17. The appellant's private life in the UK, it  is  contended,  established
    whilst pursuing his claim, is not a relevant consideration in the  very
    significant obstacles test.  Furthermore,  the  grounds  refer  to  the
    rejection of the earlier asylum claim based on Roma ethnicity which was
    not, according to the refusal letter at  least,  a  credible  one.   Mr
    Kotas accepted however, that the way that  the  Adjudicator's  decision
    was characterised in the decision letter is not entirely accurate.

18. The respondent's grounds  were  developed  before  me  to  include  the
    contention that the FtJ wrongly applied the 'no  tie's'  test  when  in
    fact, in terms  of  paragraph  276ADE,  it  is  the  'very  significant
    obstacles test' that applies.  I was referred to  the  decision  in  YM
    (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    1292.

19. There it said at [39] that:

         "So far as the 2014 Rules are  concerned,  it  is  clear  from  the
         provisions of Rule A362 itself, as  well  as  the  statement  under
         'implementation' in the Statement of Changes and paragraphs 3.4 and
         4.7 of the Explanatory Memorandum, that the 2014 Rules  are  to  be
         applied to all decisions concerning Article 8 claims that are  made
         after 28 July 2014."

20. In [39] it also states that in the absence  of  any  statement  to  the
    contrary, the most natural reading of the Rules is that they  apply  to
    decisions taken by the Secretary  of  State  until  such  time  as  she
    promulgates new rules after which she will decide according to the  new
    rules.  The decision continues that the same applies  to  decisions  by
    tribunals and the courts. Reference is made  to  the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department 1WLR 544.  The Court of Appeal  held  that  both  the  Upper
    Tribunal and the Court of Appeal were obliged to apply the  2012  Rules
    despite the fact that the Secretary of State  had  taken  her  original
    decision in 2010 under the existing Rules.

21. I was also referred on behalf of the respondent to HC 532  at  pages  2
    and 3 in support of the contention  that  the  judge  had  applied  the
    incorrect Rule, that is to say the 'no ties' test rather than the 'very
    significant obstacles' test.

22. This argument, which is not pleaded, unsurprisingly caught  Mr  Denholm
    by surprise.  It was not suggested, and I do not consider it to be  the
    case, that it was Mr Kotas's intention, as it were, to 'wrong foot'  Mr
    Denholm, but Mr Denholm submitted that if it was a material matter that
    would feature in my decision-making  he  would  require  more  time  to
    consider the point.   I indicated that I would allow him more time if I
    thought that he needed it in terms of the relevance of the issue to  my
    deliberations.

23. Mr Denholm, in essence, contended that the FtJ had applied the  correct
    Rule but even if he had not, he had considered the  appeal  under  both
    bases: either no ties and in the  alternative  under  very  significant
    obstacles.

24. Mr Kotas referred me to various aspects of the FtJ's decision in  terms
    of the factual findings, contending that essentially the  decision  was
    focused on the appellant's circumstances in the UK without reference to
    what the circumstances might be on his return.  He also relied  on  the
    decision in Bossadi (Paragraph 276ADE; suitability; ties)  [2015]  UKUT
    42  (IAC).   In  particular  he  referred  to  [16]  which   summarises
    Strasbourg jurisprudence to the effect that a tribunal  or  court  must
    take into account as a relevant consideration "whether  ties  that  are
    dormant can be revived".

25. It was also argued that the FtJ's analysis of whether the appellant had
    in fact any ties or could integrate into Kosovo on  return  is  flawed,
    and her conclusions on the facts were ones that she was not entitled to
    come to.  It was contended that what  she  regarded  as  an  immaterial
    discrepancy in terms of the response  to  a  tracing  enquiry  was  not
    immaterial at all because what the appellant's circumstances  would  be
    on return was material, and this was a matter that went to that issue.

26. Mr Denholm contended in reply that the FtJ's conclusions were  open  to
    her on the evidence and that whichever way  one  looked  at  the  FtJ's
    decision, she had applied the correct test, or had looked at the matter
    in alternative ways.

27. I consider that there is merit in the respondent's argument in relation
    to YM (Uganda) and that the FtJ ought to have looked at the  assessment
    of the Rules in terms of whether there were very significant  obstacles
    to the appellant's integration into Kosovo rather than in terms  of  no
    ties.

28. However, in the light of the further conclusions  I  have  come  to  in
    relation to the FtJ's decision, I am not satisfied that  any  error  of
    law in that respect is material.  That is because it  is  evident  that
    the FtJ looked at the matter in the alternative.   She  considered  the
    question of no ties, referring to the decision in Ogundimu, and said at
    [46] that the appellant has no meaningful ties to Kosovo.  But she also
    went on to state that she was "also satisfied" that there would be very
    significant obstacles to his integration into Kosovo without family  or
    friends there to support him.

29. I am satisfied that the FtJ was entitled to conclude that the appellant
    does not have connections with Kosovo that would allow him to integrate
    there.  That really is the effect of her decision.  It is not the  case
    that the FtJ was only focusing on the appellant's circumstances in  the
    UK.  She took into account that the  appellant  on  his  own  evidence,
    which she accepted, attends no Kosovan activities  or  cultural  events
    and effectively had lost his  cultural  connection  to  Kosovo  in  any
    meaningful sense that would allow him to reintegrate on return there.

30. She was entitled to take into account the evidence of  Ms  James  whose
    evidence the FtJ found of assistance in that regard.

31. So far as the revival of dormant ties are concerned and the decision in
    Bossadi, the effect of the FtJ's decision is that there  were  no  ties
    there, dormant or otherwise.

32. To summarise, the FtJ took into account that the appellant  arrived  at
    the age of 16 and that he had spent almost half of his life here.   She
    accepted that there was no evidence of any  ties  to  Kosovo  and  that
    informed  her  assessment  of  whether  there  were  very   significant
    obstacles to his integration there.  She referred to the extent of  the
    appellant's integration in  the  UK  which  must  be  a  factor  to  be
    considered.

33. In all those circumstances, whilst it could be said that another  judge
    might have come to a different conclusion, and whilst it  is  also  the
    case as in many reasons challenges that more could have  been  said  by
    the FtJ on one aspect of the case or another, I am not  satisfied  that
    there is an error of law in  the  FtJ's  decision  which  requires  the
    decision to be set  aside.    The  error  of  law  highlighted  by  the
    decision in YM (Uganda) is not a material error of law.

34. Accordingly the decision to allow  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules is to stand.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            28/07/16


