
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/30411/2014
                                                               IA/30412/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 20 May 2015                       |On 28 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ASHABEN SUNILKUMAR BRAHMBHATTI
                                                            First Respondent
                        ADITI SUNILKUMAR BRAHMBHATTI
                                                           Second Respondent
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R. Pennington-Benton, Counsel instructed by
                    Farani Javid Taylor


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier  Tribunal.  We  find  that  no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case  that  give  rise  to  the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    For the sake of convenience this decision will refer  to  the  parties
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal albeit that  the  Secretary
    of State is technically the appellant in this  particular  appeal.  The
    respondent was granted permission to appeal  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Suffield-Thompson  (hereafter  the  judge),
    which was promulgated  on  02  January  2015.  The  judge  allowed  the
    appellants' appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse to grant
    them leave to remain on human rights grounds and to  remove  them  from
    the UK under section 10 of the Immigration Act 1999.

2.    The first appellant is a citizen of India whose date of  birth  is  29
    November 1974. The second appellant is her dependent daughter.  She  is
    also a citizen of India whose date of birth is  16  January  1997.  The
    first appellant entered the UK on 04 October 2009 with entry  clearance
    as a student. Her husband and the second appellant entered the UK on 18
    September 2010 with  entry  clearance  as  her  dependents.  The  first
    appellant subsequently separated from her husband who she believes  has
    returned to India. She was granted further leave to remain as a student
    until 25 August 2014. On 02 February  2012  the  respondent  sought  to
    curtail the appellants' leave to remain. However,  at  the  hearing  Mr
    Tufan confirmed that his records showed that the letter  was  returned.
    Whether the appellant's leave to  remain  as  a  student  was  properly
    curtailed and when she came to know about the decision is not a  matter
    that is necessary for this Tribunal to determine  for  the  purpose  of
    this appeal.  Certainly by 02 August 2013 the appellant  seemed  to  be
    aware of her precarious status because  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain was made on human rights grounds. The application was refused in
    a decision dated 23 July 2014 on the ground that they did not meet  the
    requirements of the immigration rules and  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances that justified  granting  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    rules.

3.    The First-tier Tribunal heard the appeals on  22  December  2014.  The
    judge set out the appellants' immigration history in full  as  well  as
    the details of their private and family lives. The judge concluded that
    the appellants did not meet the requirements of the  immigration  rules
    but then went on to consider whether there were matters that  were  not
    adequately covered by the rules that could nevertheless properly engage
    their right to private and family life under Article 8 of the  European
    Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) outside the  immigration  rules.  The
    judge made reference to the five-stage test in  Razgar  v  SSHD  [2004]
    UKHL 27 and concluded that the appellants  had  formed  a  private  and
    family life in the UK and  that  removal  would  interfere  with  their
    rights in a sufficiently grave  way  as  to  engage  the  operation  of
    Article 8. The judge then went on to consider  factors  that  might  be
    relevant to the proportionality of removal and made  findings  relating
    to the best interests of the second appellant, who was  at  that  stage
    still a minor, with reference to the Court of  Appeal  decision  in  EV
    (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874. The judge then concluded that
    removal would be disproportionate in all the circumstances of the case.



4.    The grounds of appeal argue that the judge  failed  to  attach  little
    weight to the appellants' private lives as required by sections 117B(4)
    and 117B(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("NIAA
    2002"). The judge failed to take into account the fact that the  second
    appellant was not a "qualifying child" as defined in section 117D  NIAA
    2002. The grounds went on to argue that the judge failed to  apply  the
    principles set out in EV (Philippines)  properly  and  failed  to  have
    regard to the Supreme Court decision in Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC  74.
    The judge erred in failing to find that, as a non-British child, it was
    in the child's best interests to  return  to  India  with  her  mother.
    Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the judge may have erred in the application of section 117 and that the
    judge may have given insufficient weight to the requirements  contained
    in section 117B(4)-(5) and the case law cited in the grounds.

5.    The  matter  came  before  us  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law.

Submissions

6.    Mr Tufan relied on the grounds of appeal.  He  submitted  that  having
    concluded that the appellants failed to meet the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules the judge then failed to give  adequate  reasons  for
    going on to consider Article 8  outside  the  immigration  rules.  When
    asked for submissions in relation to  whether  the  judge  had  applied
    section 117B(4)-(5) NIAA 2002 properly he said that he relied  on  what
    was said in the grounds. He questioned whether  the  judge  could  have
    reasonably arrived at the decision on the facts but when asked  whether
    the respondent now wanted to put  forward  a  perversity  challenge  Mr
    Tufan merely said that the judge had "not made a good job of it".

7.    In response Mr Pennington-Benton submitted that the  grounds  amounted
    to little more than a complaint about the findings of fact made by  the
    judge. He said that it was a fact sensitive assessment. No doubt  other
    judges might have come to a different conclusion on the same facts  but
    that did not amount to an  error  of  law.  The  judge  had  heard  the
    witnesses and formed an opinion as to how integrated they were  in  the
    UK. He took us to various points in the  decision  where  he  said  the
    judge clearly had the immigration  history  and  precarious  nature  of
    their position in the UK in  mind  when  coming  to  the  decision.  He
    submitted that section 117B only required a judge to  consider  whether
    little weight "should" be given to a private life established  while  a
    person is in the UK  unlawfully  or  if  their  immigration  status  is
    precarious. The wording did not say that a  judge  "must"  give  little
    weight to those matters. It was compatible with a judge's duties  under
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 to take  it  into  consideration
    but it could not be a mandatory requirement. He submitted that  whether
    the leave was properly curtailed or not the judge had  dealt  with  the
    issue of the appellants' precarious  position  in  the  UK  in  several
    places in the decision. The grounds of appeal did not allege  that  the
    judge did not consider the issue but merely complained that  the  judge
    did not give the weight that the respondent wanted. He  submitted  that
    did not amount to an error of law and asked us to uphold the decision.

Conclusions

8.    We have considered the First-tier decision, the grounds of appeal  and
    submissions in full and conclude that the decision did not involve  the
    making of an error of law for the following reasons.

9.    Although the judge did not make specific reference to the reasons  for
    going on to assess the case outside the immigration rules it  is  clear
    from what is said in paragraph 54 of the decision that the  judge  took
    into account all the circumstances of the case  as  well  as  the  best
    interests of the child before coming to the conclusion that  there  was
    sufficient reason to consider the case outside the  immigration  rules.
    We are satisfied that this was sufficient to  move  on  to  the  second
    stage assessment outside the immigration rules.

10.   It is clear from the decision that the judge set out  the  appellants'
    immigration history in some detail and was fully aware of the fact that
    the respondent sought to curtail their leave after the sponsor  licence
    was revoked from the college at which the first appellant was  studying
    (paragraph 3). The  judge  also  took  into  account  the  respondent's
    submission that the appellants' status was precarious since she stopped
    studying under the terms of her student visa in 2012 (paragraph 39). It
    seems that the appellants' representative at the hearing also  conceded
    that "the first appellant had no legal right to be here after 2012  and
    that her position has been and  still  remains  precarious"  (paragraph
    43).

11.   The judge then correctly referred to the five  stage  test  in  Razgar
    and went on to make clear findings as to  the  best  interests  of  the
    child involved in the  case  with  reference  to  relevant  authorities
    including EV (Philippines), ZH (Tanzania) and Zoumbas. In paragraph  64
    of the decision the judge set out a number of reasons why it was in the
    best interests of the child to remain in the UK including the fact that
    she was at a significant stage of her education and that she had become
    westernised and would find it difficult to revert back to the  cultural
    expectations of being a young woman in a culture with  different  moral
    and religious  values.  The  judge  also  noted  that  the  appellant's
    daughter had no home or close family ties in India but in contrast  has
    a home in the UK, a network of friends and was "totally integrated into
    the British way of life". We find  that  the  respondent's  grounds  in
    relation to this issue amount to little more than a  disagreement  with
    the weight that she  would  like  to  have  been  placed  on  the  best
    interests of the child. The findings were fully reasoned and  open  for
    the judge to make on the evidence and they could not  be  described  as
    perverse or irrational. The fact  that  the  judge  did  not  refer  to
    section 117B(6) is immaterial because, as the  respondent  points  out,
    the second appellant is not a "qualifying child" within the meaning  of
    section 117D NIAA 2002.

12.   The public interest test contained in section 117B NIAA 2002  is  only
    relevant to  what  weight  should  be  given  to  the  public  interest
    considerations in so far as it might form part of the overall balancing
    exercise relating to the proportionality of removal. The statute  makes
    clear that a judge must have regard to those factors where relevant. In
    Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90 the Tribunal found that a judge must
    take into account the considerations set out  in  section  117  but  it
    would not be an error of law to fail to refer to each section in  turn;
    what mattered was "substance not form".

13.   The grounds also seek to challenge the alleged failure  of  the  judge
    to consider section 117B(4) (private life established while in  the  UK
    unlawfully) or section 117B(5) (private  life  established  at  a  time
    while immigration status is precarious). For the reasons given above we
    are satisfied that the issue of the appellants' immigration history and
    the precarious nature of her status formed part of the arguments at the
    hearing and the judge clearly had in mind that issue when the  decision
    was made.

14.   At the hearing there was some brief discussion as to  the  meaning  of
    the term "precarious" but shortly after we  concluded  the  hearing  it
    became apparent that the  Tribunal  had  just  issued  a  new  reported
    decision in AM (s.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT  0260.  The  Tribunal  found
    that section 117B(4) and 117B(5) clearly intended a distinction  to  be
    made between those who had formed a private life in the UK  while  they
    were here unlawfully and those who had formed a private life in the  UK
    while  their  "status  is  precarious".  The  Tribunal  concluded  that
    "precarious" status included those people with lawful leave  to  remain
    who would be required to make a further application for  leave  at  the
    end of the period and in certain circumstances may even  include  those
    whose Indefinite Leave to Remain or even British citizenship might fall
    to be revoked through fraud or criminal activity.

15.   While it is possible that there might be a technical  argument  as  to
    whether the decision to curtail the appellants'  leave  to  remain  was
    properly served we did not hear detailed argument on this  and  do  not
    seek to resolve that issue in this appeal. Given the concession made by
    the appellants' representative it is clear that the judge proceeded  on
    the assumption that the appellant was without lawful leave  from  2012.
    On the facts of the case the appellant had limited leave to remain  and
    then possibly remained without lawful leave for a period of time  after
    2012. The circumstances would come within the  terms  of  both  section
    117B(4) and 117B(5) but both provisions require a judge to approach the
    matter in the same way by giving "little weight" to a person's  private
    life that has been established in such circumstances  when  considering
    the overall balancing exercise.

16.   However, the precarious nature of the appellants' status was  not  the
    only issue that had to be weighed in the  balance  in  this  case.  The
    judge quite clearly also considered the best interests  of  the  child,
    which are a primary consideration. While the best interests of a  child
    are a weighty consideration they are capable of being outweighed by the
    cumulative effect of other factors. We are  satisfied  that  the  judge
    took into account  a  number  of  relevant  factors  relating  to  best
    interests in paragraphs 63-64 of the decision that  were  open  to  the
    judge to consider in the circumstances of  this  particular  case.  The
    judge took into account the relevant authorities  and  it  seems  quite
    clear from the conclusion contained in paragraph  68  of  the  decision
    that the best interests of the second appellant  were  weighed  against
    the fact that their status had been precarious as well as all the other
    relevant facts.  After  having  heard  from  the  witnesses  and  after
    considering all the evidence  as  a  whole  the  judge  concluded  that
    removal would be disproportionate.

17.   While it  is  possible  that  another  judge  would  have  come  to  a
    different conclusion on the facts of this case, for the  reasons  given
    above, we are satisfied that there is nothing in the judge's  reasoning
    that could be described as perverse or that discloses a material  error
    of law. The grounds amount to little more than a disagreement with  the
    judge's findings. For these reasons we uphold the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision.

18.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
    an error of law.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand



Signed   [pic]   Date 27th May 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

