
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31494/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at TAYLOR HOUSE                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th April 2017                   |On 5th May 2017                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                Ms. GA BLACK


                                   Between

                     Mr Anis Jivinkumar Edward Nesakumar
                           No anonymity order made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin (Counsel instructed by Nag Law
solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan   (Home Office Presenting Office)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.   I shall  refer  to  the  parties  in  these  proceedings  as  "the
    Appellant " and "the Respondent" who is the Secretary  of  State.  This
    matter comes before me for consideration as to whether or not there  is
    a material error of law in the decision and reasons of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge C. Buckwell)("FTT") promulgated on 7th October  2016  ,
    in which he  dismissed the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    under Article 8 ECHR outside of the Rules.

Background

    2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka whose date of birth is 6th
    October 1995 .  He entered the UK lawfully as a minor with  his  mother
    with whom he had formed a  strong  relationship.  His  application  for
    further leave to remain was delayed pending his mother's obtaining  her
    English language certificate. By the time the application was made  the
    appellant was an adult and at the date of hearing was  aged  20  years.
    Further changes in circumstances took place such that  the  Appellant's
    father had been sentenced to imprisonment  and  as  a  consequence  the
    Appellant had taken on the role of father  to  his  young  5  year  old
    brother and of provider  for  his  mother.   It  was  argued  that  the
    Appellant had established family life in the UK as a young  adult  with
    his mother and brother (following Kugathas,  Ghising  and  Beoku  Betts
    [2008] UKHL 39),  and further  that  it  would  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with family life to remove him.   It  was  contended  that
    Article 8 family life outside of the Rules  was  established  as  there
    were  compelling  circumstances   and   the   decision   made   was   a
    disproportionate interference with family/private life.

  First -tier decision

    3.   The FTT found that the Appellant failed to meet  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules with reference to  Paragraph  276ADE(1)  [23].
    The FTT went on to consider if there were arguable grounds  outside  of
    the Rules to justify consideration of Article 8 ECHR  [24].   Following
    SS(Congo) & others [2015] EWCA CIV 387 the FTT concluded that there was
    no gap in the Rules to show that they failed to cater for  applications
    made  by  an  adult  claiming  family  life  dependency,  as  this  was
    permissible. At [25 ] the FTT relied on Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and
    found that there needed to be particular factors applicable  so  as  to
    engage Article 8  family  life.   The  FTT  concluded  that  the  Rules
    adequately covered the position of an applicant who  reaches  adulthood
    in the UK and that the Secretary of State was entitled  to  distinguish
    between minors and adults in the legislation [26].

Grounds of appeal

    4.   In grounds of appeal it was argued that the FTT erred  by  failing
    to consider the particular factual   circumstances  of  the  Article  8
    claim in order to reach a decision as to  whether  or  not  there  were
    compelling circumstances not covered by the Rules as per  Kugathas  and
    Ghising(family life -adults- Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160.

Permission to appeal

    5.   Permission to appeal was granted by  UTJ  O'Connor  who  found  an
    arguable error in that the FTT erred by  concluding  that  because  the
    requirements of the Rules were not met,  that  Article  8  family  life
    could not be considered.

Discussion and decision

    6.   I heard submissions from  both  representatives,  the  details  of
    which are set out in the record of proceedings.  Mr  Martin  relied  on
    the arguments as put before the FTT summarised above.  Mr Tufan  relied
    on Singh and Khalid and Agyarko & Ikuga (R(on  the  application  of)  v
    SSHD [2017]  UKSC  11  with  reference  to  the  need  for  exceptional
    circumstances to be identified.   He  emphasised  that  the  precarious
    immigration status of the Appellant was a major factor and  that  there
    were no compelling circumstances. In the event that  the  5  stages  of
    Razgar were to be followed, it would necessitate reference  to  section
    117B Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act 2002 as amended ("2002 Act")
    to public interest factors  and there was no prospect  of  success  for
    this appellant.

    7.   Mr Martin responded that the FTT had limited its consideration  to
    the existence of a gap in the rules and failed to make findings of fact
    as to the existence of family life in the light of the Appellant's role
    as quasi parent for his  brother.   Also  relevant  was  the  issue  of
    section 117B(6) 2002 Act as the brother was a British citizen child.

    8.   At the end of the hearing I announced my decision that  I  find  a
    material error in law and I set aside the FTT decision and reasons.   I
    am satisfied that  the  FTT  failed  to  follow  the  correct  approach
    outlined in SS (Congo) [33], in  considering  if  there  were  arguable
    grounds  and  compelling  circumstances  to  justify  consideration  of
    Article 8 out with the Rules. The  Rules  do  not  fully  consider  the
    position of young adults in accordance with caselaw on Article 8.   The
    FTT failed to consider the particular facts and circumstances as to the
    existence of family  life,   did  not  follow  the  Razgar  stages  and
    ultimately  did  not   assess    whether   there   existed   compelling
    circumstances such that the public interest in removal of the Appellant
    was outweighed by his family life in the UK.  In view of the fact  that
    the FTT stopped short its analysis by  concluding  that  there  was  no
    arguable grounds for consideration of Article 8 and made no findings of
    fact as to family life or  any  assessment  of  proportionality,  I  am
    persuaded that the matter ought  to  be  remitted  for  hearing  afresh
    before the FTT at Taylor House (excluding Judge Buckwell).

    9.  There is a material error in law and I set aside the  decision  and
    reasons. The Article 8 appeal is to be listed for rehearing  at  Taylor
    House (not before Judge Buckwell), with a Tamil interpreter and for two
    witnesses to be called.




                               Signed        Date  3.5.2017
                               GA Black
                               Deputy  Judge of the Upper Tribunal


NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
NO AWARD FOR COSTS




                               Signed        Date  3.5.2017
                               GA Black
                               Deputy  Judge of the Upper Tribunal

