
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31615/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 July 2015                            |On 31 July 2015                 |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                 tahir abbas
                            (NO ANONYMITY ORDER)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Sajid, Shehzad Law Chambers, Birmingham
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Abbas argues that First-tier Tribunal Judge Dhanji erred in law when
    determining his appeal against the immigration  decisions  of  24  July
    2014 refusing to vary his leave to remain as a tier 4 (general) student
    migrant and to  remove  him  by  way  of  directions.   Judge  Dhanji's
    decision and reasons statement was  promulgated  on  1  December  2014,
    having determined the appeal without a hearing  because  the  appellant
    had only paid the lower appeal fee.

 2. The grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  are  that  there  was  a
    procedural error because Mr Abbas had received no reply from the First-
    tier Tribunal to his application of 14 October 2014 for the time  given
    to comply with directions to be extended  for  two  months.   Mr  Abbas
    position is that had he been given the additional time requested,  then
    he would have provided further evidence which would have had a material
    bearing on the outcome of the appeal.

 3. Before hearing from the representatives I informed them that the appeal
    file shows that on 17  October  2014  the  First-tier  Tribunal  issued
    notices to the parties refusing the  application  to  extend  the  time
    available to comply with directions.  Mr Sajid said  that  he  had  not
    received any correspondence from the Tribunal  but  he  would  like  an
    adjournment to check his file which he did not have  with  him  at  the
    hearing.  I refused to adjourn because I have to assume that  Mr  Sajid
    would have checked his file carefully before making an application  for
    permission to appeal on this very basis.  To conclude  otherwise  would
    be to suggest that Mr Sajid was deliberately  seeking  to  mislead  the
    Tribunal.

 4. Mr Sajid relied on the grounds of appeal.  He had little  else  to  say
    other than he had with him a number  of  documents  in  support  of  Mr
    Abbas's EEA case including evidence that he married yesterday.

 5. I asked Mr Sajid a number of questions which unfortunately he  did  not
    appear to have anticipated.  My first question was why he thought  that
    the mere application to move the date for  compliance  with  directions
    might have changed the date stated in the Tribunal's directions  of  17
    September 2014.  Mr Sajid did not seem  to  comprehend  that  the  date
    stated, which was 15 October 2014, remained in force unless superseded.
     Therefore, the fact Mr Sajid relied on the fact that he  had  received
    no response to his application of 14 October 2014 could only mean  that
    he would have advised  Mr  Abbas  that  the  date  for  complying  with
    directions remained as 15 October 2014.

 6. My second question related to why Mr Sajid did not think  to  chase  up
    his application if he had not had any reply.  As I have indicated,  the
    appeal file clearly indicates that the application was  refused  on  17
    October 2014 and that notice to that effect was sent to  both  parties.
    The Tribunal would have presumed  that  such  notice  would  have  been
    received unless the contrary was shown.  Mr Sajid thought it was enough
    to have made the application and to wait indefinitely for  a  response.
    That is clearly unreasonable and unprofessional behaviour, particularly
    given the fact there was no basis to think that the date for  complying
    with directions had been moved.

 7. My third question focused on whether Mr Sajid understood how  important
    it is for a party to  cooperate  with  the  Tribunal  in  order  to  do
    justice.  It would appear that Mr Sajid seeks to lay blame at  everyone
    else's feet rather than accept any responsibility.  For  example,  when
    asked why he had not chased his application to  have  a  new  date  for
    complying with directions he merely said that Mr Abbas  had  failed  to
    give instructions.  That is utter nonsense since it is clear  from  the
    very fact that the application was made that Mr Abbas  had  given  such
    instructions.

 8. The failure of Mr Sajid  to  cooperate  with  Tribunal  proceedings  is
    further indicated by his inability to comply with  directions  relating
    to this hearing.  Despite directions  being  issued  that  any  further
    documents must be submitted at least 14 days  before  the  hearing,  as
    indicated above Mr Sajid attended with a large bundle which he expected
    would be admitted.  His explanation for the delay  was  that  Mr  Abbas
    only married yesterday.  Mr Sajid was unable to provide any  reasonable
    explanation as to why he had not complied with direction insofar as the
    other documents were available earlier, bearing in mind that  he  would
    have been able to submit evidence of then pending marriage as it  would
    have  had  to  have  been  booked  some  time  ago.   Mr  Sajid's  only
    explanation was that Mr Abbas did not give instructions.

 9. My fourth  area  of  questioning  related  to  the  background  to  the
    application to delay the deadline for compliance  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's directions.  As I have indicated above,  Mr  Abbas  appealed
    against the refusal of further leave as a student and the  decision  to
    remove.  In his grounds he drew attention to  the  fact  that  he  also
    relied on EU law and provided limited evidence of his relationship with
    an EEA national.  He wanted more time to produce more evidence.

10. This is a clear admission that Mr Sajid knew that the evidence provided
    to the First-tier Tribunal was not sufficient to discharge  the  burden
    of proof.   Yet, rather than assist Mr Abbas and the Tribunal by acting
    diligently, Mr Sajid thought he had done enough by asking for a further
    two months to provide evidence.  It is noted by Judge  Dhanji  that  no
    further evidence had been submitted despite  his  not  determining  the
    appeal until five weeks after the deadline for  further  documents  and
    submissions.  I also take account of the fact that no further  evidence
    has been  submitted  thereafter  despite  various  opportunities  being
    available and despite the Upper Tribunal's directions.   Such  failures
    merely weaken the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

11. In light of these points, I did not need to hear from Mr Mills.  I find
    there is  no  legal  error  in  Judge  Dhanji's  decision  and  reasons
    statement.  The appellant had failed to comply with directions and  had
    failed to produce evidence to discharge the burden that was on  him  in
    relation to the grounds of appeal on which he relied before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

12. I add, as I indicated at the hearing, that I am making no  findings  as
    to whether Mr Abbas is married to an EEA national who is exercising  EU
    law rights in the UK.  If he wishes to obtain confirmation that he  has
    a derived right of residence he  can,  and  no  doubt  will,  make  the
    appropriate application  to  the  Home  Office  supported  by  relevant
    evidence.  My decision is simply that Judge Dhanji did  not  err  on  a
    point of law.

Decision

The decision and reasons statement of  Judge  Dhanji  does  not  contain  an
error on a point of law and his decision stands.




                               Signed   Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
