
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31531/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 June 2014                               |On 14 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                            MRS ESTHER TOYIN ANIA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Khalid, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The Secretary of State appeals with leave against the determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge C M  Phillips  who  allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal against the respondent's decision to remove her from the  United
    Kingdom and to refuse her application under private life provisions  of
    Article 8.  The judge allowed the appellant's appeal  by  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules

2.   The grant of  permission  stated  that  it  is  debatable  whether  the
    determination adequately justifies the conclusion that  the  respondent
    "has not ties including social, cultural or family)" with Nigeria.

3.   The appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 23 May 1968 and is  now
    aged 46.  She entered the UK on 15 September 1998 and was granted leave
    to enter expiring on 15 September  1999  as  the  spouse  of  a  person
    present and settled in the UK.  She  submitted  an  application  on  13
    April 2000  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Section  9  overstayer;  the
    application was refused with a right of appeal on 22nd July 2003.   She
    lodged an appeal which was heard on 26 October 2005 and dismissed.  Her
    appeal rights were exhausted on 18 January 2006.

4.   On 1 August 2012 the appellant submitted an application for  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom outside the Immigration Rules  on
    compassionate grounds.  The application was refused on 16 July 2013  on
    the grounds that her removal would not place the UK in  breach  of  its
    obligations under the Human Rights  Act  1998.   Directions  were  also
    given under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  for  her
    removal from the UK.

5.   The Secretary of State noted that the appellant was 45  years  old  and
    had entered the UK on 5 September 1998 and had not as a result  resided
    in the UK for twenty years.  Whilst she had not lived  in  Nigeria  for
    fourteen years, she had lived the majority of her life in  Nigeria  and
    the Secretary of State did not accept that the  respondent  would  have
    severed all ties, including social, cultural and family  with  Nigeria.
    Her application  on  the  basis  of  private  life  was  refused  under
    paragraph 276CE with reference to paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

6.   Consideration was given by the Secretary of State to the fact that  the
    appellant had raised  domestic  violence  issues  with  regard  to  the
    breakdown of her marriage in 1999, but had not submitted evidence  from
    an independent or official source  and  whilst  noting  the  statements
    submitted with her  application  did  not  accept  them  as  sufficient
    evidence of domestic violence or the breakdown of the marriage for this
    reason.  In the circumstances it was  considered  that  there  were  no
    sufficiently  compelling  or  compassionate  circumstances  to  justify
    allowing  the  respondent  to  remain  exceptionally  and  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

7.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant and a witness  Mrs  Augusta
    Ali both of whom she found to be credible witnesses whom she  said  had
    provided a credible account of an  abusive  marriage.   The  judge  was
    satisfied that the appellant has been a victim of domestic violence but
    it was not clear on the evidence that their relationship finally  broke
    down before the end of her leave which expired on 15 September 1999.

8.   The judge then turned  to  the  consideration  of  private  life  under
    paragraph 276ADE and the issues  raised  in  sub-paragraph  (vi).   She
    reminded herself that the meaning of the word "ties" were considered in
    relation to a different Immigration Rule worded  in  the  same  way  in
    Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC)  where
    it was held as follows:

         "The natural and ordinary meaning of the word 'ties'  in  paragraph
         399A of the Immigration Rules imports a concept involving something
         more than merely  remote  of  abstract  links  to  the  country  of
         proposed  deportation  or  removal.   It  involves  there  being  a
         connection to life in that country.   Consideration  of  whether  a
         person has 'no ties' to such  a  country  must  involve  a  rounded
         assessment of all of the relevant circumstances and it is not to be
         limited to social, cultural and family circumstances."

9.   The judge found that the respondent had  accepted  that  the  appellant
    does not have family ties but did not accept that  she  had  lost  ties
    with Nigeria in the time from September 1998 when she  arrived  in  the
    UK.  It was submitted that she would suffer social exclusion on  return
    to Nigeria where she has nothing to return to.

12.  The judge then went on to find as follows:

         "51. The appellant is now aged forty-five, single and I  find  that
             she is a vulnerable lady with what I find  to  be  a  credible
             fear of relationships.  She has no funds and  has  not  gained
             academic qualifications during her time in the United Kingdom.
              She has no relatives in Nigeria and  no  accommodation.   She
             has no one to turn to  in  Nigeria  not  having  a  circle  of
             friends there.  She provided a credible account  that  she  is
             frightened of the social norms that would discriminate against
             her in Nigeria as a middle aged single woman without  children
             or family.  I find that she has been depicted locally  in  the
             area where her parents came from as a person who abandoned her
             parents so they died when in fact after  her  arrival  in  the
             United Kingdom she was subjected to domestic violence, she was
             denied access to  food,  money,  personal  papers  and  denied
             telephone contact with her parents by her husband.


         52.  I find that I am satisfied that this is a case where a rounded
             assessment of  all  the  relevant  circumstances  leads  to  a
             finding that this appellant now has no ties to  Nigeria.   She
             had ties at the time that she left at the age of thirty-one in
             September 1998 but  her  years  of  isolation  in  an  abusive
             marriage, the deaths of her parents, the  loss  of  needlework
             skills, her inability to have children,  the  removal  of  her
             womb, her vulnerability and the lapse  of  time  leads  me  to
             find, against the background of the findings set out above and
             by reference to  Ogundimu that the appellant has  no  ties  to
             Nigeria and accordingly meets the  requirements  of  paragraph
             276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules.  It follows that I  allow
             the appeal under the Immigration Rules.


         53.  Having allowed  the  appeal  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
             Immigration Rules I find that it is not necessary for me to go
             on and consider the application further  and  again  and  make
             separate findings under  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
             Rules.  I am reinforced in that view by the  case  of  Shahzad
             (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC) where  it  was
             held that:


                  Where an area of the rules does not have such  an  express
                  mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of  State
                  for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)  [29]-[31]
                  in particular) and  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -
                  correct approach) [2013] 640  (IAC)  should  be  followed:
                  i.e. after applying the requirements of the rules, only if
                  there may be arguably good grounds for granting  leave  to
                  remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8 purposes
                  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are   compelling
                  circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them."

13.  I find that the judge made material errors of law in her  consideration
    as to whether the appellant has no ties with Nigeria.   Whilst  it  had
    been accepted by the respondent that the appellant does not have family
    in Nigeria, the judge failed to  consider  whether  the  appellant  has
    social or cultural ties with Nigeria.  Her findings concentrated on the
    appellant's circumstances in the  UK  and  her  fear  of  returning  to
    Nigeria because of the social norms that would discriminate against her
    as a middle-aged single woman without children or  family.   The  judge
    failed to consider that the appellant had  a  life  in  Nigeria  before
    arriving in the UK.  She was educated and employed  there.   The  judge
    failed to consider the exposure the appellant has had to  the  cultural
    norms of Nigeria and whether she speaks any or some of the languages of
    Nigeria.

14.  The judge's failure to consider these  factors  undermine  her  finding
    that the appellant now has no ties to Nigeria.

15.  The judge's decision cannot stand.  It is set  aside  in  order  to  be
    remade.

16.  Because the judge  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE, she failed to determine the appellant's appeal  under
    Article 8.  It is also for this reason that the appellant's appeal  has
    to be reheard.

17.  The judge's finding that the  appellant  was  the  victim  of  domestic
abuse is to stand.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

DIRECTIONS

The appellant's appeal is remitted to  Taylor  House  for  re-hearing  by  a
    judge other than FtTJ C M Phillips
