
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/31201/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 3 May 2017                              |On 15 June 2017                |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS


                                   Between

                            FATIMOH KOREDE KASUMU
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    of the Specialist Appeals Team

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Judge  Eldridge
    given on 2 September 2016 whereby the application by the appellant  for
    further leave to remain on the basis of her family and private life  in
    this country was rejected.  It transpires that it is now accepted  that
    she has care of a child who has British nationality.  He may also  have
    Nigerian nationality but that is not material because  he  is  British.
    That being so, Mr Duffy has very  fairly  drawn  my  attention  to  the
    guidance which is applied  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  what  is
    material is:-

         "Will it be unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave
         the UK since where a  decision  to  refuse  the  application  would
         require a parent or primary carer to return to  a  country  outside
         the EU the case must always be assessed on the basis that it  would
         be unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave  the  EU
         with that parent or primary carer".


    Pausing there of course it reflects a decision of the European Court of
    Justice which was to that effect.  Going back to the guidance:


         "In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to the
         parent or primary carer to enable them to remain in the UK with the
         child provided that there is satisfactory evidence of a genuine and
         subsisting parental relationship".


    It then goes on that there could be  refusal  if  the  conduct  of  the
    parent or primary carer gave rise to considerations of such  weight  as
    to justify separation and that it is accepted does not apply here.


2.   Albeit other matters were raised on the grant of permission  to  appeal
    and there was an issue based on fairness, it is  not  necessary  to  go
    into those because Mr Duffy, as I say, very  fairly  and  properly  has
    recognised that in the light of that guidance it would be impossible to
    support the decision that leave should not be granted.

3.   Accordingly I simply need to do no more than allow this appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date: 10 June 2017

Mr Justice Collins

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

If a fee has been paid, a fee award will be made.

[pic]


Signed                                  Date: 10 June 2017
Mr Justice Collins
