

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/31665 /2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision & Reasons  Promulgated|
|On 4 September 2017                   |      On 11 September 2017           |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                            mansoor ahmed balochi
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr P Saini, of Counsel, instructed by House of
                 Immigration Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. The appellant challenges the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Price dismissing his appeal against the respondent's  refusal
         on 8 September 2015 to grant him leave to remain on  the  basis  of
         ten years of residence. The  determination  was  promulgated  on  9
         January 2016 following a hearing at Newport on 28 November 2016.


      2. The appellant is a Pakistani national born on 13  April  1975.  His
         application  was  refused  under  paragraph  322(5)   because   the
         respondent considered that he had relied on a false  document  from
         ETS in a previous application and  under  276ADE  (1)  (i),  (iii),
         (iv), (v) and (vi) because the  requirements  of  those  provisions
         were not met.



      3. The grounds are lengthy; at 14 pages, they are  five  pages  longer
         than the determination. They take  issue  with  the  issue  of  the
         respondent's discretion, the legal and evidential burden  of  proof
         upon  the  respondent,  the  failure  to  give  the  appellant   an
         opportunity to address the judge's concerns, the failure to  assess
         the evidence of  the  appellant's  language  skills,  the  unlawful
         consideration by the respondent of paragraph 322(5) and the judge's
         failure to properly consider article 8.



      4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Adio
         on 18 July 2017.



      5. At the hearing on 4 September 2017, I heard  submissions  from  the
         parties.



      6. Mr Saini expanded on his grounds. Details are set out in my  record
         of proceedings and the following is a brief  summary  of  what  was
         argued before me.



      7. On ground 1, Mr Saini submitted that the respondent's  exercise  of
         discretion had not  been  lawfully  assessed  by  the  judge.  With
         respect to ground  2,  he  submitted  that  whilst  the  judge  was
         entitled to rely on the respondent's generic evidence to find  that
         she had discharged  the  evidential  burden,  the  judge  erred  in
         relying on the same evidence to conclude that the legal burden  had
         been met. He submitted that there were many  ways  in  which  tests
         could be invalidated particularly in the test  centre  in  question
         where many tests would have been invalidated as a matter of  course
         due to the high level of fraud and the lack of trust in the centre;
         this should have been considered by the Tribunal. With  respect  to
         ground 3, the judge did not put matters of concern to the appellant
         at the hearing and very few questions had been  asked  of  him.  Mr
         Saini submitted that ground 4 was troubling in that the  judge  had
         disregarded the historic evidence of language ability  before  him.
         There should have been  an  assessment  of  the  historic  evidence
         which, if it had been undertaken,  may  have  led  to  a  different
         outcome. On ground 5 he submitted that there had been no assessment
         of the appellant's undesirability for the application of  paragraph
         322(5). Finally, on ground 6, the appellant's lawful stay  had  not
         been factored into the article 8 assessment. The matter  needed  to
         be re-heard by the First-tier Tribunal.


      8. Mr Wilding submitted  in  response  that  the  judge  had  properly
         considered the evidence and a paragraphs 42, 44, 46 and 47  reached
         a conclusion that was open to him and  was  not  susceptible  to  a
         perversity challenge. The judge's findings on deception were sound.
         He submitted that a consideration of the previous test  certificate
         in the bundle would not have assisted the appellant  as  there  are
         many reasons why a person would use a proxy.  With  regard  to  the
         appellant's conduct, the respondent relied on 322(5) as well as the
         character requirements under 275ADE. She  did  consider  exercising
         discretion however as the appellant has used  deception  to  obtain
         leave, it was difficult to see  why  he  should  benefit  from  the
         exercise of discretion and in any event  no  positive  factors  had
         been identified.  The guidance identified the  main  categories  of
         cases to which paragraph 322(5) applied; that did not mean  it  did
         not apply to other cases.  Whilst  the  judge  had  not  considered
         s.117B, this was not a material error as no  positive  factors  had
         been put forward. Consideration of the appellant's leave would  not
         assist as part of it was obtained by deception.



      9. Mr Saini replied. The French report relied on by the respondent was
         generic evidence and did not relate specifically to the  appellant.
         The finding that the appellant could  have  taken  the  test  at  a
         centre closer to his home was not based on  any  specific  evidence
         and was speculative. This was a matter that the judge  should  have
         put to  the  appellant.  Moreover,  the  contents  of  his  witness
         statement addressed the issue of why he needed to re-take the  test
         quickly and was not considered by the judge. Finally, it  could  be
         seen from the decision letter, which had not been before  Mr  Saini
         when he prepared the grounds,  and  which  had  just  come  to  his
         attention,  that  the  respondent  refused  the  application  under
         paragraph 322(2) and not 322(5). This  meant  that  the  judge  had
         proceeded to determine the case on a false premise.



     10. Mr Wilding responded briefly to the  last  point.  He  acknowledged
         that the judge had mistakenly referred to 322(5) but submitted that
         it made no difference to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  given  the
         findings on deception.



     11. Mr Saini submitted that an appeal had to be  determined  under  the
         correct rule. The decision was not defensible.



     12. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination  which
         I now give.



         Discussion and Conclusions




     13. The most glaring problem with this determination, as pointed out by
         Mr Saini when he saw  the  decision  letter,  was  that  the  judge
         determined the appeal under the wrong provisions of the rules.  The
         respondent refused the application under paragraph 322(2)  and  not
         322(5) as the judge maintains throughout his determination. I  have
         considered the record of proceedings  and  there  is  no  erroneous
         reference to 322(5) anywhere in the submissions recorded and I have
         to assume, therefore, that this error emanated from the judge.  Not
         only does this show a lack of care on the part of the judge in  the
         preparation of  his  determination  but  it  also  shows  that  the
         documentary evidence was not properly considered; had it been,  the
         judge would not have made such a glaring mistake.



     14. Whilst the judge accepted that the appellant had attended the  test
         centre on the date of the test, he appears to have  relied  heavily
         on the appellant's failure to explain why he had  been  in  such  a
         hurry to take the test that he chose to travel to a centre  so  far
         from where he lived (at 46). However, as Mr Saini  pointed  out  in
         his  submissions,  there  was  a  good  reason  provided   in   the
         appellant's witness statement which the judge does  not  appeal  to
         have considered at all. Additionally, had this been a matter  which
         concerned the judge, it  should,  in  fairness,  been  put  to  the
         appellant at the hearing so that he had an opportunity  to  explain
         his actions. Whilst I do not suggest that each and every matter  of
         concern can be put to an appellant at a hearing, this was a concern
         which clearly factored heavily in the dismissal of the  appeal  and
         should, therefore, have been canvassed in court.



     15. The judge also  accepted  that  the  evidence  in  respect  of  the
         appellant's language ability did raise questions as to why he would
         need to use a proxy test taker. However, he relied entirely upon MA
         (ETS-TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 00450 (IAC) to  conclude  that  the
         appellant did employ deception without providing any reasons why he
         preferred that over the appellant's evidence.



     16. The judge also failed to consider s.117B when assessing article  8.
         He was obliged to do so. As there has been no assessment of all the
         matters raised by the appellant in his witness statement and  other
         evidence, I cannot speculate on whether this would  have  made  any
         difference to the outcome of the appeal. It may possibly  have  had
         little if any impact but the difficulty is that there are  so  many
         matters on which the judge erred, that they  cannot  all  be  swept
         aside on  the  basis  that  they  were  not  material.  When  taken
         cumulatively, I cannot speculate on  whether  a  different  outcome
         would have been possible.



     17. These matters are enough to render the decision  unsustainable.  In
         the circumstances, I do not consider it necessary  to  address  the
         numerous other complaints made on behalf of the appellant.



     18. The decision is set aside in its entirety except  as  a  record  of
         proceedings and the matter is remitted  to  another  judge  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made on all issues.



    Decision


     19. The First-tier  Tribunal  made  material  errors  of  law  and  the
         decision to dismiss the appeal is set aside. The matter shall be re-
         heard by the First-tier Tribunal at a hearing to be arranged.



    Anonymity



     20. I was not asked to make an anonymity order and see no reason to  do
         so.

    Signed



       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 7 September 2017












