

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/31826/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Stoke-on-Trent                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On: 16th May 2016                         |On: 20th May 2016                |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SAGHIR AHMED
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:            Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:           Mr A. Khan, Whitestone Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a male national of  Pakistan  born  on  19th  January
    1984. This is an ETS case: that is to say a case where the Secretary of
    State has alleged that Mr Ahmed had used a proxy to  take  his  English
    language test, and that this deception  was  such  that  his  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant must be  curtailed  and  a
    decision made to remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant to s10  of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.


 2. On the 12th December 2014 the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Gladstone)
    allowed his appeal against those decisions.  She  heard  oral  evidence
    from the Respondent and had regard to the material before  her.  Having
    done so she found there to be insufficient evidence to  establish  that
    the Respondent had exercised deception.

 3. The Secretary of  State  now  has  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    decision of Judge Gladstone. There are two grounds of appeal:

              i) That she acted unfairly in refusing to allow the  Secretary
                 of State to rely on further evidence


             ii) That she  erred  in  placing  insufficient  weight  on  the
                 evidence that had been  submitted,  namely  the  statements
                 made by Peter  Millington  and  Rebecca  Collins.  She  had
                 described these statements as  generic;  the  Secretary  of
                 State disagrees.

 4. Before me Mr Mills realistically conceded that in light of the decision
    of McCloskey J in SM & Qadir (ETS Evidence - burden  of  proof)  [2016]
    UKUT  00299 (IAC)  he could not sustain  an  argument  on  ground  (ii)
    alone. However, if ground (i) was made out, the Secretary of State  had
    a case. That was because this concerned the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal to refuse the late application of the Secretary  of  State  to
    submit the 'spreadsheets' relating to the Respondent.  The HOPO on  the
    day had come to court with these documents but the Judge had refused to
    admit them.  The Secretary of State  now  submits  that  this  evidence
    would have linked the Respondent to the alleged deception in a way that
    the Millington and Collins statements had not, and that in refusing  to
    admit them the First-tier Tribunal deprived the Secretary of State of a
    fair hearing and therefore contrary to the interests of justice.




    My Findings


 5. Before me the parties agreed that the decision of the President in  the
    case of Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC)  had
    some relevance  to  the  issue  raised  by  ground  (i).  Although  the
    Secretary of State did not seek an adjournment, she made an application
    based on a plea of fair hearing. The headnote of Nwaigwe sets  out  the
    core guidance:


         If a Tribunal refuses to accede to  an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected party's  right
         to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284.

 6.  Mr  Mills  submitted  that  the  decision  to  refuse  to  admit   the
    spreadsheets  was  unfair.  The  First-tier   Tribunal   had   elevated
    expediency over all else, and had failed to consider the fact that  the
    Respondent could have had a fair hearing even  if those  documents  had
    been admitted into the evidence: this much is evidenced by the decision
    in Qadir.


 7. I appreciate the Secretary of State's concern. She had the documents at
    the hearing, without them she was doomed to fail, and this  went  to  a
    substantive matter of public policy, namely the stamping out  of  fraud
    in the immigration system.  Those are all cogent arguments  as  to  why
    the spreadsheets should have been admitted.

 8. A brief examination of the chronology, however, reveals that  there  is
    rather more to it.

 9. This matter first came before Judge Gladstone on the 27th October 2014.
    The then appellant (the Respondent before me) was represented by  a  Mr
    Muhammad, and the Secretary  of  State  by  an  experienced  Presenting
    Officer (HOPO), Mr Bilsland. Mr Bilsland explained that  the  Secretary
    of State had failed to comply with directions and that he had with  him
    no evidence with which to support the allegation of deception  made  in
    the notice of decision. The case had been on a 'float list' and so  had
    not been allocated to a HOPO in advance of the hearing.  That  was  why
    the omission had not been identified earlier. With apologies, he  asked
    that the matter be adjourned so  that  the  Secretary  of  State  could
    provide evidence.   Mr Muhammad pointed out that the decision had  been
    taken, and the appeal lodged, over two  months  earlier.  He  protested
    that the Secretary of State had had sufficient time to prepare her case
    and  objected  to  the  adjournment.   Judge  Gladstone  weighed  these
    competing arguments and decided to adjourn. In doing so  she  made  the
    following directions:

         "Respondent to file and serve the statement of Mr Peter  Millington
         dated 23rd June 2014 and Ms Rebecca Collins dated  23rd  June  2014
         together with any other evidence upon which she relies on or before
         the 6th November 2014"  (emphasis added)

10. The appeal came back before Judge Gladstone a month later, on the  27th
    November 2014. Coincidentally Mr Bilsland was the HOPO,  and  the  case
    had once again been placed on a float list. It was called  on  at  3pm.
    The Tribunal found that the Secretary of State had  complied  with  her
    direction to serve the statements of Millington and Collins.  They  had
    been filed and served under cover of letter dated 28th October 2014. No
    other evidence had been provided.  At  the  start  of  the  hearing  Mr
    Bilsland made an application. He asked that he be permitted  to  adduce
    the spreadsheets. They had been available previously but had  not  been
    admitted because of an "oversight".   The Respondent was represented by
    Mr Khan who objected that the Secretary of State had already been given
    more time, and had twice failed to comply with directions.  He  further
    pointed out that he had been at court that day since the morning but no
    representative of the Secretary of State had pointed out  to  him  that
    they would be making this application. They now sought to do so without
    notice and late in the day. He strenuously objected to the inclusion of
    the spreadsheets.


11. Judge Gladstone once again  weighed  these  competing  arguments.    At
    paragraphs 32-36  she  sets  out  her  deliberations.  She  decided  to
    proceed, having regard to the fact that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    already failed to comply with two sets of directions,  the  latter  one
    made by her and specifically directed at the missing evidence. It would
    not be fair and just to Mr Ahmed to proceed and she  was  concerned  to
    avoid any further delay. She  proceeded  to  hear  the  appeal  without
    giving permission for the spreadsheets to be admitted. As I note  above
    she allowed the  appeal,  finding  there  to  be  no  support  for  the
    allegation of deception. The statements produced were generic. Mr Ahmed
    had given evidence  before  her  in  English  and  had  maintained  his
    innocence. He had always complied with the conditions attached  to  his
    leave.

12. Having had regard to that chronology I  am  not  satisfied  that  Judge
    Gladstone acted unfairly in  refusing  that  further  application.  The
    question is whether the Secretary of State was deprived of her right to
    a fair hearing. The history of the appeal demonstrates that this cannot
    be so.  The initial directions were sent  out  on  the  14th  September
    2014.   On the 8th October 2014 the Secretary of State filed and served
    a bundle which contained no material relating to the alleged  deception
    bar the bare assertion made in the refusal letter and an interview with
    Mr Ahmed  in  which  he  asserted  that  he  had  taken  his  ETS  test
    personally, attending at Collwell College in Leicester  and  describing
    the contents of the test. So it was that Mr Bilsland was armed with  no
    evidence at all when he was sent into court on the 27th  October  2014.
    Given that the bundle had been served in compliance with directions the
    First-tier Tribunal would have been perfectly entitled  to  refuse  his
    application for an adjournment. It did not do so. In  fairness  to  the
    Secretary of State the Judge decided to give her another opportunity to
    produce  evidence.  The  directions  made  are  clear.   This  was  the
    Secretary of State's opportunity to remedy the defects in her case.  If
    there is complaint to be made, it is about  the  Secretary  of  State's
    failure to act, rather than the fairness of Judge Gladstone's decision.
    Her decision was one open to her on the  evidence  before  her  and  it
    cannot be said to have deprived  the  Secretary  of  State  of  a  fair
    hearing.


      Decisions

13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.


14. I was not asked to make a direction for anonymity and on  the  facts  I
    see no reasons to do so.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                17th May 2016
