
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/31280/2014
                                                               IA/31285/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 30 April 2015                             |On 7 May 2015                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                     Mrs Wenting Yang (First Appellant)
                     master zihan lin (Second Appellant)
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr. S. Karim, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Both appellants are citizens of China and the first  appellant  is  the
    mother of the second appellant.  The first  appellant  applied  to  the
    respondent for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  the  basis  of
    her,  and  the  second  appellant's  family  and  private  life.    The
    application was refused on 17 July 2014 because the respondent was  not
    satisfied that the appellants met the requirements of Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).  In  the
    alternative there were  no  exceptional  circumstances  that  justified
    consideration outside the Immigration Rules and the  refusal  of  leave
    would not result in unjustifiably harsh consequences.

 2. No  application  for  anonymity  has  been  previously  made  in  these
    proceedings and no such application was made before me today.  There is
    no reason for such an order being made.

 3. The first appellant was born and brought up in  China.   On  6  October
    2007 she arrived in the United Kingdom with leave to enter as a student
    which expired on 31 October 2008.  An extension was  granted  until  28
    February 2011.  The appellant was subsequently granted leave to  remain
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student until 20 April 2014.

 4. In February 2010, in the United Kingdom, the first  appellant  met  Mr.
    Tian Fu Lin.  Mr. Lin had arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  18  April
    2004 and subsequently claimed asylum.  It was recorded that having done
    so he then absconded and was not encountered until September 2008  when
    he was discovered working illegally in a restaurant.  At  the  time  he
    was encountered he was in possession of forged identity documents.  His
    asylum claim  was  refused  on  28  August  2014  and  I  was  told  in
    submissions today that his appeal had been initially dismissed but  was
    now remitted pending the outcome of the appeal before me.  Mr.  Lin  is
    the father of the second appellant and  the  first  appellant's  second
    child, Eric Fu Lin, born on 23 June 2014.  They all  live  together  in
    accommodation provided by Mr. Lin's employer in Peterborough.

 5. Following the refusal of their application the appellants appealed  and
    in a decision promulgated on 4 December 2014 Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal E. M. M. Smith dismissed their  appeals.   The  judge  did  so
    having been told at the outset of the hearing that it was conceded that
    neither appellant can meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.
    The judge then carried out a balancing exercise before  coming  to  the
    conclusions that he did and which are summarised at paragraph 32 of his
    decision.  That states:-

         "32. Taking into account the facts surrounding the appellants,  the
             position of Mr Lin, the case  law,  and  not  least  the  best
             interests of the children I am satisfied and so find there are
             simply no exceptional circumstances that justify consideration
             outside The  Rules.   There  is  nothing  exceptional  in  the
             appellant's (sic) case."

 6. The appellants sought permission to appeal Judge Smith's decision which
    was granted on 28 January 2015 by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Page.  His reasons for so granting were:-

         "1.  The appellants seek permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Smith)  who,  in  a
             decision  promulgated  on  4  December  2014,  dismissed   the
             appellants'  appeals  against  the  respondent's  decision  to
             refuse leave to remain on  the  basis  of  their  private  and
             family life in the United Kingdom.

         2.   Complaint is made in the grounds of appeal  that  the  judge's
             decision  is  'too  brief  and  inadequate',  particularly  in
             relation to the position of the  appellant's  (sic)  children.
             Secondly, the grounds for permission to appeal argue that  the
             judge failed to provide reasons as to why the first  appellant
             would not be  punished  and  eventually  sterilised  upon  her
             return to China due to the country's one child  policy.   This
             ground of appeal is arguable.  At paragraph 27 an (sic) 28  of
             the decision the judge has recorded that this point was raised
             and that it was argued that Mrs Yang  would  be  punished  and
             potentially sterilised.  The judge said that this was not part
             of the grounds of appeal  but  this  gained  traction  in  her
             witness statement.  There is record of  the  response  of  the
             respondent's representative to this at  paragraph  27  of  the
             decision.  However, at paragraph 28, where the judge  recorded
             that there was no evidence that Mrs Yang would be subjected to
             any form of discrimination, there is no  indication  that  the
             judge has adjudicated between the appellant and the respondent
             on the contested  issue  as  to  whether  Mrs  Yang  would  be
             punished and potentially sterilised upon return.  This  was  a
             one-stop appeal and it was behoven on the judge to make  clear
             findings about this.  As no clear findings have been made,  it
             follows that the appellants have identified an arguable  error
             of law in the judge's decision.  I find there is merit in this
             ground of appeal so permission to appeal is granted."

 7. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 8. In making his submissions Mr. Karim submitted that the judge had  erred
    in three ways.

 9. Firstly, that the judge erred in his consideration of the  welfare  and
    best interests of the children which was not set into  the  context  of
    China's "one child policy".  That there had been failure by  the  judge
    to take account of the country guidance case  of  AX  (family  planning
    scheme) China CG [2012] UKUT 00097 (IAC).  In particular the judge  had
    been deprived of the benefit of paragraph 6 of the head  note  to  that
    authority which states:-

         "It is unhelpful (and a mistranslation  of  the  Chinese  term)  to
         describe  the  Chinese  family  planning  scheme  as  a  'one-child
         policy', given the current vast range of  exceptions  to  the  'one
         couple, one child' principle. Special provision is made for 'double-
         single' couples, where both  are  only  children  supporting  their
         parents and their grandparents. The number of  children  authorised
         for a  married  couple,  ('authorised  children')  depends  on  the
         provincial regulations and  the  individual  circumstances  of  the
         couple.  Additional  children   are   referred   as   'unauthorised
         children'."

10. Secondly, the judge erred in not considering Article 8 outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules and in particular  failed  to  take  account  of  the
    authority of Nagre, R (on  application  of)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin).

11. Mr. Clarke argued that the risk of sterilisation had been  advanced  in
    the First-tier Tribunal and  was  raised  by  the  first  appellant  at
    paragraph 15 of her witness statement.  However, no evidence  had  been
    put before the judge which showed this  appellant  to  be  at  specific
    risk, for example by reason of there being a crackdown in  her  "Hukou"
    area, or any  other  evidence  in  relation  to  individual  risk.   He
    submitted that the burden was on the first appellant to prove her  case
    and there was no evidence either then or now that she would be  at  any
    individual risk.  He acknowledged that the judge's decision was  silent
    on this issue.  However, he cannot be said  to  have  materially  erred
    bearing in mind, in the absence of individual evidence, paragraph 11 of
    the head note to AX which suggests that in general for female returnees
    there is no real risk of forcible sterilisation.  Beyond that,  Section
    55 issues have been properly dealt with by the judge and whilst Article
    8 may not have  been  considered  outside  the  Rules  the  judge  has,
    nonetheless, in coming to the conclusions that he did, dealt  with  all
    issues that fell to be balanced within  any  Article  8  consideration.
    There was no evidence before the judge to enable him to find that there
    was  anything  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules  that  fell  to  be
    considered.

12. It is important to be alert to the fact that the burden of proof rested
    upon the appellants.  Both representatives  today  highlight  the  head
    note to the country guidance case of AX.  I appreciate that it may  not
    have been considered by the judge within  the  First-tier.   Mr.  Karim
    submitted that it was "Robinson obvious" that  the  judge  should  have
    given consideration to it.  Whilst in a specialist Tribunal that may be
    right it was nonetheless incumbent upon the appellants' advocate to put
    the case and provide  and  indicate  which  relevant  authorities  were
    relied on.  I also appreciate that the judge  may  have  erred  in  not
    making a formal finding  in  relation  to  whether  or  not  the  first
    appellant would be forcibly sterilised upon return.  However,  none  of
    these shortcomings or errors can be said to  be  material  upon  proper
    consideration of AX and the absence of evidence brought  by  the  first
    appellant to the First-tier Tribunal in relation to any individual risk
    that she might face.

13. Mr. Karim, thirdly, urged me to accept the judge had further  erred  in
    not considering paragraph 6 of the head note in AX.  It states:-

         "Any second child, even if authorised,  entails  the  loss  of  the
         family's SCP certificate. Loss of a family's SCP results in loss of
         privileged access to schools, housing, pensions  and  free  medical
         and contraceptive treatment. Education and medical treatment remain
         available but are no longer free."

    However, such an error is also not material in that if as a consequence
    of a second child there is a loss of the family's SCP  certificate  and
    privileged access to schools, housing, pensions and  free  medical  and
    contraceptive treatment, there is the alternative available in terms of
    education and medical treatment by making payment.

14. The judge,  contrary  to  Mr.  Karim's  submission  had  given  careful
    consideration to Section 55 considerations and the  relevant  authority
    of EV (Philippines) and Others [2014] EWCA Civ 874 the judge emphasises
    that a consideration of all the factors set out therein leads him to  a
    conclusion from the evidence that the best interests  of  the  children
    lie with being with their parents.  Neither  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom long enough to establish strong ties  to  the  United  Kingdom,
    either educationally, medically or to establish that there will be  any
    linguistic difficulties were they to return to China.

15. I appreciate again that it could be  argued  the  judge  erred  by  not
    giving consideration  to  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.
    However, this again is not material in light of the fact that  all  the
    issues that fell to  be  considered  within  the  Article  8  balancing
    exercise have been taken into account by the judge when coming  to  the
    conclusions that he did.  In particular the position  of  the  children
    and Section 55 considerations have been subsumed within that  analysis.



16. It is difficult  to  see  how  these  appellants  could  possibly  have
    succeeded in their appeals.  The first appellant  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom for temporary purposes and was always aware that at the end  of
    her visa she would have to return to her country  of  origin.   On  the
    basis of the limited evidence presented to the judge he was entitled to
    come to the conclusions that he did that there  would  be  no  risk  to
    either the first appellant or her family upon return to China.   Coming
    to those conclusions the judge took account of  the  first  appellant's
    husband's own circumstances as a failed asylum seeker and the  position
    of their two children.

17. There are no material errors within this decision.

Notice of Decision

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

19. I do not set aside the decision.

20. No anonymity order is made.






Signed                              Date 6 May 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



