

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: IA/31487/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                         |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 March 2018                           |On 14 March 2018                     |
|                                           |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                            RATSAMEETHARA SREESAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:                  Ms Barton instructed by SABZ Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:               Mr Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with permission against  a  decision  of  the
        First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 7 February 2017  in  which  that
        Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal of an
        application for further discretionary leave to remain as  a  spouse
        of her sponsor. The date of refusal is 1 September 2015.
     2. Having considered the reasons for refusal, grounds  of  appeal  and
        evidence made available, the Judge sets out conclusions in relation
        to the matter at [44 - 53] of the decision under challenge where it
        is written:








        Conclusions on Article 8


        44.  I take into account that this family can if they wish live  in
             Thailand. The family with the exception of Jessica has done so
             before. The right to respect  for  family  life  protected  by
             Article 8 ECHR does not convey a right to exercise that family
             life where ever one wishes. The sponsor  has  adult  children.
             They have their separate lives. The sponsor  has  lived  apart
             from them in Thailand by choice before. They  do  not  form  a
             barrier to the sponsor moving to Thailand with his family.


        45.  I take into account that the family life of the appellant  and
             sponsor has been developed in the United  Kingdom  at  a  time
             when the appellant's immigration status was precarious.


        46.  I take into account that there are other options open  to  the
             appellant. She could make a new application as the  spouse  of
             the sponsor. She would have to provide the necessary  evidence
             and show that she met the financial requirements  of  Appendix
             FM. She may not be able to do so but that is not a matter that
             I can determine now. It is reasonable for  the  respondent  to
             require the appellant to make the appropriate application,  in
             the correct form, at the correct time, and  supported  by  the
             correct evidence to enable a reasoned decision to be made upon
             her application.


        47.  The sponsor, the appellant, or both of them may have  to  find
             jobs. No evidence has been put before me to  show  any  reason
             why they should not do so. Many people in the  United  Kingdom
             have to work in order to support themselves. The  requirements
             are the same for most partners seeking leave to remain in  the
             United Kingdom. The interference with the family life  of  the
             appellant and the sponsor  is  in  reality  no  more  than  to
             require them to comply with the same  Immigration  Rules  that
             everyone else in their situation has to.


        48.  It may not be necessary for the appellant to leave the  United
             Kingdom in order to make  her  application.  She  is  lawfully
             here. Even if she did have to return to Thailand to  make  her
             application she could make it quickly. The  interference  with
             family life would be limited. She could if she wished take the
             two  children  with  her  on  a  temporary  basis  whilst  the
             application was made. She has family members in Thailand  with
             whom she would be able to stay  and  who  would  no  doubt  be
             delighted to see her  and  the  two  children.  In  any  event
             subject to compliance with its legal requirements  the  United
             Kingdom is not under any obligation to allow an alien  seeking
             leave to remain in the country  to  remain  in  its  territory
             whilst the application is dealt with.


        49.  I take into account those matters that I must have  regard  to
             by virtue of section 117B of the Immigration, Nationality  and
             Asylum Act 2002. The appellant has produced no  evidence  that
             she has ever passed any English language test. Her English  is
             on her own  admission  poor.  She  gave  evidence  through  an
             interpreter. It is in the public interest that those who  seek
             to remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak  English  as
             they will be less of a burden on taxpayers and better able  to
             integrate into society.


        50.  It is in the public interest that people  who  seek  leave  to
             remain in the United Kingdom are financially independent.  The
             appellant is not. The sponsor is not working. It is reasonable
             for the appellant to  demonstrate  that  she  will  not  be  a
             financial  burden  to  the  taxpayer   in   respect   of   her
             accommodation, maintenance, and care.


        51.       The maintenance of effective immigration  control  is  in
        the public interest.


        52.   These  matters  count  heavily  against  the  appellant  when
             assessing the question of  proportionality.  Whilst  I  accept
             that the appellant has a family life  in  the  United  Kingdom
             which is interfered with by the decision under appeal and that
             Article 8 ECHR  is  engaged,  I  find  that  the  decision  is
             legitimate. I further find that such interference is necessary
             in a democratic society both for the  economic  well-being  of
             the country and for the protection of the rights and  freedoms
             of others and that the interference is proportionate to  these
             legitimate public ends  on  the  facts  of  this  appeal.  The
             appellant does not succeed under Article 8 ECHR.


        53.  The appellant does not argue that she can succeed on the basis
             of a private life either under Article 8 or paragraph 276 ADE.


     3. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  grounds  that  are,
        frankly, substandard and prepared without any attention to  detail.
        The tribunal is grateful to  Ms  Barton  whose  first  job  was  to
        establish which of  the  grounds  applied  to  the  decision  under
        challenge. Ms Barton confirmed it was paragraphs 1 to  4  only  and
        that 5 to 10 related to a completely different decision.
     4. The applicable grounds assert the following:


        2.   The IJ findings in paragraph 24 are erroneous and  vague.  The
             Appellant was previously granted discretionary leave to remain
             in the UK, under the rules in place before July 2012.  In  the
             circumstances, she had no reason to lie about her relationship
             with Mr Chay  and  in  fact  this  would  have  benefited  her
             application because she would have been granted  discretionary
             leave to remain in the UK due to no  change  of  circumstances
             since the last discretionary leave to remain.


        3.   Similarly, the IJ findings in paragraph 28 are  erroneous  and
             it makes it apparent that the IJ has drawn  adverse  inference
             in  her  case  because  she  failed   to   provide   requested
             information to the Home Office. The Appellant sent a  detailed
             statement to the Home Office dated 05/03/2014 (in respondent's
             bundle) explaining the problems of her  relationship  and  her
             inability to provide requested information to the Home Office.
             There  was  nothing  adverse  on  file  to  suggest  that  the
             Appellant has  been  dishonest  in  her  communication  and/or
             witness statements.


        4.   The IJ has attached less weight to the fact that the Appellant
             is the mother of her two minor British national  children  and
             she maintains regular contact and parental  relationship  with
             them.

     5. Permission to appeal was granted by a judge of the  Upper  Tribunal
        on the basis it is arguable the Judge did not take into account the
        appellant's witness statement of 5 March 2014.





Error of law


     6. At [24] the Judge found:


        24.  I have seen the appellant and the sponsor and have heard  what
             they have to say. I  do  not  believe  them.  The  absence  of
             independent evidence to  show  that  they  have  had  separate
             addresses and that the conduct  of  the  appellant  throughout
             these proceedings leads me to doubt that the situation  is  as
             she says it is. The most likely explanation for a husband  and
             wife living in the same house with their children is that they
             are in a marital relationship. That is  what  I  find  on  the
             evidence before me. They are not living separately  under  the
             same roof. They are living together in a genuine  relationship
             as a family.


     7. It is not made out that such findings are erroneous and vague.  The
        appellant may have been granted discretionary leave  to  remain  on
        the basis of the rules prior to July 2012 and may have been able to
        make an application for further discretionary leave the same basis,
        but no such application was made. The appellant chose to  make  the
        application for discretionary leave pursuant  to  Article  8.  Even
        though the appellant may have had an entitlement under another head
        it was not pursued and it does not automatically follow that  there
        was no reason for the appellant not  to  be  less  than  honest  in
        relation to her evidence. The finding at [24] is an  assessment  by
        the Judge having seen and heard both  the  appellant  and  sponsor.
        Even if there may have been no requirement to mislead this  is  the
        impression the witnesses gave the Judge. It is also the  case  that
        the finding by the Judge that things were not as was being claimed,
        as the appellant and sponsor were living together as man and  wife.
        This finding is supported by a statement prepared for the  purposes
        of the current proceedings in which both the appellant and  sponsor
        refer to earlier difficulties in their relationship but that  since
        June 2016 they have reconciled and been living together as  husband
        and wife. There appears arguable merit in the finding of the  Judge
        that the claim they were not living as man and wife  was  not  true
        when they themselves admit that they were. No arguable legal  error
        is made out on this ground.
     8. At [28] the Judge finds:


        28.  I find that the real reason that she refused to  provide  this
             information was that she did not think  that  her  application
             could succeed on  the  basis  of  the  information  she  could
             provide. The respondent was entitled to know  the  basis  upon
             which the application was being put. If the appellant expected
             to have her  application  properly  considered  there  was  an
             obligation on her to provide the  information  requested.  She
             did not do so.


     9. The Judge found in the preceding paragraph:


        27.  She could meet the partner route on the  basis  of  the  facts
             which I have found. However I find that the appellant does not
             meet  the  suitability  requirements  of  S-LTR.1.7.(b).   She
             failed to provide information without reasonable excuse.  This
             is a mandatory ground for refusal.  The  respondent  requested
             that  the  appellant  to   provide   information   about   her
             circumstances on two separate occasions. She did not do so. On
             the  first  occasion  she  said  that  she  had   difficulties
             obtaining documents. On the second occasion on 4  August  2015
             she requested an  extension  of  time  as  she  did  not  have
             sufficient time to prepare the original documentation.


    10. The Judge also finds at [17]:


             "To  give   the   appellant's   case   its   most   charitable
             interpretation she has been economical  with  the  truth.  Her
             original application which was made on 7 March 2014 was on the
             basis that she was in a marital relationship with the  sponsor
             and lived with her two children. She  confirmed  that  in  her
             statement  dated  5   March   2014   which   accompanied   the
             application.


    11. The Judge noted that the response of 4 August 2015 asking for  more
        time did not include any reference to the fact  the  appellant  was
        separated from her husband at that time. The statement of  5  March
        2014 speaks about difficulties in the relationship and at paragraph
        8 contains the following:


             "My representative has asked me to provide evidence in support
             of my case like the previous Home Office papers,  my  marriage
             certificate, and the children's birth certificates  but  Henry
             seems to have hidden all of these. I have tried to look around
             the house for them when he is not looking  but  I  could  only
             find some copies. This is why do not  have  this  evidence.  I
             confirm though that I  am  still  married  to  Henry  and  our
             marriage is subsisting, although we  are  fighting  just  now.
             Also I continue to live with  my  two  young  children.  I  am
             responsible for their  day-to-day  along  with  their  father.
             Despite all the problems with me and Henry, he is a  good  dad
             and I want our children to grow up with both of their parents,
             so we will stay together."


    12. It is arguable, as Ms Barton submitted, that the appellant in  that
        statement did provide an explanation for why she could not  produce
        the documents requested by the respondent. It  has  not  been  made
        out, however, that this is an issue determinative of the appeal  or
        establishes arguable legal error in relation to the findings  based
        upon the oral evidence of the appellant and her sponsor  and  other
        material considered as a whole.
    13. Ground 3 claiming the Judge attached less weight to  the  fact  the
        appellant is the mother of her two minor British national  children
        is a weight challenge. The weight to be given to the evidence was a
        matter for the Judge. The Judge considered the  evidence  with  the
        required degree of anxious scrutiny and has made findings that  are
        adequately reasoned.
    14. In her submissions Ms Barton submitted  the  Judge  had  failed  to
        consider section 55. This submission is without arguable  merit  as
        the Judge specifically considers  the  interests  of  the  children
        between [30 - 43] of the  decision  under  challenge.  The  heading
        appearing after [30] is "The Welfare of the  Children".  The  Judge
        also poses the question "Is it reasonable to expect the children to
        leave the United Kingdom?" indicating these were issues clearly  in
        the mind of the Judge.
    15. There is consideration of the children  and  the  circumstances  of
        this family leading in the decision, leading to it being  concluded
        as provided above. The finding the appellant was not able  to  meet
        the requirements of the Immigration Rules is factually correct.  Mr
        Harrison's submission that the appellant in fact went  out  of  her
        way to try and circumvent the Rules is a finding that  is  open  to
        the Judge on the basis of the evidence.
    16. The Judge noted that the children are looked after by both  parents
        and that even if the appellant herself was removed there will be no
        compulsion for the children to leave the territory  of  the  United
        Kingdom or the European Union. The respondents published policy  in
        relation to British national children with non-national parents  is
        in the public domain.
    17. The advocates were asked to consider  what  countervailing  factors
        exist that may make this case one in  which  it  is  reasonable  to
        expect the children to leave the United Kingdom. A strong factor is
        what appears to be the deliberate attempt to circumvent  the  rules
        by the appellant who would have been  aware  of  her  inability  to
        satisfy the same as well as the section 117 factors  identified  by
        the Judge. The respondent's decision sets out a number of  concerns
        that arise including it being noted the appellant had not  provided
        evidence to show the children's welfare or safety will be adversely
        affected by the decision.
    18.  The  best  interests  of  the  children  were  factored  into  the
        assessment and it  found  their  welfare  would  not  be  adversely
        affected by going with their parents to Thailand. The  Judge  noted
        the fact the children are British Citizen's, length of  time  spent
        in the United Kingdom, which were identified  as  very  significant
        factors, but found their welfare would not  be  adversely  affected
        were they to travel to Thailand with their parents [38].
    19. What this matter comes down to  is  the  question  of  whether  the
        Judge's conclusions in  relation  to  the  proportionality  of  the
        decision are within the range of findings reasonably  open  to  the
        Judge on the evidence. The fact the children are British  nationals
        is not an absolute bar to their leaving the United Kingdom and  the
        Judge clearly factored in all relevant aspects  into  the  equation
        before coming to the conclusion under challenge.
    20. In relation to this matter, I find it has not been established that
        the decision is outside the range of those reasonably available  to
        the Judge on  the  evidence.  As  such  this  tribunal  should  not
        interfere with  the  decision.  The  appellant  may  not  like  the
        decision but it has not been shown it is affected by arguable legal
        error to a material degree that enables this tribunal to intervene.

Decision

    21. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    22. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed
Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 13 March 2018









