
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31183/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16th May 2014                                |On 6th August 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                              MR Mubarak PATEL
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Holt, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Mr Mubarak Patel a citizen of India born  on  20th
    December 1982.  The Appellant has a very extensive  immigration history
    which is set out in detail at paragraph 4 of  the  reason  for  refusal
    letter dated 12th July 2013.  In brief the Appellant entered the United
    Kingdom on 15th June 2003 with a spousal visa valid from 19th May  2003
    until 19th May 2005.  Between May 2005 and 4th May 2011  the  Appellant
    appears to have remained in the United Kingdom as an overstayer and  on
    4th  May  2011  he  was  arrested  by  Greater  Manchester  Police  who
    subsequently referred  him  to  the  Home  Office  in  respect  of  his
    immigration status.  The history is set out  in  detail  thereafter  at
    paragraph 4 of the reason for refusal letter but on 21st June 2013  the
    Appellant submitted an application for indefinite leave  to  remain  in
    the  United  Kingdom  as  the  victim  of  domestic   violence.    That
    application was refused on 12th July 2013.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ransley sitting  at  Manchester  on  20th  November
    2013.  In a  determination   promulgated  on  27th  November  2013  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed under the Immigration  Rules  but  was
    allowed on the basis that  the  Respondent's  decision  to  remove  the
    Appellant would breach Section 55 of the UK Borders and Immigration Act
    2009 and was disproportionate by reference to Article 8(2) of the ECHR.



 3. On 6th December 2013 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds asserted that  the  Immigration  Judge
    had materially misdirected herself in law with regard to  her  analysis
    of Article 8 and that it was still the case that decisions pursuant  to
    the lawful operation of immigration control will  be  proportionate  on
    all save the minority of exceptional cases identifiable on  a  case-by-
    case basis.  Further it was contended that  the  judge  had  materially
    misdirected herself in law and had found that a preference test for the
    Appellant to remain with the family constituted  best  interests  under
    Section 55 which was the wrong test.

 4. On 14th January 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane granted permission
    to appeal.  The judge considered that generally the  grounds  reflected
    no more than  a  disagreement  with  the  findings  of  Judge  Ransley,
    findings which were properly open to her on the evidence  presented  to
    her and accordingly disclosed no arguable error of law.  However  Judge
    Keane noted that it was also contended in the grounds  that  the  judge
    did not identify those exceptional circumstances which she had in  mind
    in finding that the removal of the Appellant from  the  United  Kingdom
    would interfere with his right to respect for family life under Article
    8 of the Human Rights Convention.  He considered that  it  was  perhaps
    not incumbent upon the judge to refer to "exceptional circumstances" as
    long as the circumstances which she mentioned in her assessment of  the
    proportionality of the decision under appeal were indeed exceptional.

 5.  Judge  Keane  considered  that  a  careful  reading  of  the   judge's
    determination suggested that the judge had  in  mind  the  family  life
    which the Appellant had formed with his sister Sabiha and Sabiha's five
    children after he moved into their home in July 2006.   If  those  were
    the exceptional circumstances which the judge had in mind when striking
    the balance in favour of the Appellant he considered that she  made  an
    arguable error of law but for which the outcome  of  the  appeal  might
    have been different and that the application for permission was granted
    but limited to that ground.

 6. No Rule 24 response appears  to  have  been  lodged  in  reply  by  the
    Appellant's instructed  solicitors.   For  the  purpose  of  continuity
    throughout  the  proceedings  Mr  Mubarak  is  referred  to   in   this
    determination as the Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.  The Respondent appears by his instructed Counsel Mr  Holt.
    Mr Holt is familiar with this matter having appeared before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of  State  appears  by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Harrison.

Submission

 7. Mr Harrison  acknowledges  that  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  predate  the
    decision in Gulshan but do make reference to R (Nagre)  v  SSHD  [2013]
    EWHC 720 but the issue before me  is  whether  or  not  the  judge  has
    identified exceptional circumstances.  He  relies  on  the  grounds  of
    appeal and accepts the view expressed by Judge Keane that in  the  main
    the  decision  of  Judge  Ransley  is  well-reasoned  but  (to  use  Mr
    Harrison's words) "she subsumed Section  55  of  the  2009  Act  within
    Article 8."  The Secretary of  State  considers  that  the  Immigration
    Judge has failed to take  into  account  that  the  best  interests  of
    children are to remain with their mother in the UK and that whilst they
     may enjoy the Appellant's presence it is not necessary to  their  best
    interests.  He points out that  the  Immigration  Judge  has  not  made
    findings  as  to  whether  the  Appellant's  sister  could  obtain  the
    necessary level of support from another family  member  in  the  UK  to
    enable her to parent the children effectively.   He  asked  me  to  set
    aside the decision of Judge Ransley and to remit the  decision  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

 8. Mr Holt starts by stating that it is  difficult  within  the  grant  of
    permission to see any error of law, although it is contended  that  the
    judge has failed to identify "in exceptional circumstances" but  states
    that there could be family life maintained by the  Appellant  with  his
    sister and her children and takes me to paragraph  34  of  the  judge's
    determination.  He states that the relationship is accepted by Dr Moore
    in his report and points out that Mr  Harrison  when  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer before the First-tier  Tribunal  only  made  a  very
    limited challenge to Dr Moore's report and that  he  did  not  seek  to
    challenge Dr Moore's assessment regarding the  impact  of  the  removal
    directions on the children.   That  was  noted  by   Immigration  Judge
    Ransley and he submits that that was a conclusion she was  entitled  to
    reach.  He asked me to find that there is no material error of law  and
    to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. The challenge made herein by the Secretary of State is that  the  judge
    has materially misdirected herself  with  regard  to  her  analysis  of
    Article 8 and that the judge should not have allowed the appeal outside
    the Immigration Rules.  Certain facts however have to  be  acknowledged
    in this matter.  The first of these  is  that  this  determination  was
    produced in November 2013 before a considerable number  of  cases  were
    determined to provide guidance both to judges and practitioners  as  to
    what constituted exceptional circumstances that would enable a judge to
    allow a case under Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules.   Secondly
    the issue arises as to whether the Respondent's decision to remove  the
    Appellant  would  breach  Section  55  of   the   2009   Act   and   is
    disproportionate by reference to Article 8(2) of the ECHR.

12. These issues are addressed by Immigration Judge Ransley at paragraph 34
    of her determination.  She made findings of fact that the Appellant had
    been in his sister's house since July 2006 a period of some seven years
    at date of decision and that the Appellant formed a strong family  life
    with her and her five children aged respectively 14 to 9   at  date  of
    decision and consequently were aged between 7 and 2 at the date that he
    moved in.  Certainly so far as the younger children are concerned there
    can be little doubt that the Appellant  has  provided  the  predominant
    father figure  for  the  children  throughout  their  lives.   This  is
    acknowledged by Judge Ransley at paragraph 34.  She has  accepted  that
    Dr Moore's report is well-reasoned  and  that  the  removal  directions
    would seriously prejudice the best interests  of  the  children.   This
    factor was not challenged by Mr Harrison for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and that is acknowledged at paragraph 30.

13. In LD [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC) the Tribunal stated:-

         "The interests of the  minor  children  and  their  welfare  are  a
         primary consideration in the balance of competing considerations in
         this  case  and  their  educational  welfare  as  part  of  the  UK
         educational system point strongly to their continued residence here
         as necessary to promote those interests."

14. It is, of course, well-established that, where the Appellant is in  the
    UK and removal will interfere with the family life/private life he (and
    since Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39 his family)  already  enjoy  in
    the UK, then Article 8 can be engaged.  In Ullah and Do [2004] UKHL  26
    the House of Lords accepted that Article  8  could,  in  principle,  be
    relied upon if the effect was that the infringement of the  Appellant's
    rights would occur in the country to which he was to be removed.

15. The law was recently considered in Zoumbas v the Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74.  Paragraph 10 of that determination
    sets out the basic principles the court needs to follows:

        a. the best interests of a  child  are  an  integral  part  of  the
           proportionality assessment under Article 8 ECHR;

        b. in making that assessment, the best interests of a child must be
           a primary consideration although not  always  the  only  primary
           consideration;  and  the  child's  best  interests  do  not   of
           themselves have the status of paramount consideration;

        c. although the best interests of a child can be outweighed by  the
           cumulative   effect   of   other   considerations,   no    other
           consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;

        d. while different judges might approach the question of  the  best
           interests of a child in different ways, it is important  to  ask
           oneself the right questions in an orderly  manner  in  order  to
           avoid the risk that the best  interests  of  a  child  might  be
           undervalued when other important considerations were in play;

        e. it is important to have a clear idea of a child's  circumstances
           and of what is in a  child's  best  interests  before  one  asks
           oneself whether those interests are outweighed by the  force  of
           other considerations;

        f. to that end there is no substitute for a careful examination  of
           all relevant factors when the interests of a child are  involved
           in an Article 8 assessment; and

        g. a child must not be blamed for matters for which he  or  she  is
           not responsible such as the conduct of a parent.

16. The above sets out the law and whilst  Zoumbas  postdates  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal  and  gives  added  clarity  as  to  the
    approach to be adopted by the judiciary it is clear that the judge  has
    given full consideration to all competing factors and the interests  of
    the children in reaching her determination.

17. Further it is accepted herein that the Appellant cannot  succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules.  The judge has gone on to consider  this  matter
    under Article 8 and has provided a detailed and thorough  analysis.   I
    acknowledge that MF Nigeria [2013] EWCA Civ 1121 confirms that the  new
    Rules are a complete code and  consequently  if  an  appeal  is  to  be
    allowed under Article 8 it is necessary that exceptional  circumstances
    considered in the balancing exercise involving  the  application  of  a
    proportionality test.

18. The Tribunal in Gulshan made clear and  has  repeated  subsequently  in
    Shahzad  (Article  8:  legitimate  aim)  [2014]  UKUT  00085  (IAC)  at
    paragraph (31):

         "Where an  area  of  the  rules  does  not  have  such  an  express
         mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)  ([29]-[31]  in  particular
         and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT
         640 (IAC) should be followed: i.e. after applying the  requirements
         of the rules, only if  there  may  be  arguably  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them."

19. In this instant case the judge when considering Article  8  has  looked
    very carefully at the impact of removing the Appellant bearing in  mind
    his relationship with his nieces  and  nephews.   Whilst  acknowledging
    that the judge has not adhered in detail to the concept of  exceptional
    circumstances purely because the authorities were  not  before  her  at
    that  time  she  has  given  due  consideration  both  to  the  factual
    circumstances and comprehensive report of Dr Moore.   She  has  recited
    within the  determination  Dr  Moore's  conclusion  that  the  enforced
    removal of the Appellant would have a  lasting  negative  psychological
    effect on the children, that the appellant has effectively  a  paternal
    relationship with the younger children and has  gone  on  to  note  the
    impact on the  children  that  removal  of  the  Appellant  would  have
    particularly bearing in mind the fact that the Appellant's sister  (the
    mother of the children) is receiving medical help  for  stress  related
    mental health difficulties.  Judge Ransley confirms  that  she  has  no
    reason to disagree with the assessment and conclusions made by Dr Moore
    nor indeed the Home Office Presenting Officer.  In  such  circumstances
    applying the relevant case law particularly ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4
    the judge has made findings of fact that she is entitled to.  I am  not
    determining whether or nor I, or any other judge, would  have  come  to
    the same conclusions.  The question is was there a  material  error  of
    law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   There  is  nothing
    within her determination to show that the decision  is  perverse.   The
    decision discloses no material error of law and in  such  circumstances
    the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  a  material
    error of law.  The appeal is dismissed and the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal is maintained.

21. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           31st July 2014


