
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: IA/31141/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 29 September 2015              On 1 June 2016


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                  Appellant
                                                         and

                                                         EBS

                       (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                            Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:           Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Balroop, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

1.    This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made by the First-tier
      Tribunal. Neither party invited me to rescind the order. I continue it
      pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).


Background

2.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      (hereafter "the Secretary of State") against the decision of  a  panel
      of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) (Judge M Loughbridge and  Judge  N  J
      Osbourne). On 21  April  2015  the  FtT  allowed  the  appeal  of  EBS
      (hereafter "the claimant") against a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
      State dated 7 July  2014  giving  directions  for  his  removal  under
      section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

3.    The claimant arrived in the United Kingdom in 1998 accompanied by  his
      uncle. On arrival his uncle seized his passport and he was put to work
      as a  labourer.  In  2001/2002  the  claimant's  uncle  was  shot  and
      paralysed in Ghana during a business trip. He never  returned  to  the
      United Kingdom. Subsequently, his  uncle's  girlfriend  asked  him  to
      leave the home and he was taken in by  his  mother's  half  sister.  A
      subsequent application to remain with her as a family member under  EU
      law was refused on 5 February 2009. The claimant began a  relationship
      with a woman he had known since 2006 and began  cohabiting  with  her.
      The relationship broke down in 2012 and the claimant went to live with
      an aunt. In April 2013 the claimant met a woman on an internet  dating
      site. Initial contact was by telephone and in June 2013  they  met  in
      person. The relationship progressed and in  2014  the  claimant  moved
      into his partner's home which she shared with her  youngest  son.  The
      claimant developed a close relationship with  his  partner's  son  and
      took on the  role  of  a  father-figure. In  the  circumstances,  the
      claimant argued that removal would be a disproportionate  interference
      with his established family and private life.

The Decision of the FtT

4.    The FtT heard evidence from the claimant and  his  partner  and  found
      that their evidence was credible and compelling [17]. Based  on  their
      evidence the FtT was satisfied that their relationship was genuine and
      further accepted that there was a genuine father/son type relationship
      between the  claimant  and  his  partner's  son.  The  FtT  noted  the
      vulnerable status of the claimant's partner when they first met -  she
      was suffering from depression and stress  as  a  result  of  financial
      problems, lack of family support and a subsequent breakdown [17].  The
      FtT accepted the claimant's presence had had a positive impact on  his
      partner's mental health and on her son's, particularly in  respect  of
      his education. The FtT observed the closeness of the family  unit  but
      accepted that in all likelihood the relationship would come to an  end
      if the claimant was required  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  as  the
      claimant's partner would remain in the UK with her minor son. The  FtT
      found that the son was an insurmountable obstacle to the claimant  and
      partner continuing family life together in Ghana [25].

5.    The FtT next turned to consider the Immigration Rules  with  reference
      to paragraph EX.1.(b) and EX.2. of Appendix FM, and concluded that the
      Exception therein applied on account  of  their  being  insurmountable
      obstacles to family life continuing in Ghana as a consequence  of  the
      partner's minor son whose interest lay in the United Kingdom. The  FtT
      thus  found  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  not  in
      accordance with the law and Immigration Rules [25].

6.    The FtT proceeded to consider Article 8 outside of the Rules. The  FtT
      found that removal would amount to an  interference  with  family  and
      private  life.  It  observed  that  paramount  to  the   question   of
      proportionality was the best interests of the partner's son.  The  FtT
      noted that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  undertaken  a  proper
      assessment of the best interests of the child in accordance  with  her
      duties under section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration
      Act 2009,  as  her  decision  was  founded  upon  her  view  that  the
      relationship between the claimant and partner was not genuine. The FtT
      thus concluded that the Secretary of State  was  required  to  make  a
      "proper section 55 assessment". The FtT further observed that "... the
      importance  of  [the  son]  relationship  with  the  Appellant  is  so
      overwhelming that it is likely to be disproportionate  to  remove  the
      Appellant from the UK", and gave a strong indication, as the  claimant
      continued to have an, "... extremely positive impact on [the son] at a
      critical stage of his formative years", that there  was  "...  A  very
      strong case ... for the Appellant being permitted to remain in the UK"
      [37].

      Thus the FtT allowed the appeal "under the Immigration Rules  and  the
      ECHR to the extent that  it  is  remitted  to  the  Respondent  for  a
      decision taking proper account  of  [the  son]  best  interests  under
      section 55."

7.    The Secretary of State appealed. Permission to appeal was  granted  by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin on 25 June 2015.

8.    The matter came before me to determine whether the FtT erred in law.

Decision on Error of Law

9.    Whilst I agree with Mr Avery that there is a degree of  confusion  and
      error in the decision  of  the  FtT,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
      infelicities are material such  that  it  vitiates  the  decision  and
      requires it to be set aside.

10.   The grounds of appeal argue essentially that the FtT  failed  to  take
      into account and/or resolve conflicts of fact or opinion  on  material
      matters raised in the refusal letter. The grounds point out  that  the
      FtT failed to consider that the Secretary of State took issue with the
      absence of evidence confirming the identity of the claimant's partner.
      Mr Avery, rightly, did not pursue that challenge as the FtT had before
      it a copy of the partner's passport.

11.   The grounds also advance a reasons challenge in respect of  the  FtT's
      finding at [17] that the relationship between  the  claimant  and  his
      partner was genuine and subsisting and, further state that  there  was
      no corroboration from any third party, and that,  the  FtT  failed  to
      take into account the claimant's poor immigration history. I find that
      there is no merit in these grounds. The FtT had the benefit of hearing
      oral evidence from the claimant and his partner. The FtT  found  their
      evidence  was  "entirely  credible"  and  considered  that  they  gave
      "compelling oral evidence".  The  FtT  was  aware  of  the  claimant's
      immigration history and made reference to the level of detail  of  the
      evidence and gave two examples which supported  its  conclusion.  That
      conclusion was clearly supported by the evidence before the FtT  which
      it made detailed reference to at [8] to [14]. The  conclusion  of  the
      FtT was thus sufficiently reasoned and was entirely open to it on  the
      evidence. Further,  there  was  no  requirement  to  corroborate  that
      evidence by reference to a third party. I find that the grounds amount
      to a disagreement with the FtT's findings and identify no error of law
      in its approach.

12.   Where the FtT did fall into error was in respect of  the  approach  it
      adopted to its consideration of the appeal under the Exception to  the
      Immigration Rules, there being no dispute  that  the  requirements  of
      Appendix FM were not met. The FtT found that the  decision  to  remove
      the claimant was "not in accordance with the law  and  the  applicable
      Immigration Rules" because the partner's  son  was  an  insurmountable
      obstacle to family life continuing outside the  United  Kingdom  [25].
      The FtT, however, failed to recognise that the claimant's partner  was
      not a qualifying partner under Appendix FM because their  relationship
      did not meet the definition of a "partner"  under  the  provisions  of
      Gen.1.2(iv), which requires  the  claimant  to  have  lived  with  his
      partner for at least two years prior to the date of  application.  The
      evidence before the FtT was that the couple had  cohabited  from  mid-
      2014, which was around the time the claimant made his application. The
      claimant therefore could  not  benefit  from  the  provisions  of  the
      Exception and the FtT was wrong to conclude otherwise. I shall turn to
      consider the materiality of this error in due course.

13.   The FtT then proceeded to consider Article 8  outside  of  the  Rules.
      Applying the principles in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, the FtT  found  that
      there was an interference with family and private life. Next, the  FtT
      set out its observations in  respect  of  proportionality  and  stated
      that, if its consideration was limited to  the  human  rights  of  the
      claimant and his partner, then it was not disproportionate  to  remove
      the claimant as it was reasonable to expect the partner to relocate to
      Ghana [35]. However, the FtT considered that this was  an  "artificial
      assessment" because the  decision-maker  had  failed  to  undertake  a
      proper section 55 assessment of  the  son's  best  interests  who  was
      clearly "a very important part" of the "overall picture"  because  the
      decision was "entirely premised on  the  Respondent's  view  that  the
      relationships between the Appellant and [partner/son] are not genuine,
      meaning that  any  section  55  assessment  would  be  an  essentially
      meaningless and hollow exercise. Given that the Tribunal has reached a
      different conclusion of the facts, a proper section 55  assessment  is
      now required." [36]

14.   Next at [37] the FtT considered that  it  was  not  for  it  to  be  a
      primary decision-maker  and  went  on  to  indicate  its  view  as  to
      proportionality and stated the following: "It is not for this Tribunal
      to be a primary decision-maker  regarding  a  section  55  assessment.
      However, we do take this opportunity to indicate that, in our opinion,
      the importance of [the son's] relationship with the  Appellant  is  so
      overwhelming that it is likely to be disproportionate  to  remove  the
      Appellant from the  UK".  The  FtT  summarised  its  conclusion  thus:
      "Overall, the Appellant has had, and continues to have,  an  extremely
      positive impact on [the son] at a  critical  stage  of  his  formative
      years. This leads to  a  very  strong  case,  in  our  view,  for  the
      Appellant being permitted to remain in the UK.  We  recognise  however
      that our indication is no more than guidance and is not binding on the
      Respondent."  [My Emphasis]

15.   In its omnibus conclusion at [40] the FtT stated :

      "In the light of the above conclusions,  we  find  that  the  Decision
      appealed against should be remitted to the  Respondent  for  a  proper
      section 55 assessment of [the son's] best interests given  that  there
      is a genuine and positive relationship between him and the Appellant."



16.   The FtT then at [42] announced its decision in the following terms:

      "The Respondent's decision was made without  proper  consideration  of
      the best interests of [the son's] under section 55 name the Act  [sic]
      and therefore was taken otherwise than in  accordance  with  the  law.
      Consequently, we allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules and  the
      ECHR to the extent that  it  is  remitted  to  the  Respondent  for  a
      decision taking proper account of [the  sons']  best  interests  under
      section 55."

17.   The grounds of appeal argue that it was not open to the FtT  to  reach
      a decision in respect of proportionality if  it  considered  that  the
      decision was not in accordance with the law. That is a  misreading  of
      the decision. In my judgement, the FtT was simply purporting  to  give
      its observations in respect of proportionality  and  made  clear  that
      that was a question initially to be answered by the Secretary of State
      with due consideration being given to her duties under section 55.  It
      was further argued that the Secretary of State gave due  consideration
      to such duties in her decision. I disagree. I am  satisfied  that  the
      FtT's summary of the position at [36] is correct. Whilst the Secretary
      of State's decision gives lip service to the provisions of section 55,
      it is clear that she did not undertake an assessment  of  the  child's
      best interests because the duty did not arise as a consequence of  her
      doubts in respect of the relationship between  the  claimant  and  his
      partner. The FtT did not therefore err in its adopted approach.

18.   Whilst the FtT's conclusion allowing the appeal under the  Immigration
      Rules to the extent that the decision was not in accordance  with  the
      law was incorrect for the reasons that I indentified earlier,  I  find
      that this error is not material to the outcome because it was open  to
      the FtT to allow the appeal to a limited extent because it  found  the
      decision  appealed  against  on  human  rights  grounds  was  not   in
      accordance with the law. On a holistic reading of the decision, whilst
      the FtT should have expressed  its  decision  with  greater  care  and
      clarity, it is clear that that is what the FtT was purporting to do at
      [42].

19.   In MK (section 55 - Tribunal options) [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC) (15  April
      2015) the President of the Upper Tribunal said, inter alia, at [38]:

      "We consider that there can be no objection in principle to  an  order
      of the Tribunal the effect whereof is  to  require  the  Secretary  of
      State, rather than the Tribunal, to perform the two duties imposed  by
      section 55. There is no jurisdictional bar of which we are  aware.  It
      has long been recognised that there is a category of cases in which it
      is open to both tiers to allow  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
      Secretary of State's decision was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law
      without further order, thereby obliging the  Secretary  of  State,  as
      primary decision maker, to re-make the decision, giving effect to  and
      educated and  guided  by  such  correction  and  guidance  as  may  be
      contained in the Tribunal's determination. This is  not  contested  on
      behalf of the Secretary of State."

20.   That is the very approach the FtT adopted and was entitled  to  do  so
      for the reasons that it gave. Its decision, properly  understood,  was
      to give effect to section 55, under which the Secretary of  State  was
      bound to discharge her duties which she had not hitherto properly done
      so.

Notice of Decision

21.   I am satisfied the decision of the FtT is not vitiated by an error  of
      law. Accordingly, the decision of the FtT shall stand. The  effect  of
      this decision is that the Secretary of State must now  reconsider  the
      claimant's application which  remains  outstanding  in  light  of  the
      findings made by the FtT and the best interests of the child.







Signed:                                      Dated: 1 June 2016



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

