
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31013/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11 November 2014                        |On 4 December 2014         |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

                          MS BASIRAT SURULERE JIMOH
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr P Collins of
           counsel instructed by TKD Solicitors
          For the Respondent: Mr C Avery a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 8  August  1974.
      She has been given permission to appeal the  determination  of  First-
      Tier Tribunal Judge Braybrook ("the FTTJ") who  dismissed  her  appeal
      against the respondent's decision of 4 July 2013 to refuse  her  leave
      to remain in the UK under  the  provisions  of  Appendix  FM,  on  the
      grounds of long residence under paragraph 276ADE and on  human  rights
      grounds.


   2. The appellant arrived in the UK on a visit visa on 12 August 2004  and
      remained without leave when it expired.  In  April  2009  she  started
      babysitting for Mr Rufai. He had two children who  had  been  born  in
      January 2006 and August 2007. He had come to the UK in November  2000,
      also on a visit visa, and had subsequently married a French  national.
      He was granted an EEA family permit and, in  August  2008,  indefinite
      leave to remain. At the end of 2008 his marriage  broke  down  and  in
      January 2009 he and  his  wife  separated.  Initially,  the  appellant
      babysat for his children four days a week and then she moved in  full-
      time. Mr Rufai became a British citizen in September 2009. He obtained
      a decree absolute of divorce in January  2010.  The  appellant  became
      romantically involved with him in early 2012. She was detained at  his
      home by the immigration authorities in November 2012.


   3. The appellant applied for leave to remain but this was  refused  on  4
      July 2013. The appellant appealed and her appeal was  dismissed  by  a
      First-Tier Tribunal Judge on 24 March 2014. The appellant appealed and
      the Upper Tribunal found that the judge had erred in law  and  ordered
      that the appeal be reheard. It was in  these  circumstances  that  the
      appeal came before the  FTTJ  on  23  July  2014.  Both  parties  were
      represented, the appellant by Mr Collins who appears before me.


   4. The FTTJ accepted  that  the  appellant  was  caring  for  Mr  Rufai's
      children but found that her relationship with them did not  go  beyond
      that  of  a  long-standing  child-minder.   There   were   substantial
      discrepancies between the evidence of the appellant and Mr Rufai which
      the FTTJ  considered  fundamentally  damaged  their  credibility.  She
      concluded that the relationship  between  them  was  not  genuine  but
      advanced to meet the threat of the appellant's removal. The FTTJ found
      that the appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE.
      She went on to consider  the  appellant's  human  rights  outside  the
      Immigration Rules. Whilst she doubted that there was a family life  in
      the normal Article 8  sense  she  was  prepared  to  accept  that  the
      appellant's removal would be an interference with family life. It  was
      accepted  that  the  appellant's  role  as  a  child-minder  was  more
      significant than it would otherwise have been because of  the  absence
      of a mother figure in their lives.


   5. The FTTJ gave limited weight to the assessment of the expert  witness,
      Ms Pagella. The appellant's removal would be an upheaval but this  was
      to some extent due to the fact that Mr Rufai had knowingly  taken  the
      risk of employing someone who had no right to remain in the UK and was
      at risk of  being  removed  at  any  time.  The  FTTJ  considered  the
      appellant's private  life  in  this  country  and  the  factors  which
      contributed to this. The best interests of the children did not  trump
      the public interest factors.  The  FTTJ  found  that  the  appellant's
      removal would be a proportionate interference with her Article 8 human
      rights. She dismissed the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and  on
      human rights grounds.


   6. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
      which was granted. There is a Rule 24 response  from  the  respondent.
      The appellant and Mr Rufai attended the hearing. Mr  Collins  tendered
      the original of their  marriage  certificate  showing  that  they  had
      married on 12 August 2014, after the hearing before the FTTJ.


   7. Mr Collins relied on his grounds  of  appeal.  They  are  lengthy  and
      detailed. I hope I do his submissions no disservice if I say that they
      added little to the grounds. Mr Avery relied on the  Rule  26  letter,
      arguing that essentially the grounds were no more  than  disagreements
      with conclusions properly reached by the FTTJ on all the  evidence.  I
      reserved my determination.


   8. The first ground of appeal submits that  the  FTTJ  erred  in  law  by
      failing to address and make appropriate findings in  relation  to  the
      relevant parts of section EX1 of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.
      The grounds set out these requirements as they relate to the  children
      and the relationship between the appellant and Mr Rufai. As Mr Collins
      accepts the FTTJ referred to these provisions in paragraph  6  of  her
      determination.  I  find  that  the  FTTJ  did  properly  assess  these
      requirements reaching the conclusion open to her  that  they  did  not
      assist the appellant because, in relation to the children, she did not
      have a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with  them.  In
      relation to Mr Rufai they  did  not  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      relationship.


   9. The second ground of appeal submits that the FTTJ's conclusions as  to
      the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  the   children   were
      irrational and contrary to the weight  of  the  evidence.  Mr  Collins
      accepted that this amounted to  a  perversity  challenge.  Whilst  the
      grounds identify factors which it is said the FTTJ should  have  taken
      into account it is not suggested that she failed to refer  to  any  of
      them. I find that this ground is no  more  than  a  disagreement  with
      conclusions properly reached by the FTTJ on the evidence. They are not
      remotely perverse.


  10. The third ground of appeal is a similar perversity challenge. It  sets
      out the FTTJ's findings as to aspects  of  the  appellant's  life  and
      relationship with the children and goes on to argue that the impact on
      the children was not properly considered. I find that this  ground  is
      also no more than a disagreement with conclusions properly reached  by
      the FTTJ on the evidence. There is a detailed and thorough  assessment
      of the appellant's relationship with the children and  the  effect  on
      them of her removal from the country.


  11. The fourth ground is another similar challenge, arguing that the  FTTJ
      erred in law by giving an inadequate and over simplistic view  of  the
      effect of the appellant's removal on the children's  lives.  It  fails
      for the same reason as grounds two and three.


  12. As to ground five, I can find no fault with the  FTTJ's  consideration
      of or conclusions in relation to the evidence of Ms Pagella.  For  the
      reasons she gave it was open to her to give this limited weight.  This
      is another unmeritorious perversity challenge.


  13. As to ground six, the FTTJ correctly stated that no  submissions  were
      made in relation to Article  8  private  life.  Mr  Collins  does  not
      suggest that he made any oral submissions and I can find no indication
      that the  FTTJ  failed  to  consider  the  matters  advanced  for  the
      appellant  in  his  skeleton  argument.  In   paragraph   6   of   the
      determination she records that  he  had  submitted  "a  very  detailed
      skeleton". Mr Collins does not suggest that  there  were  any  factors
      relevant to private life which the FTTJ failed  to  consider.  I  find
      that the limited private  life  factors  were  set  out  and  properly
      considered in paragraph 36 of the determination.


  14. I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction and I see no good
      reason to do so.


  15.  I  find  that  the  FTTJ  did  not  err  in  law  and  I  uphold  her
      determination.












      ..............................................
            Signed                                    Date 12 November 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

