
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31120/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 February 2019                  |On 12 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                           mr Moeez Naseer Abbasi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Lourdes of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, has permission to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge McIntosh of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent  on  9
    July 2018.

2.   On 15 May 2012 the appellant applied for leave to remain as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant.  On 8 September 2015 the respondent  refused
    his application.  The refusal letter stated that the respondent was not
    satisfied he had a valid CAS because the Tier 4 Register was checked on
    8 September 2015 and Scott's College  London  was  not  listed  on  the
    Sponsor Register on that date.  The letter further  noted  that  on  11
    February 2015 the appellant was informed of the result of the  Register
    check and allowed 60 days to obtain a new sponsor and CAS.  Within  the
    same letter he was informed that due  to  irregularities  uncovered  by
    ETS, his language test score had been cancelled and he had been advised
    that he needed to submit a new  test  score  within  the  same  60  day
    period.  It was noted that he had not provided a new  CAS  within  that
    period.

3.   What happened next is recorded by Judge McIntosh  at  paragraphs  15-22
    as follows:

         "15.  After  initial  administrative  difficulties  requiring   fee
             payment, Standard directions were given for the appeal  to  be
             considered on the papers by the First Tier Tribunal on a  date
             after 19 November 2015.

         16.  On the 28 April 2015, the Home Office wrote to the Appellant's
             then legal representatives, in response to their  request  for
             the return of the Appellant's passport  for  the  purposes  of
             undertaking a further English test.

         17.  On the 10 November 2015 the Appellant wrote to the First  Tier
             Tribunal requesting an oral appeal hearing.  The Appellant was
             advised of the need to pay  an  additional  fee  for  an  oral
             hearing.  Further directions were made for  the  Appellant  to
             submit evidence upon  which  he  relied,  to  the  First  Tier
             Tribunal by 23 August 2016 for the hearing listed  on  the  16
             December 2016.

         18.  On 16 December 2016 Deputy Immigration Judge  Freer  gave  the
             directions  including,  'The  Respondent  will   release   the
             original  passport  of  the  Appellant  by  delivery  to   the
             Appellant's representative  within  14  calendar  days  of  17
             December 2016'.

         19.  The appeal hearing of the 16 December 2016, was  adjourned  to
             be heard on the 07  July  2017.   On  the  07  July  2017  the
             Appellant appeared before Judge B A Foulkes-Jones of the First
             Tier Tribunal.  The Appellant appeared  represented  by  Mr  L
             Lourdes of counsel and the Respondent was represented by Mr  I
             Briant, Home Office Presenting Officer.  On the 07  July  2017
             the appeal hearing was adjourned with directions for Mr Briant
             to write to the Appellant and his  representatives  confirming
             and detailing what was required of the Appellant  as  outlined
             in the letter of Ravi Khosla dated  13  September  2016.   The
             Appellant was directed to provide all  further  evidence  upon
             which he intended to rely, to be served at least 14 days prior
             to the next hearing.

         20.  On the 08 August 2017 the Appellant and  the  Respondent  were
             notified of the adjourned hearing date to be listed on the  10
             November 2017.  On the 10 November 2017 the Appellant attended
             represented by Mr L Lourdes and the Respondent represented  by
             Mr Moore.  The matter was listed before Immigration Judge  KSH
             Miller of the First  Tier  Tribunal.   On  that  occasion  the
             appeal hearing was adjourned, the letter from  the  Respondent
             only being seen on the 08 November 2017, leaving  insufficient
             time for the Appellant to submit  and  sit  for  another  SELT
             test.  A further adjournment was granted on that occasion.

         21.  Immigration Judge K S H Miller  directed  that  the  Appellant
             apply to take SELT test forthwith, with the assistance of  the
             letter from the Home Office dated 08 November 2017.  There was
             an  added  direction  that  there   should   be   no   further
             adjournment.

         22.  On the 29 December 2017 the Notice of Adjournment Hearing  was
             sent to the parties, confirming that the  hearing  of  the  10
             November was adjourned to the hearing on 16 May 2018."

4.   The judge went on to record that at the date of hearing  the  appellant
    said that he had received a  letter  from  the  Home  Office  dated  13
    September 2016 outlining what action he needed to undertake to  take  a
    requisite English language test but each tester he had  approached  had
    requested the production of his passport, which was still with the Home
    Office.  However, he also accepted that he had not followed  the  steps
    set out in this letter, but would if given more time.  On the  strength
    of this  evidence,  his  representative  then  applied  for  a  further
    adjournment.  This was opposed by the Presenting Officer.  At paragraph
    29 the judge recorded his response to this application as follows:

         "29. Having considered the proposition of  an  adjournment  towards
             the end to the Appellant's evidence,  I  decided  to  continue
             with the appeal hearing as the reasons  put  forward  for  the
             adjournment  was  exactly  the  same  reason  for  which   the
             adjournment had been granted on the  previous  occasions.   To
             continue with the  appeal  hearing  would  not  prejudice  the
             appeal in respect of either party."

5.   The appellant's grounds contend that the judge erred (1) in failing  to
    consider the appellant's account met the minimum level of  plausibility
    required to shift the burden of proof back to the  respondent;  (2)  by
    allowing the respondent to argue factors that were not  raised  in  the
    refusal letter; and (3) in failing to agree an adjournment in  relation
    to directions made for the release by the respondent  of  the  original
    passport with reference to the case of Patel [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC).

6.   I am grateful for the submissions I heard from both representatives.

Analysis

7.   Ground (1) is devoid of arguable merit.  Whilst it is correct that  the
    appellant was informed by  the  respondent  on  11  February  that  she
    considered the appellant's ETS was invalid,  the  decision  made  on  8
    September 2015 did not rely on any allegation of deception.  It  relied
    simply on the  failure  of  the  appellant  to  produce  a  valid  CAS.
    Further, in challenging this decision the appellant's grounds  did  not
    argue  that  the  appellant's  ETS  test  was  valid,   nor   did   his
    representative at the hearing raise such an  argument.   The  appellant
    had ample opportunity when informed about the ETS results  in  February
    2015 to challenge the Home Office position, but failed to do so.

8.   As regards ground (2),  it  is  wholly  misplaced.   The  crux  of  the
    refusal letter was that the appellant had failed to produce a valid CAS
    and had failed to obtain a new sponsor and CAS within the 60 day period
    granted him, on 11 February 2015.  The respondent's  arguments  at  the
    hearing were entirely consonant with  those  set  out  in  the  refusal
    decision.  At paragraph 31  the  judge  records  these  submissions  as
    follows:

         "31. Relying on the Reasons for Refusal dated 08 September 2015, Mr
             Jones submits that this is a straight forward  case  in  which
             the Appellant was unable to provide a valid CAS.  Referring to
             the case Sandeep Kaur (Patel  fairness:  respondent's  policy)
             [2013] UKUT 344 (IAC), the appellant was notify of the 60  day
             policy for an alternative CAS.  Referring to the  concerns  of
             the Respondent, Appellant maintains that at no  time  did  use
             TOEIC certification in support of his application."

9.   At paragraph 38 the judge went on to find that  the  respondent  "acted
    in accordance with its 60 day policy and that the  appellant  had  been
    allowed additional time  to  meet  the  requirements  of  providing  an
    English Test Certificate".

10.  The appellant's grounds contain several paragraphs that  simply  ignore
    the fact that the appellant was given 60 days.  Reconstructing them  as
    best one can, they also seek to argue that the  appellant  should  have
    been allowed more than 60 days, as it was felt that the  appellant  had
    been obstructed from obtaining a fresh ETS by the  respondent  refusing
    to release to him his passport.  The difficulty with that contention is
    that the appellant produced no evidence to show  that  in  the  60  day
    period from 11 February - 8 April 2015 he had tried to obtain a new ETS
    and had only failed because he did not have a passport.

11.  So far as concerns  the  appellant's  position  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, it will be apparent from what I set out above,  that  the  judge
    was entirely justified in concluding that the appellant had  failed  to
    meet the relevant requirements (under paragraph 245ZX(d) with reference
    to paragraph 116(e) of Appendix A and paragraph 245ZX(d) of the Rules).



12.  I turn then to the issue of the relevance of the  appellant's  evidence
    concerning attempts post-decision to obtain an ETS. Its only  relevance
    can be to the issue of whether  the  decision  was  in  breach  of  the
    appellant's right to respect for private  and  family  life,  an  issue
    which the judge was required to decide at the date of the  hearing  (in
    May 2018).

13.  Two things need to be said about the appellant's  evidence.   First,  a
    significant amount of it related to efforts he had made since the  date
    of hearing and decision.  Mr Lourdes, for example, adduced evidence  to
    show that the appellant has now obtained an ETS, having sat his test on
    30 October 2018, by which time he had got a new Pakistani ID card and a
    new passport.  However, evidence that has come  into  being  after  the
    hearing and after the decision  of  the  FtT  Judge  cannot  assist  in
    establishing an error of law.

14.  Second, insofar as the appellant's evidence  pertained  to  efforts  he
    made prior to the date  of  hearing,  it  was  his  own  evidence  that
    although he spoke about a number of efforts he had  made,  he  had  not
    followed the advice given to him by the Home Office in the letter of 13
    September 2016.

15.  In the discussions before me there was some confusion  about  what  the
    precise terms of the  guidance  given  in  this  letter  were.   It  is
    necessary, therefore, to set out the relevant parts:-

         "However, I can confirm  the  arrangements  in  place  around  SELT
         identity requirements and the return of passports as requested.

         When attending a test centre to sit a SELT test  a  candidate  must
         provide evidence of their identity before being allowed to take the
         test.  The only acceptable forms of identification for  in  the  UK
         are:

           . a valid passport or travel document;

           . a valid EU Identity Card;

           . a valid Biometric Residence Permit.

         The documents must be originals  and  include  a  photograph.   Any
         candidate who is unable to prove their identity will not be allowed
         to take the test.  Photocopies of a passport cannot be accepted, as
         the test centre staff will not be able to confirm that the document
         is a genuine document, including checking the security features  of
         the passport.

         You have asked for an explanation as what  would  the  Home  Office
         position if a request  is  made  for  the  return  of  an  identity
         document to take a SELT test in the following scenarios:

         1.   the applicant has extant leave;

         2.   the applicant has leave under section 3C  of  the  Immigration
             Act 1971;

         3.   the applicant has permission to remain under the Free Movement
             Directive;

         4.   the applicant is an overstayer / illegal entrant.

         In the first three  scenarios,  the  identity  document  should  be
         returned by the Home Office in order to allow the individual to sit
         the SELT test.

         In the last scenario the Home Office may not return the passport to
         allow the individual to sit the SELT test, as they would be in  the
         UK illegally and the passport  would  assist  in  the  individual's
         removal.  Guidance on the power to retain passports is available at
         https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/retaining-valuable-
         documents

         Also, where an individual has requested the return of the  identity
         document after the application has been refused,  the  Home  Office
         may not return the document as it would assist in the  individual's
         removal.

         In cases where an  immigration  appeal  has  been  held  or  is  in
         progress the Home Office will make a decision whether to return the
         passport or not.  In the majority of cases the passport  should  be
         returned.  In exceptional cases where there  are  serious  concerns
         that the applicant may abscond if the  passport  is  returned,  the
         Home Office will request that the applicant books a SELT test, then
         will scan the passport and send this with the  booking  details  to
         the SELT provider to allow the applicant to sit the test.  In these
         cases the Home Office will confirm to the SELT  provider  that  the
         passport has been checked and there are no concerns about it  being
         genuine."

16.  It is clear that the relevant parts of this guidance applicable to  the
    appellant (given that it is agreed he had leave under Section 3C of the
    1971 Act) was that "... where an individual has requested the return of
    the identity document after the application has been refused, the  Home
    Office  may  not  return  the  document  as  it  would  assist  in  the
    individual's removal", but that  where  an  immigration  appeal  is  in
    progress, in the majority of cases the  Home  Office  will  return  the
    passport but where it will not the procedure is that  the  Home  Office
    will request that the applicant books a SELT test and  then  scans  the
    passport and sends this with the booking details to the SELT  provider.
    As the appellant himself acknowledged, he did not follow this guidance.
     In particular, having asked for his passport back but not received it,
    he did not request that the Home Office requests him  to  book  a  SELT
    producing this request to the SELT provider.

17.  Accordingly, the judge did not err in  concluding  that  the  appellant
    (not the Home Office), was responsible for him not being able to obtain
    a SELT test by the time of the hearing.

18.  Turning to ground (3), Mr Lourdes submitted that the judge should  have
    adjourned the hearing because she herself accepted that  the  appellant
    had been active in pursuing and completing the English test.   However,
    that submission appears to misread the last sentence  of  paragraph  33
    which states that "I note also that the Appellant appeared in active in
    pursuing and completing the English test".  That is clearly a typo  for
    "inactive".  For it to be read as "active" would  be  contrary  to  the
    judge's conclusion at paragraph 38 that the  appellant  "has  not  been
    proactive in ensuring that he followed  the  instructions  of  what  he
    needed to do to take his English test at an appropriate  test  centre";
    see also paragraph 32 which notes that "there have  been  a  number  of
    adjournments in this case with no real progression".

19.  Even if the last sentence of paragraph 33 were to be  read  as  meaning
    "active",  that  could  only,  as  Mr  Lourdes  acknowledged   in   the
    submission,  refer  to  his  application  dated  18  May  2018.    This
    application was responded to by the Home Office on 13 June 2018 setting
    out how he could apply even though he did not  have  a  passport.   But
    this activity was two days after the date of hearing before  the  judge
    and even though the judge did not promulgate her decision until 9  July
    2018, there is nothing to indicate  that  the  appellant  notified  the
    Tribunal of these efforts or the response they elicited.

20.  Accordingly I consider the judge properly refused  the  application  to
    adjourn.

21.  To conclude:

    The appellant's grounds do not disclose an error of law on the part  of
    the judge and accordingly her  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  must
    stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 8 March 2019

           [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

