
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/31748/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 July 2015                      |On 24 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                               WAYNIAN SALMON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F. Iqbal of Wainright & Cummins LLP
For the Respondent:    Miss A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is a citizen of  Jamaica  whose  date  of  birth  is  21
    August 1994. She appealed against the respondent's  decision  dated  27
    November 2013 to refuse leave to remain on human rights grounds and  to
    remove her from the UK under section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 1999.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge J.D.L. Edwards dismissed  the  appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on  13  February  2015.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on 16 April 2015. In
    a decision dated 11 June 2015 the Upper Tribunal found that the  First-
    tier decision contained material errors of law and the decision was set
    aside. The matter now comes before the Upper  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision.

Decision and reasons

Factual circumstances

3.    There is no dispute between the  parties  in  regard  to  the  factual
    circumstances of this appeal.

4.    The appellant is a 20 year old woman who  has  lived  in  the  UK  for
    nearly 8 years. She was born in Jamaica but moved to Antigua  with  her
    parents when she was around 2 years old. She subsequently spent further
    time in Jamaica with her grandmother but returned  to  her  parents  in
    Antigua. She was largely brought up in Antigua and spent no  more  than
    about 5 years of her life in Jamaica.

5.    The appellant says that her father began to sexually  abuse  her  when
    she was around 6 years old. She told  her  mother  about  the  abuse  a
    couple of years after it began but she did not believe her. As a result
    the appellant has a difficult and distant relationship with her mother.
    In 2004 the  family  returned  to  Jamaica  and  in  2006  her  parents
    separated. The appellant's father took custody  of  the  children.  The
    appellant says that she was subjected to physical violence by her step-
    mother. During this time she had no contact with her mother.

6.    On 04 August 2007 their father brought the appellant  and  her  sister
    to the UK. The appellant entered the UK with entry clearance  that  was
    valid until 18 July 2009. It is not clear from  the  evidence  on  what
    basis she was granted  entry  but  it  is  said  that  her  step-mother
    sponsored the application. I find that it is reasonable to  infer  that
    she may have been granted entry as a dependent child if her father  had
    remarried. The appellant was 12 years old on arrival in the UK.

7.    Unfortunately  her  difficult  childhood  continued  in  the  UK.  She
    continued to suffer abuse from her father and step-mother. In  December
    2008, when the appellant was only 14 years old,  her  stepmother  asked
    them all to  leave  the  house.  Her  father  made  informal  fostering
    arrangements for the appellant and her sister with his relatives.  When
    her visa expired her father did nothing to regularise her status.  When
    her father's relatives  refused  to  continue  to  support  her  social
    services became involved. They  contacted  the  appellant's  mother  in
    Jamaica who made arrangements with a relative of hers, Michael  Rumble,
    to foster the appellant and her sister. The  appellant  says  that  she
    continues to have a good relationship with Mr Rumble and he has written
    a letter in support of the appeal.

8.    In late 2010 the appellant's sister  was  asked  to  leave  the  house
    because of problems between her and Mr  Rumble's  wife.  The  appellant
    went with her sister. Then there was a further  period  of  instability
    when they stayed with various friends. At this stage the appellant  was
    still only 16 years old. In 2011  they  returned  to  live  with  their
    father in London but the appellant says that her  father  attempted  to
    abuse her again. In April 2011 they went  to  stay  with  their  foster
    mother's niece.

9.    At around the same  time  the  appellant  began  a  relationship  with
    Ochike Woolcock. They met at Kids  Company,  a  charity  that  provides
    support to vulnerable children. Mr Woolcock is a Jamaican  citizen  who
    was also brought to the UK as a child. He says that he has lived in the
    UK for the last 13 years. He says that  he  was  granted  Discretionary
    Leave to Remain in 2014 in light of his family life with his 5 year old
    son who is a British citizen. Although they did not live together  they
    were in a relationship until very recently  but  have  now  decided  to
    split. Their daughter was born on 28 April 2013 and is now 2 years old.
    Mr Woolcock used to have almost daily contact with their  daughter  but
    since the relationship ended he has regular contact with the  child  at
    the weekends. Both his children know each other and spend time with one
    another.  Mr Woolcock provides the  appellant  with  child  support  of
    around �200 a month and says that he would be willing to continue  that
    support if the appellant had to return to Jamaica. He would also try to
    stay in contact with his daughter but would only be able to  afford  to
    visit about once a year.

10.   As a result of  the  appellant's  chaotic  family  situation  she  was
    eventually taken into the care of social services in July  2011.  Since
    then she has been supported by a social worker and a key worker who has
    developed a  close  and  supportive  relationship  with  her.   She  is
    assisted in all areas of her life including housing, financial support,
    advice on parenting and any other aspect of her life  where  she  might
    need support. Her key worker, Sonia Crutchley, says that her role is to
    assist the appellant to become an independent adult. She  is  allocated
    10 hours a week to assist the appellant but in reality  she  speaks  to
    the appellant nearly every day and is available  to  help  her  at  any
    time. Ms Crutchley works for a company that is sub-contracted by social
    services to provide support. Although  she  is  not  a  trained  social
    worker she works closely with the social worker who is allocated to the
    case.

11.   Ms Crutchley  gave  her  evidence  in  an  open  and  considered  way.
    Although it seems clear that she has  developed  a  close  relationship
    with the appellant outside her usual work commitments  I  am  satisfied
    that she sought to give her opinion in  a  professional  and  objective
    way. She has worked closely with the appellant since 2011 and is  in  a
    good position to comment on her particular vulnerabilities. As  such  I
    give weight to her evidence.

12.   Ms Crutchley told me that she thought the  appellant  was  capable  of
    finding work and that it would  be  a  good  ting  for  her  to  be  in
    employment. With the level of support that she is currently given there
    were no real concerns about the appellant's ability to look  after  her
    daughter. However, she had concerns about the  appellant  returning  to
    Jamaica. She didn't think she would cope very well if she had to return
    because  she  did  not  have  any  family  or  support  network  there.
    Unemployment was rife and she wondered how  the  appellant  might  cope
    with the stress of returning to a country where she had no support  and
    would have to care for her daughter  alone.  She  considered  that  the
    appellant was stable up to a point but had recommended that  she  seeks
    professional counselling to help her deal with  the  emotional  turmoil
    she still suffers  as  a  result  of  her  past  experiences.  She  was
    concerned that if the appellant found it difficult to cope  in  Jamaica
    that this might also have a negative impact on her child. Ms  Crutchley
    pointed out that even if the appellant was able to find work in Jamaica
    that was only one aspect of her life. It would still be the  case  that
    she would have no network of friends or relatives to provide  her  with
    support.

13.   The appellant says that she has only spent a limited  period  of  time
    in Jamaica as a child. She no longer has any family members there.  Her
    grandmother passed away in July 2014. As far as she is aware her mother
    has now migrated to the USA.  The  appellant  says  that  she  has  bad
    memories of Jamaica because of the abuse she suffered there as a child.
    The country is violent and there  is  widespread  abuse  of  women  and
    girls. She says that she was very young when she left Jamaica and would
    not know how to support herself there. Unemployment  is  high  and  she
    does not know whether she would be able to care for her  daughter.  She
    would have no one to turn to for  support  or  guidance.  Her  daughter
    would not be  able  to  have  regular  contact  with  her  father.  The
    appellant says that she thinks that she would be able to find  work  in
    the UK if she was permitted to do so. She would want to work  in  order
    to support her daughter. It is also possible that she may  continue  in
    education and she has produced some evidence to show that she has  made
    enquiries about relevant courses.  She has developed a network of close
    friends and some relatives in the UK who provide  her  with  continuing
    support.

14.   It is accepted that the appellant does not meet the private or  family
    life requirements of the immigration rules. Although the appellant  has
    lived in the UK for a significant part of her young life  she  has  not
    spent at least half of her life living continuously in the UK  for  the
    purpose of paragraph  276ADE  of  the  immigration  rules.  The  appeal
    proceeded solely on arguments relating to the application of Article  8
    of the European Convention outside the immigration rules.

Best interests of the child

15.   In assessing the best  interests  of  the  child  I  have  taken  into
    account the statutory guidance "UKBA Every Child  Matters:  Change  for
    Children" (November 2009), which gives further detail about the  duties
    owed  to  children  under  section  55.  In  that  guidance  the   UKBA
    acknowledges the importance of a number  of  international  instruments
    relating to human rights including the UN Convention on the  Rights  of
    the Child (UNCRC). The guidance goes on  to  confirm:  "The  UK  Border
    Agency must fulfil the requirements of these instruments in relation to
    children whilst exercising its functions as expressed  in  UK  domestic
    legislation and policies." I take into account the fact that the  UNCRC
    sets out rights including a child's right to survival and  development,
    the right to know and be cared for by his or her parents, the right not
    to  be  separated  from  parents  and  the  enjoyment  of  the  highest
    attainable  standards  of  living,   health   and   education   without
    discrimination. The UNCRC also recognises the common responsibility  of
    both parents for the upbringing and development of a child.

16.   I have also taken into account the decisions in ZH (Tanzania)  v  SSHD
    [2011] UKSC 4, Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 and EV  (Philippines)  and
    others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874. The best interests of the child  are
    a primary consideration in this case  but  may  be  outweighed  by  the
    cumulative effect of other matters that weigh in the public interest. I
    take into account that the younger the child  the  more  important  the
    involvement of a parent is likely to be:  see  Berrehab  v  Netherlands
    (1988) 11 EHRR 322. It is in the  best  interests  of  a  child  to  be
    brought up by both parents unless it is contrary to his best  interests
    to see one or other of his parents: see also  E-A  (Article  8  -  best
    interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315.

17.   The appellant's daughter was born in the UK and knows no  other  life.
    However, she is not a British citizen and is liable to removal with her
    mother. She is only 2 years old and is not at  an  age  where  she  has
    established any ties to the UK outside her family. Her life  is  likely
    to revolve around close family members such as her mother,  father  and
    other family members in the UK. However, the  effect  of  removing  the
    child with her mother would be to deprive her of  the  regular  contact
    that she currently enjoys with her father. Such a young child  requires
    physical and emotional nurturing from both parents that  could  not  be
    replicated through distant communication by telephone or  other  modern
    methods of communication.

18.   Although  there  appear  to  be  no  concerns  about  the  appellant's
    parenting abilities this might largely be as a result  of  the  support
    network that has built up around her in the  UK.  While  the  appellant
    appears to be relatively stable I accept that she is  likely  to  be  a
    vulnerable person as a result of her past experiences.  There  is  some
    question mark over how she would cope if she is removed  to  a  country
    with far more difficult socio-economic conditions and in  circumstances
    where she would have no similar support network. The Country of  Origin
    Information  Report  (COIR)  on  Jamaica  (2013)   contained   in   the
    appellant's bundle states that legal protections for women  are  poorly
    enforced and that violence and  discrimination  against  women  remains
    widespread [22.23]. Amnesty International reported that women and girls
    in inner-city communities were particularly exposed  to  gang  violence
    including sexual coercion [22.25 &  22.33].  The  US  State  Department
    Report stated that  social  and  cultural  norms  perpetuated  violence
    against women [22.26]. The appellant has already  been  the  victim  of
    sexual abuse and in light of this evidence I find that she is likely to
    be vulnerable to further exploitation  as  a  lone  woman.  The  stress
    caused to the appellant  if  she  is  returned  to  such  a  vulnerable
    situation is also likely to impact on her child in a negative  way  and
    it is at least possible that it might also impact  on  the  appellant's
    ability to protect her daughter from similar exploitation.

19.   For these reasons I conclude that it is in the best interests  of  the
    appellant's daughter to remain with her mother in the UK. In the UK her
    mother can continue to benefit from the network of support that enables
    her to care for the child without any concerns for her welfare. In  the
    UK she could continue to have regular contact with her father and other
    family members, which she would not have if she was removed to  Jamaica
    with her mother.



Article 8 (private and family life)

20.   Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  protects  the
    right to private and family life. However, it is not an absolute right.
    The state is able to lawfully interfere with an appellant's private and
    family life as long as it is  pursuing  a  legitimate  aim  and  it  is
    necessary and proportionate in all the circumstances of the  case.  The
    starting point is the basic principle that a state  has  the  right  to
    control the entry and residence of people within its borders. There  is
    a  strong  public  interest  in  maintaining  an  effective  system  of
    immigration control. This is done through  the  immigration  rules  and
    policies, which set out the requirements for leave to enter  or  remain
    in the UK. The immigration rules and policies are  the  main  guide  to
    what  decisions  are   likely   to   be   considered   reasonable   and
    proportionate. It is still possible for cases that fall  outside  those
    requirements to engage the operation of Article 8 but only if there are
    compelling circumstances that are not sufficiently recognised under the
    immigration rules: see Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11, Patel  &  Others  v
    SSHD [2013] UKSC 72, R (on the application  of  MM  &  Others)  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 985 and SS (Congo) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

21.   The appellant has lived in the UK for  a  significant  period  of  her
    life during which time she  made  the  transition  from  her  difficult
    childhood into adulthood. The evidence shows that during that time  she
    has slowly been able to establish a more stable life of  her  own  with
    the support of social services as well  as  other  friends  and  family
    members in the UK. Although her relationship with  the  father  of  her
    child has now ended they continue to  work  together  as  parents.  Her
    daughter has regular contact with her father and her  half-brother.  In
    these circumstances I accept that the appellant's length  of  residence
    and other ties to the UK show that removal is likely to interfere  with
    her right to private and family life in a sufficiently grave way as  to
    engage the operation of Article 8 of the European Convention (questions
    (i) & (ii) of Lord Bingham's five  stage  approach  in  Razgar  v  SSHD
    [2004] INLR 349)

22.   The appellant does not meet the requirements of the immigration  rules
    and the normal course of action would be to require her  to  leave  the
    UK. While the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control  is  an
    important  factor  the  balancing  exercise  under  Article  8   is   a
    complicated one and must  take  into  account  a  number  of  different
    factors  balancing   the   public   interest   against   the   specific
    circumstances of each individual. In this case  the  immigration  rules
    relating to private and  family  life  set  out  requirements  in  very
    specific categories but do not make adequate provision for  a  holistic
    assessment of the situation as it relates to a number of people who are
    likely to be affected by the decision.

23.   In assessing what weight  to  place  on  the  public  interest,  where
    relevant, the Tribunal must take into account  section  117B  (general)
    and 117C (deportation) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 ("NIAA 2002"),  which  outlines  a  number  of  factors  that  the
    Tribunal must consider when assessing whether an  interference  with  a
    person's right to respect for private and family life is justified  and
    proportionate.

24.   The maintenance of immigration control is in the public  interest  and
    I give this significant weight. However, some other matters that  might
    weigh in the public  interest  under  section  117B  do  not  have  any
    significant weight in this case. The appellant speaks  English  and  is
    well integrated into life in the UK. At the moment she is  not  working
    but this is only because she has no permission to do so. She is willing
    and able to work and the evidence indicates that there is no reason why
    she would not be able to support herself and contribute to society in a
    positive way without becoming a burden on the taxpayer.

25.   The appellant has lived in the UK for nearly 8  years,  which  is  the
    longest time she has lived in any country. For the  last  6  years  she
    remained without leave. This would normally be a matter that  would  be
    given significant  weight  in  the  public  interest.  A  private  life
    established at a time when a person is in the  UK  unlawfully  or  when
    their immigration status is  precarious  would  not  usually  be  given
    weight. But in this  case  I  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    appellant entered the UK as a young child. She was dependent  upon  her
    father to regularise her immigration status, which he failed to do.  It
    is through no fault of her own that the appellant  ended  up  remaining
    without leave. It was only after a chaotic period  in  her  young  life
    that she came into the care of social services who assisted her to make
    an application to regularise her status. In such circumstances  I  find
    that weight can be placed  on  the  private  life  established  by  the
    appellant and that the public interest should  not  be  given  as  much
    weight as it might have been if the appellant had been an adult who was
    responsible for her own actions.

26.   I find that there are a number of  compelling  aspects  to  this  case
    including  the  appellant's  young  age  on  arrival  as  well  as  her
    background of abuse, which is likely to render her more  vulnerable  to
    further exploitation if she is returned to  Jamaica  as  a  lone  woman
    without a network of support. The most compelling aspect is her  family
    situation. I have already found that it is in the best interests of the
    child to remain in the UK where she would benefit from nurture and care
    from both parents. To remove the child with her mother  would  separate
    her from the kind of contact such a young child needs with her  father.
    He is no longer in a relationship with her mother, and even if he  was,
    he has another  child  in  the  UK  with  whom  he  also  has  a  close
    relationship.

27.   The maintenance of  immigration  control  must  be  given  significant
    weight but the best interests of the child are a primary  consideration
    albeit not an overriding consideration. Nevertheless there  would  need
    to be a number of countervailing factors to outweigh the  child's  best
    interests. Although the appellant has a period of  overstaying  it  was
    through no fault of her own because she was a child at the time.  Apart
    from the fact that the appellant has no leave to remain  there  are  no
    other factors at the more serious end  of  the  scale  such  as  fraud,
    deception or criminal convictions  that  might  give  more  significant
    weight to the public interest in removal.

28.   The task of weighing all the circumstances of  a  particular  case  is
    always difficult and complex. Having carefully weighed up the facts  of
    this case I find that there is very little evidence before me  to  show
    that there  is  a  pressing  social  need  to  remove  this  particular
    appellant. In this case the basic guidance given by the House of  Lords
    in Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11 has been of assistance:

         "... the main importance of the case law  is  in  illuminating  the
         core value which article 8 exists to protect. This is not, perhaps,
         hard to recognise. Human beings are social animals. They depend  on
         others. Their family, or extended family, is  the  group  on  which
         many people most heavily depend, socially,  emotionally  and  often
         financially. There comes a point at which, for some, prolonged  and
         unavoidable separation from this  group  seriously  inhibits  their
         ability to live full and fulfilling lives. Matters such as the age,
         health and  vulnerability  of  the  applicant,  the  closeness  and
         previous history of the family, the applicant's dependence  on  the
         financial and emotional  support  of  the  family,  the  prevailing
         cultural tradition and conditions in the country of origin and many
         other factors may all be relevant."

29.   After a difficult and abusive start the appellant has  stabilised  her
    life and has begun to establish a positive path for  herself  with  the
    support of social services as well as a network of friends  and  family
    members in the UK. The evidence suggests that if she continues on  this
    path she is in a position to begin work, continue her education and  is
    likely to be able to make a positive contribution to society.  She  has
    established a strong private and family life here with  her  child  who
    continues to have regular contact with her  father.  Without  the  same
    network of support in Jamaica the appellant is likely  to  be  rendered
    quite vulnerable, which could also have implications for the welfare of
    her child. Even if she was able to find  work  in  Jamaica  to  support
    herself that is not the only aspect of her private life. She  would  be
    socially isolated and be separated from the only network of friends and
    family that she knows. I find that there are a  number  of  aspects  to
    this case that cumulate to create compelling circumstances that are not
    adequately dealt with under the immigration rules.  These  include  the
    appellant's  length  of  residence,  her  young  age  on  arrival,  her
    background of abuse and the best interests of her child.

30.   After having  weighed  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case  I  have
    concluded that the removal of the appellant would prejudice  her  right
    to private and family life in a sufficiently serious way to amount to a
    breach of her fundamental rights under Article 8. For these  reasons  I
    find that removal in consequence of the  decision  would  amount  to  a
    disproportionate interference with the appellant's rights under Article
    8 of the European Convention (points (iv) & (v) of Lord Bingham's  five
    stage approach in Razgar).

DECISION

I re-make the decision and ALLOW the appeal



Signed      [pic]      Date 23 July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
