
ST

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31340/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 28th January 2015                 |On 23rd February 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HARRIES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR SHOAIB SHABBIR
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Dhanji, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Details of the Parties and Proceedings


 1. The appellant in the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department. The respondent, Mr  Shoaib  Shabbir,  is  referred  to
    hereafter as the claimant. He was born on 13th December 1987 and  is  a
    citizen of Pakistan.  He  appealed  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pirotta (the Judge) at Birmingham on 20th  December  2014  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of  State  to  remove  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom by way of directions under section 10 of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999 after service of  an  IS.151A  form  on  the  appellant
    informing him of his immigration status,  liability  to  detention  and
    removal.  This  notice  was  followed  by  an  IS.151A  Part  2  notice
    informing the claimant of  the  removal  decision  and  the  consequent
    invalidation of his leave under section 10(8) of  the  1999  Act.   The
    Judge allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper tribunal was granted to the Secretary
    of State on 15th December 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes  for
    the following reasons:

         No human  rights  claim  was  advanced  by  the  Appellant  to  the
         respondent prior to 1st October 2014 (the date of decision). In the
         circumstances the decision of 1.10.14 was an "immigration decision"
         under section 82(2)(g), but the right  of  appeal  against  it  was
         governed by section 92 which states that the only right  of  appeal
         against the decision was one that could be exercised  from  outside
         the UK. Arguably the Judge has failed to engage with the absence of
         any jurisdiction to entertain the appeal and  the  guidance  to  be
         followed in Ali [2014] UKT 494, Mahmood [2014]  UKUT  439,  or  Jan
         [2014] UKUT 265.


 3. The matter accordingly came before me to determine whether there is  an
    error of law.

Consideration of Submissions

 4. The decision of the  Secretary  of  State  followed  the  provision  of
    information from the Educational Testing Service (ETS)  of  an  anomaly
    with the speaking test of the claimant which indicated  the  use  of  a
    proxy test taker and therefore the use of fraud  on  the  part  of  the
    claimant. He was issued with a form IS.151A on 14th July  2014  and  an
    IS.151A Part 2 on 21st July  2014  informing  him  of  his  immigration
    status, liability to removal and notification of the  removal  decision
    respectively.  He was informed of his  right  to  appeal  only  out  of
    country.

 5. At the hearing before the Judge he considered the merits of the  appeal
    at the outset, in paragraph 4 of the determination, without considering
    any issue of jurisdiction.  He found that the Secretary of State  could
    not provide the  evidence  of  proxy  test  taking  from  the  ETS  and
    concluded that the decision was not supported  with  evidence  and  was
    therefore unlawful and decided to remit the matter to the Secretary  of
    State for further consideration "and a fresh decision based on evidence
    which could be demonstrated, and a right of appeal if necessary, in the
    case of an adverse decision, because the Secretary of  State  would  be
    able to take all facts into account in a new decision which I was under
    the impression formed part of a larger consideration in an  application
    by the Appellant".

 6. The Judge was under the misapprehension at the hearing that there  were
    several  issues  for  consideration  in  an  application  made  by  the
    appellant but states in his determination that subsequently, after  the
    representatives did not correct his  misunderstanding,  he  ascertained
    that the decision "stood alone" on the basis of deception with no other
    issues to be considered by the Secretary of State. The Judge  concluded
    his determination  by  stating,  in  paragraph  11,  that:  "therefore,
    contrary to my original opinion, the appeal must succeed, not  only  to
    declare the decision of the Secretary of State unlawful  but  to  allow
    the appeal altogether".

 7. Mr Kandola relied before me on the grounds of appeal asserting that the
    Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear  this  appeal  for  the  following
    reasons. The Secretary of State made the section 10 removal decision on
    the basis of leave to remain being obtained by deception and it  was  a
    decision subject to appeal only from outside the  United  Kingdom.  The
    cases of R (on the application of Ashfaq Ali) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department (s3C extended leave: invalidation) IJR [2014]  UKUT
    494(IAC) and R (on the application of Bilal  Mahmood)  v  Secretary  of
    State  for  the  Home  Department  (candour/reassessment  duties;  ETS:
    alternative remedy) IJR [2014] UKUT 439 (IAC) are relied upon.

 8. The Tribunal  is  submitted  to  have  erred  by  failing  properly  to
    establish jurisdiction. In accordance with the  case  of  Mahmood  held
    that a person  whose  leave  is  invalidated  on  the  basis  that  the
    Secretary of State considers deception has been used in connection with
    an application for leave will, at present,  normally  have  an  out  of
    country  right  of  appeal.  The  availability  of   that   right   is,
    presumptively, an adequate alternative remedy  to  be  pursued  by  the
    person concerned.

 9. The Judge purported to deal with the decision of the Secretary of State
    made on 14th July 2014 to remove the claimant from the United  Kingdom.
    In oral submissions Mr Kandola submitted to  me,  in  addition  to  the
    submitted  grounds  of  appeal,  that  the  Judge  further   erred   in
    considering this decision because it was withdrawn and substituted with
    a fresh decision on 1st October 2014.  The Judge recorded, but made  no
    findings about, the submission to him at the hearing by the Home Office
    Presenting Officer that  the  decision  made  in  July  2014  had  been
    withdrawn and reissued on 1st October 2014 on the same grounds but with
    the addition of a refusal to exercise discretion which was omitted from
    the original decision.

10. Mr Kandola submitted that the July 2014  decision  had  therefore  been
    withdrawn, if not in advance of the hearing in writing, at  the  latest
    by the HOPO orally at the hearing before the Judge. A letter was before
    the Judge from the Secretary  of  State  to  the  claimant,  dated  1st
    October 2014, informing him of the withdrawal of the July decision  and
    the making of the new decision in October  2014.  For  this  reason  Mr
    Kandola submits the Judge had no jurisdiction  because  the  notice  of
    appeal related to the July 2014 decision and not to the fresh  decision
    made on 1st October 2014 in response to which no appeal had been  filed
    before the hearing which followed shortly afterwards, on  20th  October
    2014. The Tribunal was obliged to treat the appeal as  withdrawn  under
    Rule 17 of the First-tier  Tribunal  Rules  on  notification  from  the
    Secretary of State, either orally or in writing, of the  withdrawal  of
    the decision.


11. Mr J Dhanji took issue with this  approach  because  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal in the Upper Tribunal was not made or granted permission
    on this ground; the issue of whether there was an in-country appeal was
    the subject of the permission.  However, Mr Dhanji dealt with the issue
     by submitting that the Secretary of State's  behaviour  by  sending  a
    representative to the hearing before the Judge  demonstrated  that  the
    appeal was on-going; there would have been no purpose in sending a Home
    Office Presenting Officer  if there were no outstanding appeal. Even if
    I accepted this submission for the claimant I find  that  Secretary  of
    State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  succeeds  in  any  event  on  the
    submitted grounds because there was no jurisdiction for  the  Judge  to
    hear an in-country appeal.

12. Mr J Dhanji accepted that in order to have  jurisdiction  to  hear  the
    appeal as an in-country appeal the claimant must have made an asylum or
    human rights claim in the United Kingdom before the 1st  October  2014.
    He accepted that under section 92  (1)  and  (2)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 a person may not appeal  under  section
    82(1) while he is in the United Kingdom unless his appeal is of a  kind
    to which that section applies; the section applies to an appeal against
    an immigration decision of a kind specified in section  82(2)(c),  (d),
    (e), (f) [, (ha)] and (j) and under section 82(2) the decision is  this
    case is under 82(2)(g) as follows and therefore not capable of  an  in-
    country right of appeal:

             82   (1) Where an immigration decision is made in respect of a
                 person he may appeal [to the Tribunal]
                 (2)   In this Part "immigration decision" means-
                    (a)    refusal of leave to enter the United Kingdom,
                    (b)    refusal of entry clearance,
                    (c)    refusal of a certificate of entitlement under
                       section 10 of this Act,
                    (d)    refusal to vary a person's leave to enter or
                       remain in the United Kingdom if the result of the
                       refusal is that the person has no leave to enter or
                       remain,
                    (e)    variation of a person's leave to enter or remain
                       in the United Kingdom if when the variation takes
                       effect the person has no leave to enter or remain,
                    (f)    revocation under section 76 of this Act of
                       indefinite leave to enter or remain in the United
                       Kingdom,
                    (g)    a decision that a person is to be removed from
                       the United Kingdom by way of directions under
                       [section 10(1)(a), (b), (ba) or (c)] of the
                       Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (c. 33) (removal of
                       person unlawfully in United Kingdom).


13. There is, however, an in-country right of appeal under  section  92  of
    the 2002 Act when an asylum or human rights claim has been made in  the
    United Kingdom. Mr Dhanji submitted that by virtue of  a  reference  in
    the grounds of appeal against the July 2014 decision such a  claim  had
    been made prior to the October 2014 because of the reference  in  those
    grounds, albeit brief, to a breach of the claimant's human right  to  a
    fair trial under the Human Rights Act.  Mr Dhanji accepted that this  a
    complicated  way  of  approaching  the  issue  but  submitted  that  in
    accordance with the case of  Jisha v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2010] EWHC 2043 (Admin) (05 August 2010), at paragraphs  21
    and 22 in particular, even a weak claim can qualify  as  such  a  claim
    within the necessary definition.

14. I bear in mind that in Jisha the decision concerned the  interpretation
    of paragraph 353 of the Statement of Changes in Immigration  Rules,  HC
    395, which, unlike the appeals  provisions  of  the  2002  Act,  is  an
    important fail-safe provision to ensure that human  rights  and  asylum
    claims are properly considered before a  final  decision  to  remove  a
    claimant,  which  may  well  be  after  an  unsuccessful  appeal.   The
    interpretation of the words of page  353  is  therefore  likely  to  be
    rather wider than is necessitated by the  construction  of  the  appeal
    rights themselves.

15. I reject Mr Dhanji's argument because I find it to be undermined by the
    skeleton argument before the Judge for the claimant prepared  for  that
    hearing by his counsel. At paragraph 5 of the skeleton argument  it  is
    explicitly stated that no human rights grounds of appeal were raised in
    the grounds because of the  nature  of  the  decision;  permission  was
    therefore sought in the skeleton argument to vary the grounds of appeal
    to argue a breach of Article 1 Protocol 1. There  is  nothing  to  show
    that the Judge either considered or granted such permission and nor  is
    there any indication that he treated such a claim as having been  made.
    Nor was such a claim apparently argued or relied upon before him at the
    hearing.

16. In these circumstances I find that the Judge made a material  error  of
    law by failing to consider whether he had any jurisdiction to hear  the
    appeal before purporting to allow it outright on its merits.  In  these
    circumstances I find that there was no jurisdiction for all the reasons
    set  out  above  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   is
    accordingly set aside and is remade by dismissing the appeal.

Notice of Decision

17. The making of the previous decision involved the making of  a  material
    error on a point of law.  There was no jurisdiction to hear the  appeal
    and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and remade  by
    dismissing the appeal.

18. The appeal of the Secretary of State in the Upper Tribunal succeeds.

Anonymity

The position remains that no anonymity direction has been made.



Signed: J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date: 20th February 2015


Fee Award

No fee has been paid or is payable and there is therefore no fee award.



Signed : J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date: 20th February 2015


