
IAC-AH-CO-V1
                                    [pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/31470/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 November 2014                          |On 17 December 2014           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                  JUDGE of the first-tier tribunal HANBURY


                                   Between

                          mrs Bibi Reezwanah Gopee
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Islam Khan
For the Respondent:    Mr M Lowton, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Details of the Appellant

1.   The appellant is a Mauritian national born on 6 July 1979.




The Appellant's Immigration History

2.   The appellant entered the UK on 15 July 2004  on  a  visit  visa  valid
    from 15 July 2004 to 15 January 2005.  She came here with  her  family,
    namely her two children Bibi Sameena Gopee born  9  February  1999  and
    Nudaar Zakiyah Gopee born 7 April 2001.  Her husband,  Muhammad  Zubair
    Gopee born 16 November 1996, also accompanied her.  Prior to the expiry
    of their leave, the appellant's husband applied for a variation  so  he
    could remain as a full-time student.  It seems that  a  false  document
    was used, allegedly innocently, by him.  However, a  subsequent  appeal
    against the  dismissal  of  that  application  was  unsuccessful.   The
    appellant and her children were dependents on that application.

3.   In March 2012 Mrs Gopee along with her  husband  and  children  applied
    for leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  on  human  rights  grounds.   Those
    applications were also refused on 30 April 2013.   An  application  was
    made for judicial review which resulted in a  consent  order  dated  16
    April 2014. By that consent order the respondent agreed  to  reconsider
    their case.   On  completion  of  that  review  on  24  July  2014  the
    respondent decided to refuse leave to remain on the grounds that the UK
    would not be in breach of its obligations under the European Convention
    of Human Rights, as incorporated into English law by the  Human  Rights
    Act 1998.  The respondent made  directions  under  Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The respondent served notice  to  the
    appellant as a person liable  to  removal  and  set  out  her  detailed
    reasons for refusal in a letter dated  24  July  2014.   The  appellant
    appealed that refusal by completing form IAFT1 on 1 August 2014 stating
    that the decision was not in  accordance  with  the  law  or  with  the
    Immigration Rules.  The appellant also states that the  respondent  had
    failed to follow the correct approach to an application  under  Article
    8.

Basis for the Appellant's Claim

4.    The  appellant  claims  that  although  her  partner  was  in  the  UK
    unlawfully her children had nevertheless been brought  up  in  the  UK,
    having lived here for ten years and nine years,  respectively,  at  the
    date of the decision.  They formed a family unit.   The  appellant  was
    not their sole carer but was settled in the UK. The  appellant  claimed
    that it was relevant that her  application  had  originally  been  made
    prior to the changes in the Immigration Rules on 9 July 2012,  i.e.  in
    April 2012.  Accordingly, she should not  be  prejudiced  by  the  more
    stringent requirements of the Rules after that date.

The Respondent's Decision

5.   The respondent gave careful consideration to  the  immigration  history
    and the requirements of Article 8 as incorporated  in  the  Immigration
    Rules including Appendix FM (family life) and paragraph 276ADE (private
    life).  She also had regard to the  need  to  protect  the  appellant's
    children and for their welfare to be a primary consideration.  However,
    the respondent was conscious of the changes in the  Immigration  Rules.
    She did not consider the appellant qualified under either  the  old  or
    the new Rules.   She  considered  that  EX.1  did  not  apply  and  the
    appellant's private  life  was  not  of  such  duration  as  to  engage
    paragraph 276ADE.  The respondent also considered  whether  there  were
    exceptional circumstances for treating the  appellant  more  generously
    than the rules allowed but they did not.  Accordingly,  the  respondent
    thought it necessary and proportionate for the appellant to be  removed
    from the UK.

The Hearing

6.   The appellant pointed out the background to this case; stating  that  a
    new decision was issued in July 2014.  At  this  point  the  respondent
    pointed out that there had been an earlier determination by the  First-
    tier Tribunal following a hearing on 31 August 2011.  Immigration Judge
    Buckwell in his determination promulgated  on  28  September  2011  had
    decided that there was nothing in  the  appellant's  husband's  account
    having been deceived by an agent into submitting application forms  and
    had rejected the argument that the decision to remove the appellants in
    that  appeal  (i.e.  the  appellant,  her  husband  and  her  children)
    contravened their Article 8 rights.  It seems that in evidence  it  was
    established that the appellant's husband had made false representations
    but these were blamed on an agent.  At  the  end  of  the  hearing  the
    Immigration Judge concluded there would  be  no  contravention  of  the
    appellants 'Article 8 rights.  The  appellant  had  been  given  finite
    leave to enter the UK.  That leave was at an end and they could  return
    as a family to Mauritius.  There was no professional evidence in  terms
    of medical or other material to suggest any significant "trauma" to the
    children and the Immigration Judge was satisfied, having  undertaken  a
    balancing exercise that the respondent's public interest  in  enforcing
    immigration control should take precedence over the appellants'  family
    life.

7.   The subsequent appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  before  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Spencer failed.

8.   The appellant nevertheless  invited  me  to  consider  a  "freestanding
    claim".  Mr Khan claimed not to have previously seen the Upper Tribunal
    decision but nevertheless agreed to take instructions on it.  There was
    no application for an adjournment.

9.   Having given Mr Khan an opportunity to consider the decision  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Spencer Ms Gopee  gave  evidence.   She  said  that  the
    statement she had provided to her solicitors was true.  There  were  no
    further questions.  She was cross-examined.  She said that  she  had  a
    sister, a brother, a mother and father living in Mauritius.   She  also
    had cousins, aunts and uncles.  She did not, however,  own  a  property
    there.  According  to  the  appellant  the  family  had  rented  before
    marriage.  The appellant had  been  a  housewife  and  the  appellant's
    husband had been studying.  She said that he was funded by his  sister.



10.  In re-examination the appellant said she did not have contact with  her
    mother, brother or sister.  This was due to the  relationship  she  had
    had with her husband. It seems that the appellant's mother and siblings
    did not want her to marry her husband.

11.  Sannaiah Gopee then gave evidence.  She adopted her  witness  statement
    at page 8 in the appellant's bundle.   Clarifying  the  information  in
    paragraph 9 of her statement she said that she  could  not  recall  her
    childhood in Mauritius.  She  was  currently  doing  her  GCSEs  having
    already taken other exams in the past.  She did not know how she  would
    continue with her studies in Mauritius and did not  know  which  family
    members she had there.

12.  The respondent relied on Edgehill [2014] EWCA Civ 402.   She  submitted
    that it did not matter which Rule applied, i.e. whether it  was  before
    or after July 2012, given that the decision would  have  probably  have
    been the same.  There was a weak case under Article 8.  The  appellants
    did  not  come  within  the  Rules.   Compelling   circumstances   were
    necessary.  This case did not meet any either the old or the new Rules.
     I was referred to the case of  Shahzad  [2014]  UKUT  85.   Here,  the
    appellant had arrived as a visitor in 2004 with six  months'  leave  to
    remain.  She had lived the majority of her life in Mauritius.   It  was
    submitted that the ties the appellant had developed with  the  UK  were
    not abnormal and there  was  no  flagrant  denial  of  family  life  in
    deciding to remove her.  Even if the family were  divided,  they  could
    communicate by all modern means available to them.   The  children  had
    experience of both the education systems in the UK and in Mauritius and
    there is no reason why they should not be adequately  educated  in  the
    latter. No significant hardship would  follow  from  having  to  return
    there.  Furthermore, the parents would be returning  as  one  unit  and
    would provide support at appropriate milestones.  A structured approach
    was needed to these questions and the need  for  effective  immigration
    control was recognised by Section 117B (3) and (4) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  by  section  19  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014.  In all  the  circumstances,  I  was  invited  to
    dismiss this appeal.

13.  The appellant's representative, Mr Khan, submitted that  there  was  no
    deliberate  attempt  by  his  client   to   deceive   the   immigration
    authorities.  The appellant's daughter had reached a crucial  stage  in
    her education which may be disrupted by her removal.  I was referred to
    paragraph 33 of Edgehill  wherein  it  was  pointed  out  that  a  mere
    reference to the twenty year requirement in the  new  Rules  would  not
    invalidate the decision.  It was only if the decision maker  relies  on
    Rule 276ADE(iii) as a consideration affecting his  decision  in  a  pre
    July 2012 case that it may, arguably, amount to an error of law.

14.  In this case the decision was on 20 July 2014 and the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules  was  very  different  by  that  stage.   It  was
    necessary to look at what is "reasonable".  It was disproportionate  to
    remove the children, including  the  daughter.   That  she  had  strong
    reports from her head teacher and would suffer  significant  disruption
    by her removal.  Given these difficulties there were compelling reasons
    not to  remove  this  family.   It  was  disproportionate  in  all  the
    circumstances and unduly harsh.  I was invited to allow the appeal.

Discussion

15.  The focus of the discussion in the case of  Edgehill  and  other  cases
    has been the  fact  that  the  new  Rules,  introduced  in  July  2012,
    increased  the  period  of  continuous  residence  required  before  an
    applicant qualifies under paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The former provision, enforced at the time  of  this  application,  was
    paragraph 276B which specified a period of fourteen  years'  continuous
    residence.  In Edgehill Laws LJ explained that  the  Immigration  Rules
    are detailed statements of ministerial intent which must  be  construed
    sensibly according to their natural and ordinary meaning.  But provided
    the Secretary of State does not place reliance  on  the  new  Rules  in
    refusing an application made before they came into force on 9 July 2012
    the decision will not be unlawful on this basis.

16.  It  seems  to  be  accepted  by  the  appellant's  representatives  the
    appellant does not qualify under either the Immigration Rules  as  they
    existed before 9 July 2012 or under the  new  Immigration  Rules  since
    that date.  The only basis on which the application could succeed is on
    the freestanding basis  that  the  interference  with  the  appellant's
    private or family life by removal would be disproportionate  and  hence
    should be ruled unlawful.  Provided the Secretary  of  State  does  not
    assert that a period of  residence  in  excess  of  fourteen  years  is
    required to satisfy the Rules the decision will not be unlawful on that
    basis.

17.  The decision here is thoroughly explained in the refusal  letter.   The
    respondent states on the  first  page  under  the  heading  "Article  8
    consideration":

         "I have considered Article 8 by applying the relevant provision  of
         the Rules in force on 9 July 2012".

    I can find no evidence in the refusal that the respondent  had  treated
    the  "twenty  year"  requirement  as  being  a  material  consideration
    although  there  is  reference  to  it  in  parts   of   the   refusal.
    Furthermore,  it  is  clear  that  the  respondent  did  consider   the
    application in the round including taking into account the  welfare  of
    the children involved.  It is clear that the appellants would not  have
    qualified under the Immigration Rules either in their pre or post  July
    2012 form.

Findings

18.  I find that this  is  the  second  occasion  in  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal has had to consider the Article 8 rights of the appellant  and
    her family.  The previous appeal  in  2011  considered  her  rights  in
    connection with the refusal of her husband's application as a  student.
    I find that having regard to the case of Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT  00702
    it is incumbent upon this Tribunal to give appropriate  weight  to  the
    earlier determination, particularly since it was upheld  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 22 March 2012.  Following the  case  of  Devaseelan  it  is
    appropriate to consider the extent to which there had  been  change  in
    circumstances since the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    2011.   I  find  that  there  has  not  been  a  material   change   in
    circumstances  since  then,  although  the  appellant's  children  have
    continued to be educated in the English state school system and I  bear
    in mind the potential disruption to their education by the  removal  of
    their mother.

19.  I find that many of the material points to be considered in an  Article
    8 claim have been incorporated into the Rules. I now set out  the  more
    important considerations and consider  the  facts  of  this  case.  The
    appellant has extensive family members in Mauritius. The appellant  and
    her family have been in the UK for a  long  period  of  time,  but  the
    appellant has known of her limited right to be here.  The whole  family
    must have envisaged it would need one day to return to Mauritius as one
    family unit.  I find that there are no compelling circumstances why the
    appellant and her family should not do so, even taking into account the
    potential disruption to her childrens' education.  Leave to remain  was
    temporary.  The appellant's have exhausted all the avenues available to
    them , indeed the appellant and her family would not have been  in  the
    UK as long as they have been but for the deception used by her  husband
    to remain on the basis  that  he  was  a  Tier  1  post-study  migrant.
    Mauritius does have an  education  system  of  its  own  to  which  the
    children can be sent. They will be assisted by their parents  who  will
    be returning there with them to settle into its education system.   The
    needs of immigration control and the economic wellbeing of the  UK  are
    not considerations  to  be  disregarded  lightly,  particularly  having
    regard to the changes in primary legislation introduced by  Section  19
    of the Immigration Act 2014.There is a significant cost to  tax  payers
    in allowing uncontrolled immigration  which  puts  pressure  on  public
    services and causes anxiety amongst lawful residents.

20.  For the above reasons I am satisfied that the respondent's decision  is
    not disproportionate and was in accordance with the  Immigration  Rules
    and indeed did not contravene the ECHR.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds and  under  the  Immigration
Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date

Judge Hanbury
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and I make no fee award.



Signed        Date

Judge Hanbury
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal

