
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/31741/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                 |    Determination Promulgated |
|On 30 September 2015                         |    On 16 October 2015        |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ARCHER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          mr winston derick evelyn
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms Julie Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:   Ms Francesca Clarke, Counsel instructed by Fadiga and
Co.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Carroll)  allowing  the
    respondent's appeal against a decision taken on 22 July  2014  refusing
    his application for leave to remain under Articles 3 and 8 of the Human
    Rights Convention. The application was made on 4 June 2014.

Introduction

 3. The respondent entered the UK as a visitor  on  15  October  2000  with
    leave to enter for six months. He resided with one of his sons,  Marvin
    Evelyn, in London between October 2000 and February 2007 but then had a
    stroke and was admitted to  hospital.  He  has  been  in  a  number  of
    different residential and nursing homes since June 2007. The respondent
    is now estranged from the son with whom he lived from 2000-2007 but  is
    supported by his other son in the UK, Asha Evelyn.  He  has  two  other
    children in Jamaica (Carlos and  Winsome).  All  of  the  children  are
    adults.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  respondent's  identity   and
    nationality but concluded that the requirements of Appendix FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules ("the Rules") were not met  and  appropriate  medical
    care and treatment was available in Jamaica. The respondent could  live
    with his children in Jamaica. Removal would not breach the  obligations
    of the UK under Articles 3 and 8 on medical grounds.  It  was  accepted
    that the respondent would require a medical escort to accompany him  to
    Jamaica and the options for where he would be housed would need to have
    been considered beforehand to ensure that his care needs would  be  met
    on return to Jamaica.

The Appeal

 5. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Taylor House on 20 April 2015.  He  was  represented  by  Ms
    Clarke. The First-tier Tribunal found that the respondent had  been  in
    the UK since October 2000 and had little contact with his  children  in
    Jamaica. He enjoyed contact in the UK with his son,  Asha  Evelyn,  his
    grandchildren and his daughter in law, Paulette Evelyn. He had lived in
    Hill House nursing home since March 2012 and was visited  regularly  by
    his family. He was diagnosed with  prostate  cancer  in  2011  and  was
    wheelchair bound. He was blind in one eye and  had  significant  speech
    difficulties. His physical difficulties would mean that he  would  have
    the greatest difficulties in accessing medical provision.

 6. The respondent had lost meaningful ties to Jamaica. He had proved  that
    there were very significant obstacles to his integration  into  Jamaica
    and the appeal was allowed under paragraph 276ADE (vi)  of  the  Rules.
    The immigration decision was dated 28 July  2014;  the  date  when  the
    revised paragraph 276ADE came into force.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  in
    finding that the respondent had lost meaningful ties to Jamaica because
    the judge failed to make an objective assessment of the  reasonableness
    of renewal of family ties, as required by Bossadi [2015] UKUT 42 (IAC).
    The decision was made on 22 July 2014 and the previous  requirement  of
    "no ties" was in force. The error of law was therefore material.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes on
    8 July 2015 on the basis that  it  was  arguable  that  the  judge  had
    applied the wrong version of the Rules.

 9. In a rule 24 response dated 28 July 2015, Ms Clarke submitted that  the
    judge did not make a material error of law. The subjective evidence was
    not disputed and the judge considered relevant objective evidence.  The
    Secretary of State applied the  later  version  of  the  Rules  in  the
    decision letter. Bossadi could be distinguished because the suitability
    requirement does not apply to the respondent - his presence in  the  UK
    was never deemed or regarded as not conducive to the public  good.  The
    respondent does have two children in Jamaica but  the  evidence  showed
    that the  ties  were  remote  and  abstract  rather  than  a  continued
    connection. It was open to the judge to find that  there  would  be  no
    familial support in Jamaica.

10. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

11. Ms Isherwood submitted that there was no finding on Article  8  outside
    the Rules. The relevant date is the date of decision; 22 July 2014. The
    respondent has never had any right to reside in the UK. He  has  family
    in Jamaica and is reliant upon public funds. There is medical provision
    in Jamaica. The respondent has never had any entitlement to  reside  in
    the UK - just a choice. To find that the respondent has  lost  ties  in
    Jamaica there must be a rounded assessment.

12. Ms Clarke submitted that the judge relied upon the witness statement of
    the  respondent  and  the  evidence  from  Asha  Evelyn.  A   continued
    connection to life in the country of origin was required to dismiss the
    appeal under paragraph 276ADE. The respondent left Jamaica 14 years ago
    and there is limited communication with the children  in  Jamaica  -  a
    text on his last birthday and a card in  2014.  There  are  exceptional
    circumstances creating unjustifiable hardship. The respondent has close
    bonds in the UK. He suffered a stroke soon after coming to the UK and a
    rounded assessment has been made. Any error  is  not  material  because
    another Tribunal  would  come  to  the  same  decision.  The  objective
    evidence showed that the treatment available was at a distance  or  was
    not available. The children  in  Jamaica  are  in  their  thirties  and
    forties; they are married and leading independent lives. There has been
    no contact with the children since 2014.

13. Ms Isherwood submitted in reply that healthcare for disabled people  is
    universally available in Jamaica. All of the medical evidence  is  from
    the first half of 2014. There is still no rounded  assessment  and  the
    respondent cannot simply choose where he wishes to live. If the  matter
    were to be considered outside the Rules then the judge  would  have  to
    consider sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act.

14. It is common ground between the parties that the judge erred in law  by
    applying the wrong version  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Rules.  The
    correct version was the version in force from 9 July 2012  to  27  July
    2014. That error is material because the judge applied the wrong  legal
    test to the evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Had  the  judge
    applied the correct test then, following Bossadi, a rounded  assessment
    would have been required as to whether the respondent's  familial  ties
    in Jamaica could result in support to him in the event of  his  return,
    an  assessment  taking  into  account  both  subjective  and  objective
    considerations and also consideration of what lies within the choice of
    the respondent to achieve.

15. None of that has been considered within the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal because the judge was considering the facts within the context
    of a wholly different test. The findings of fact cannot be stretched to
    accommodate the consideration required under the  previous  version  of
    paragraph 276ADE - the required assessment is simply not present. It is
    also worth noting that the decision is very brief given the  complexity
    of the issues in this appeal. The submissions by  both  parties  reveal
    issues arising from the evidence, particularly in  relation  to  family
    ties in Jamaica and availability of medical and social care in Jamaica,
    that have not been adequately addressed in the decision.

16. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal under the Rules involved the making of an error of law  and  its
    decision cannot stand.

Decision

17. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the error of law infects  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

18. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.

Signed                          Date 15 October 2015


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Archer


