
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber    Appeal Number IA/31841/2014
                                                               IA/31845/2014
                                                               IA/31846/2014
                                                           and IA/31843/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 23rd April 2015                   |On 19th May 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                   A A D-M
                                 O E J U O O
                                 A C E T B O
                                   T N S O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Doyle, legal representative, M & K Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are nationals of Nigeria. The immigration history of the
    First Appellant is set out in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Camp of the 8th of December 2014, the facts are largely not in  dispute
    and I do not repeat the contents of the decision here. The issue is the
    legal consequences of the position that the Appellants are in and  that
    turns on the findings made in relation to the Second Appellant and  the
    conclusions drawn from them.

 2. Judge Camp found that the First Appellant was not credible on a  number
    of points going on to find in paragraph 15 that she had remained in the
    UK without leave to obtain the benefits of the educational  system  and
    other state provision.  The  Third  and  Fourth  Appellants  could  not
    succeed under the Immigration Rules but having found  that  the  Second
    Appellant succeeded the other appeals were allowed under Article 8.

 3. In respect of the Second Appellant the Judge's findings are set out  at
    paragraphs 18 and 19 which read as follows:

         "18.     The Respondent state, in the refusal letter, that there is
             no evidence that the  minor  appellants  have  developed  ties
             outside the family unit in the United Kingdom. The  appellants
             have produced school reports relating to the second  appellant
             and photographs. She engages in various  sporting  activities,
             including participation in a rugby tag team, and is  a  member
             of sports clubs. There are also reports relating to the  third
             appellant. The family attend church. It would be remarkable if
             they had not formed ties outside the family. I have noted  the
             letter (p.12  of  the  appellant's  bundle)  from  the  Second
             Appellant in which she names  various  friends,  as  does  the
             third appellant, in his letter at page 13.

         19.       I  do  not,  for  these  reasons,  consider  that  it  is
             reasonable to expect the second appellant to leave the UK."

 4. The Secretary of State seeks to challenge that finding for the  reasons
    given in the grounds of application to the First-tier Tribunal  of  the
    16th of December 2014. In summary it is contended that  the  assessment
    of reasonableness was superficial, the appellants had no  future  right
    to education or healthcare and as it was in the second appellant's best
    interests to remain with her family it would be reasonable for  her  to
    return to  Nigeria,  the  difference  in  standards  in  education  and
    healthcare did not demonstrate unreasonableness. So far  as  the  other
    appellants were concerned the first appellant had no stand alone  right
    and the public interest required to removal of all the appellants.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes on
    the 27th of January 2015. He did so on the basis that it  was  arguable
    that the Judge's starting point should have been from the  position  of
    the First Appellant and it appeared that the Judge had not applied  the
    guidance in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874. It was arguable  that
    it was in the children's interests to be brought up by their mother and
    that they could be removed to Nigeria in safety.

 6. At the hearing in the Upper Tribunal the parties  made  submissions  in
    line with their respective positions. These are set out in  the  Record
    of Proceedings and referred to where relevant below.

 7.  The  findings  made  against  the  First  Appellant,  and  which   are
    unappealed, are damming. She does not have a good  immigration  history
    and was found to have remained in the UK in order to  receive  benefits
    (in the wider sense of the term) for herself and her children to  which
    none of them were  entitled.  It  is  also  clear  that  they  have  no
    entitlement or legitimate expectation to continue to receive them.

 8. There is no suggestion that the any members of  the  family  are  in  a
    situation which is in any way unusual or out of the ordinary. There  is
    no evidence any special educational needs or health  problems  or  that
    any of the attachments that have been  formed  are  of  a  particularly
    strong or durable nature. In any event, a private life formed  when  an
    individual is in the  UK  illegally  or  precariously  attracts  little
    weight and there is no reason why children should  be  in  a  different
    position from an adult in  that  regard.  Also  children  move  schools
    regularly, most schools in the  UK  experience  a  turnover  of  pupils
    moving in and leaving, the effect of leaving a school will  be  similar
    whether the child so going from one end of  the  UK  to  the  other  or
    abroad.

 9. In EV (Philippines) Clarke LJ, having reviewed  the  legal  background,
    made the following observations:

         "32      There is a danger in this field of moving  from  looseness
             of terms to semantics. At the same time there could be said to
             be a tension between (a) treating the best  interests  of  the
             child as a primary consideration which could be outweighed by
             others provided that no other  consideration  was  treated  as
             inherently more significant; and (b) treating the child's best
             interests as a consideration which must rank higher than any
             other which could nevertheless be outweighed by others. It  is
             material, however, to note that Lord Kerr, as he  made  clear,
             was dealing with a case of children who were British  citizens
             and where there were very powerful other factors  -  see  [41]
             below -in favour of not removing them ("the best interests  of
             the child clearly favour a certain course"/ "the  outcome  of
             cases such as the present"). He also agreed with the  judgment
             of Lady Hale. In those circumstance we should, in my judgment,
             be guided by the formulation which she adopted.

         33. More important  for  present  purposes  is  to  know  how  the
             tribunal should approach the proportionality  exercise  if  it
             has determined  that  the  best  interests  of  the  child  or
             children are that they should continue with their education in
             England. Whether or not it is in the interests of a  child  to
             continue his or her education in England may  depend  on  what
             assumptions one makes as to what happens to the parents. There
             can be cases where it is in  the  child's  best  interests  to
             remain in education in the UK, even though one or both parents
             did not remain here. In the present case, however, I take  the
             FTT's finding to be that it was in the best interests  of  the
             children to continue their  education  in  England  with  both
             parents living here. That assumes that both parents are  here.
             But the best interests of the child are to  be  determined  by
             reference  to  the  child  alone  without  reference  to   the
             immigration history or status of either parent.

         34. In determining whether or not, in a case such as the  present,
             the need for immigration control outweighs the best  interests
             of the children, it is necessary  to  determine  the  relative
             strength of the factors which make it in their best  interests
             to remain here; and also to take account of any  factors  that
             point the other way.

         35. A decision as to what is in the  best  interests  of  children
             will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)
             the length of time that they have been here; (c) how long they
             have been in education; (c) what  stage  their  education  has
             reached; (d) to what extent they have  become  distanced  from
             the country to which it is proposed that they return; (e)  how
             renewable their connection with it may be; (f) to what  extent
             they will have linguistic, medical or  other  difficulties  in
             adapting to life in that country; and (g) the extent to  which
             the course proposed will interfere with their family  life  or
             their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.

         36. In a sense the tribunal is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
             answer falls to be given to the question: is it  in  the  best
             interests of the child to remain? The  longer  the  child  has
             been here, the more advanced (or critical) the  stage  of  his
             education, the looser his ties with the country  in  question,
             and the more deleterious the consequences of his  return,  the
             greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.  If
             it is overwhelmingly in the child's  best  interests  that  he
             should not return, the need to  maintain  immigration  control
             may well not tip the balance. By contrast  if  it  is  in  the
             child's best interests to remain, but only  on  balance  (with
             some factors pointing the other way), the result  may  be  the
             opposite.

         37. In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken  into
             account the strong weight to be given to the need to  maintain
             immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of
             the country and the fact that, ex  hypothesi,  the  applicants
             have no entitlement to remain. The immigration history of  the
             parents may also be relevant e.g. if they are overstayers,  or
             have acted deceitfully."

10. At paragraphs 58 to 61 he said this:

         "58      In my judgment, therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis  that  the
             facts are as they are in the real world. If one parent has  no
             right to remain, but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against  which  the  assessment  is  conducted.  If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
             ultimate question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?

         59. On the facts of  ZH  it  was  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
             children to follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because
             the family would  be  separated  and  the  children  would  be
             deprived of the right to grow up in the country of which  they
             were citizens.

         60. That is a long way from the facts of our  case.  In  our  case
             none of the family is a British citizen. None has the right to
             remain in this country. If the mother is removed,  the  father
             has no  independent  right  to  remain.  If  the  parents  are
             removed, then it is entirely reasonable to expect the children
             to go  with  them.  As  the  immigration  judge  found  it  is
             obviously  in  their  best  interests  to  remain  with  their
             parents. Although it is, of course a question of fact for  the
             tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of being educated
             at public expense in the UK can outweigh the  benefit  to  the
             children of remaining with their parents. Just  as  we  cannot
             provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate
             the world.

         61. In fact the immigration judge weighed the  best  interests  of
             the children as a primary consideration, and  set  against  it
             the economic well-being of the  country.  As  Maurice  Kay  LJ
             pointed out in AE (Algeria) v Secretary of State for the  Home
             Department [2014] EWCA Civ  653  at  [9]  in  conducting  that
             exercise it would have been appropriate to consider  the  cost
             to the public purse in providing education to these  children.
             In fact that was not  something  that  the  immigration  judge
             explicitly considered. If anything, therefore, the immigration
             judge adopted an approach too favourable to the appellant."

11. The fact that a child may have been in the UK for 7 years or more would
    imply that they will have been educated and made friends, they may have
    attended church and sports clubs and may well  be  making  progress.  A
    child's life which indicates that normal progression  and  contacts  is
    not sufficient to  make  removal  unreasonable.  The  addition  of  the
    reasonableness consideration has to  import  more  into  the  equation.
    Equally the fact that the  child  will  experience  the  need  to  make
    adjustments will  not  be  sufficient  nor  will  the  loss  of  future
    educational opportunities.

12. In this appeal the fact is that the Appellants have remained in the  UK
    illegally with the adverse findings made against the  First  Appellant.
    There is nothing unusual in the ties  that  the  Second  Appellant  has
    established in the UK and none of those could be said to be  sufficient
    to found an argument that her removal was unreasonable.  If  they  were
    then any child who had managed to remain in the UK for that  length  of
    time would inevitably succeed. I am satisfied that is not how the  rule
    is to be read.

13. In this case I find  that  Judge  Camp  effectively  treated  the  best
    interests of the Second Appellant as determinative of the appeal  as  a
    whole even though there was nothing that was out of the ordinary  about
    her situation and without having regard to the countervailing  factors.
    It was an error on his part to find that taking the case a whole it was
    not reasonable to expect her to leave when she had no entitlement to be
    in the UK, was not at  a  critical  stage  in  her  education  and  her
    mother's immigration history was an aggravating feature. Accordingly  I
    set aside the decision of Judge Camp.

14. The parties made  submissions  with  regard  to  the  remaking  of  the
    decision on the basis of the facts as they appear in  the  decision  of
    Judge Camp. One observation made on behalf of the Appellants and  again
    in relation to the Second Appellant is that she will,  by  the  end  of
    this year, have lived in the UK for over  10  years  and  may  then  be
    entitled to apply for citizenship. I am not in a position to  speculate
    about that, by then they may have been removed. In any event that is  a
    matter for the Secretary of State who may  take  into  account  matters
    such as the overall history when considering such an application. Until
    that time arrives it is not a relevant consideration in this appeal.

15. The Appellants' circumstances are set out in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal and referred to above. The  fact  that  adverse  findings
    were made against the First Appellant and it is her abuse of the system
    that has led to this situation is a highly relevant factor in assessing
    the situation. I appreciate that the Second Appellant and  her  brother
    have only known the UK and  would  prefer  to  live  here  rather  than
    relocate and that is unsurprising.

16. Given the relative strengths of the different education and health care
    systems I would be  prepared  to  accept  that  it  is  in  the  Second
    Appellant's best interests to remain in the UK.  I  find  that  is  not
    determinative of the situation and in the absence  of  unusual  factors
    that would take her situation out of  the  ordinary  there  is  nothing
    about her circumstances as they stand now that would make  her  removal
    unreasonable. This is reinforced by the conduct of the First  Appellant
    in her cavalier approach to the immigration rules and her own status.

17. To put the question another way, what is unreasonable about expecting a
    national of a different country who is in the UK illegally  to  go  and
    live in the country of which they are nationals  where  they  can  live
    legally? It is not the role of the  UK  to  educate  or  treat  foreign
    nationals in the UK anymore than Nigeria would be expected  to  provide
    healthcare and education to non-Nigerians living there.

18. In the context of Article 8 the family would be removed together to the
    country of which they are all nationals. There  will  be  a  period  of
    adjustment just as this for children moving at any age to  a  new  area
    wherever that may be. The Appellants will have  each  other  and  their
    mother spent much of her life in Nigeria and can provide  the  children
    with the guidance and support that they would need. The  evidence  does
    not show that it is unreasonable to  expect  the  Second  Appellant  to
    leave the UK or that the removal of the Appellants  as  a  family  unit
    would be disproportionate having regard to the immigration history  and
    the need to protect the economic well-being of the UK.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law and I set aside the decision.

I  re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal  dismissing  the  appeal  of  the
Appellants.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  I  continue  that
order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
2008.)



Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated:



Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.
