
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31177/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th September 2015               |On 29th October 2015                 |
|Prepared 23rd October 2015           |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                            mr ananth chinnusamy
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Sowerby of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a  citizen  of  India  born  on  4th  June  1987.   He
    appealed against the decision of the Immigration Officer made  on  18th
    June 2014 to refuse to grant him leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.  His appeal was allowed by Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal  Lucas  sitting  at  Victory  House  on  8th
    January 2015 to the extent that the Respondent's decision (to refuse to
    grant leave to remain) was not in accordance with the law and therefore
    remained outstanding before the Respondent to take.  The Respondent has
    appealed that decision and the matter has therefore come before  me  as
    an appeal by the Respondent to determine in  the  first  place  whether
    there was an error of law in Judge Lucas's decision.  For the  sake  of
    convenience however I will continue to refer to  the  parties  as  they
    were referred to at first instance.

2.   The Appellant was first granted leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  on
    25th August 2009 as a Tier 4 (General) Student valid until 30th October
    2011.  This was extended until 20th September 2014.   However  on  15th
    January 2014 eight months before the Tier 4 leave was due to expire the
    Respondent curtailed the Appellant's leave such that it now expired  on
    16th March 2014.  This meant that the Appellant  had  to  apply  before
    that date if he wished to extend his leave and this he duly did on 19th
    February 2014.  He made a combined application for leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 General Student Migrant under the points-
    based system and for a biometric residence permit.  It was the  refusal
    of the 19th February 2014 application by the Respondent that gave  rise
    to the present proceedings.

The Explanation for Refusal

3.   The letter informing the Appellant of the Respondent's decision  stated
    that the Appellant did not have a right  of  appeal  against  it.   The
    concern of the Respondent in this  case  was  that  the  Appellant  had
    submitted TOEIC certificates from  the  Educational  Testing  Services.
    During an administrative review process  ETS  had  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant's test results  were  obtained  through  deception.   As  the
    results could not be authenticated the scores from the test year  taken
    on 22nd February 2012 at  Portsmouth  International  College  had  been
    cancelled.  The Appellant's application  was  refused  under  paragraph
    322(1A) of the  Immigration  Rules.  This  provides  that  where  false
    representations have been made or false documents or  information  have
    been submitted (whether or not material to the application, and whether
    or not to the applicant's knowledge), or material facts have  not  been
    disclosed, in relation  to  the  application  or  in  order  to  obtain
    documents from the Respondent or a third party variation  of  leave  to
    remain is to be refused.

4.   The letter went on to say that the  Appellant  had  claimed  30  points
    under Appendix A of the Immigration Rules for a CAS but the  Respondent
    was not satisfied he had a valid CAS.  The reference  number  submitted
    with the Appellant's application had been withdrawn by the Sponsor.  As
    a result the Appellant was liable to administrative removal as  defined
    in Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  because  ETS  had
    confirmed that the  Appellant's  test  results  were  obtained  through
    deception.  It was not unfair to serve the Appellant with Form IS  151A
    which is a notice to a person liable to  removal.   The  Appellant  was
    awarded no points for a CAS because of the withdrawal of the CAS by the
    Appellant's Sponsor.

The Appeal Against the Respondent's Decision

5.   The Appellant appealed against the Respondent's decision on Form  IAFT-
    1 on 8th August 2014.  In his Grounds of Appeal the Appellant explained
    that his first college had been closed and  his  leave  to  remain  was
    curtailed to expire on 14th March 2013 when he was  given  60  days  to
    submit a new application.  This he duly did and  leave  to  remain  was
    granted until 25th June 2013. Unfortunately his second college was also
    closed and his leave to remain was again curtail this time to expire on
    16th March 2014.  He made a third in-time  application  for  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student visa on 19th February 2014 but  this  was  apparently
    refused on 18th June 2014, his Grounds of Appeal adding  "according  to
    Home Office records".  The Appellant denied that  he  had  been  served
    with this  decision  of  18th  June  2014  and  was  unaware  that  his
    application had been refused.

6.   He was arrested by immigration  authorities  on  4th  August  2014  and
    served with an undated refusal  letter  which  contained  no  right  of
    appeal.  He was never served with the  Respondent's  decision  of  18th
    June 2014.  Removal directions were served on him on  7th  August  2014
    which were to be carried out on 20th August 2014.  The undated  refusal
    letter wrongly notified the Appellant he had no  right  of  appeal  and
    therefore failed to comply with the Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations
    2003 which required the Respondent to notify the Appellant of  a  right
    of appeal.  Time had not therefore begun to run against  the  Appellant
    although the Appellant appreciated that  by  appealing  he  waived  the
    requirements of the Notices Regulations citing the case of C  (Jamaica)
    [2011] UKUT 121.

7.   On the other hand if the Tribunal took the view that time  was  running
    against the Appellant he argued that  there  were  special  reasons  to
    justify extending time.  The letter of rejection was not served on  the
    Appellant until 4th August 2014 when he was arrested  even  though  the
    decision (to refuse the Appellant's  third  application  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 student) was purportedly made on 18th June 2014.  In
    any event the Respondent's decision to treat  his  in-time  application
    for leave to remain as invalid was procedurally unfair.  The Respondent
    should have notified the Appellant of any deficiency in the application
    so that the Appellant had the opportunity to make good that deficiency.
     The Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law.

The Issue of the Validity of the Appeal

8.   The Appellant's appeal received on 8th August 2014 raised on  the  face
    of it an issue as to the validity of the Notice of Appeal.  The  matter
    was referred to Judge of the First Tier Tribunal Fisher,  who  was  the
    Duty Judge at Arnhem House on 12th August 2014. He  directed  that  the
    appeal should proceed to a hearing "at which point the Judge  can  hear
    evidence and decide whether there is a valid appeal and if  so  whether
    it was in-time and whether time  should  be  extended".   Judge  Fisher
    noted that the refusal letter which was undated asserted there  was  no
    right of appeal but a similarly undated Notice  of  Decision  suggested
    that there was an out-of-country right of appeal.  This was a reference
    to Form IS 151A Part  2  which  was  addressed  to  the  Appellant  and
    informed him he had been served with Form IS 151A (informing him of his
    immigration status and liability to detention and removal).

9.   The IS 151A Part 2 did not give a date  when  the  Appellant  had  been
    served with IS 151A but did inform the Appellant that  a  decision  had
    been taken to remove him from the United Kingdom which he was  entitled
    to appeal once he had left the United Kingdom.  Similarly  no  date  of
    service of the IS 151A Part 2 was given although it  appears  from  the
    Appellant's Grounds of  Appeal  which  I  have  summarised  above  that
    removal directions were served on the  Appellant  on  7th  August  2014
    which would therefore appear to be the date of service of the  IS  151A
    Part 2.

10.  The appeal was listed and the Respondent was  notified.  This  prompted
    the Respondent to write to the Tribunal on  12th  August  2014  stating
    that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction in this case as there was no  in-
    country right of appeal.  The Respondent's letter stated  that  the  IS
    151A Part 2 was issued by  the  Respondent  on  25th  July  2014.   The
    decision to remove under Section 10  was  an  immigration  decision  by
    virtue of Section 82(2)(g) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 which carried a right of appeal to the Tribunal under  Section
    82(1) of that Act.  However Section 92(1) of the 2002 Act provided that
    a person may only appeal from within  the  United  Kingdom  where  that
    Section applied.  A decision under Section 82(2)(g) did not fall within
    Section 92(2) or (3) and Section 92(4) did not apply in this case.

11.  Paragraph 6 of the Respondent's letter addressed the issue  of  whether
    the curtailment of the Appellant's leave might of itself give  rise  to
    an in-country right of appeal.  The Respondent wrote:

         "It may be argued by the Appellant  that  there  is  an  in-country
         right of appeal because the Section 10  decision  made  is  also  a
         Section 82(2)(e) decision, that is a  curtailment  decision.   That
         would be wrong in law, the Court  of  Appeal  held  in  RK  (Nepal)
         [2009] EWCA Civ 359 that curtailment of  leave  and  a  Section  10
         removal are two distinct immigration decisions, they  are  not  the
         same and a Section 10  decision  only  attracts  an  out-of-country
         appeal."

12.  The Respondent's subsequent decision of 26th July  2014  to  refuse  to
    grant leave to remain was not an immigration decision under Section  82
    because it concerned a refusal to vary a person's  leave  to  enter  or
    remain in the United Kingdom if the result of the refusal was that  the
    person had no leave to enter or remain.  That was not the situation  in
    this case as the effect of the previous Section 10 decision made by the
    Respondent against the Appellant meant that any existing leave to enter
    or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  the  Appellant  might  have   was
    invalidated under Section 10(8).  The Appellant had no leave  to  enter
    or remain at the time the decision to  refuse  to  vary  his  leave  to
    remain was notified to him.  The only immigration  decision  that  gave
    rise to a right of appeal in this  case  was  the  Section  10  removal
    decision and that was an out-of-country right of appeal only.

13.  The Tribunal was requested to dispose  of  this  matter  in  accordance
    with Rule 9 of the Procedural Rules 2005. I pause  to  note  here  that
    last point cites the wrong rule.  The present procedure is governed  by
    Rule 22 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014 which  provides  that  the
    Tribunal may not  accept  the  Notice  of  Appeal  where  there  is  no
    appealable decision and if it does not accept that Notice of Appeal  it
    must  notify  the  person  providing  the  Notice  of  Appeal  and  the
    Respondent can take no further action on the Notice of Appeal.

14.  The Respondent also relied on the authority of Nirula [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    1436 that as no human rights claim had  been  made  to  the  Respondent
    before the purported appeal was lodged no right of  appeal  exercisable
    under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  (right  to
    respect for private and family life) could arise in this case.

The Hearing at First Instance

15.  In view of the direction of Judge Fisher  the  Tribunal  did  not  deal
    with the Respondent's letter there and then  but  the  matter  remained
    outstanding when it came before Judge Lucas on 8th January  2015.   The
    determination of Judge Lucas is brief and he  did  not  deal  with  the
    issue of whether the Appellant had a  right  of  appeal  out-of-country
    only but instead confined himself to the Appellant's complaint that  he
    should have been given 60 days' leave in order to obtain a new CAS from
    a new Sponsor following the withdrawal of his CAS.  After  noting  that
    both parties were represented before him he stated at paragraph 3:

         "An issue was to arise in this case that was to have the effect  of
         frustrating its progress.  It was agreed by both  parties  to  this
         appeal that the refusal decision was made on  the  basis  that  the
         Appellant did not have  a  valid  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for
         Studies (CAS).  On behalf of the Respondent  Mr  Armstrong  was  to
         concede that the Appellant had not been given  the  appropriate  60
         days' leave in order to obtain a new CAS from a  new  Sponsor.   He
         was to state that this  "should"  have  been  done.   He  therefore
         accepted  that  the  refusal  decision  was   defective   in   this
         fundamental respect.  Under these  circumstances  both  parties  to
         this appeal agreed that the appropriate course was for this  appeal
         to be remitted to the Respondent for reconsideration on  the  basis
         that the Appellant should be given a further 60 days to identify  a
         new Sponsor in order to issue a CAS certificate."

    He allowed the appeal to that limited extent.

The Onward Appeal

16.  The Respondent appealed Judge Lucas' decision saying that he  had  made
    a material misdirection in law because the Appellant was only  entitled
    to appeal the Section 10 removal decision after he had left the  United
    Kingdom.  The Tribunal had no  jurisdiction  to  hear  the  Appellant's
    appeal in-country.  The grounds went on to summarise what  had  already
    been said by the Respondent in her letter  of  12th  August  2014  (see
    paragraphs 10 to 14  above)  but  this  time  cited  the  authority  of
    Mahmood, a decision of the Upper Tribunal ([2014] UKUT  00439),  and  a
    further Upper Tribunal authority of Ali [2014] UKUT 494.  The Appellant
    plainly did not have an in-country right of appeal and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  had  materially  erred  in  failing  to  properly   establish
    jurisdiction.  In the alternative there was no  legitimate  reason  for
    Judge Lucas to remit the appeal for reconsideration.  The Appellant had
    used deception and even if there was jurisdiction to  hear  the  appeal
    Judge Lucas should have substantively  considered  this  issue  in  his
    findings before disposing of the appeal.

17.  That latter argument appears to be based on the premise that  paragraph
    322(1A) is a mandatory ground for refusal. Thus even if  the  Appellant
    was entitled to an in-country right of appeal and there  was  merit  in
    his argument that he should have been afforded a  further  60  days  to
    find a third college he could  not  satisfy  the  requirements  in  the
    Immigration Rules that he did not fall for refusal  under  the  general
    grounds.  The Appellant fell for  refusal  under  the  general  grounds
    because of the alleged deception.

18.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge Hollingworth on 10th March 2015.  He refused permission to appeal
    stating that the judge had carefully set out what had  taken  place  at
    the hearing before him.

         "The permission application contradicts the position adopted by the
         Presenting Officer on behalf of the Respondent.  No indication  was
         given to the judge of the issues  now  raised.   No  error  of  law
         vitiates the determination which would lead to a different  outcome
         in the light of  the  stance  adopted  by  the  Respondent  at  the
         hearing."

    The grant of permission appears to assume that the Respondent's  letter
    of 12th August 2014 which did indeed set out in  some  detail  why  the
    Respondent argued that there was in fact no valid appeal was no  longer
    relied upon. It does appear that the Presenting Officer,  Mr  Armstrong
    did not refer to the Respondent's letter of 12th August 2014.

19.  The Respondent renewed her application for permission to appeal on  the
    same grounds as before and the matter came on the papers before  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara on 12th June 2015.  She granted  permission
    to  appeal  stating  she  disagreed  with  the   reasoning   of   Judge
    Hollingworth who had previously refused permission.  She wrote:

         "The Respondent made a decision to remove the Appellant pursuant to
         Section 10(1)(b) of the 1999 Act as it is  said  that  he  obtained
         leave to remain by  obtaining  a  TOEIC  certificate  from  ETS  by
         deception.  The notice of immigration decision states any right  of
         appeal is only exercisable  from  abroad.   This  matter  had  been
         before a Duty Judge however no decision on validity had been  made;
         the matter being left for the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  at  the
         substantive hearing.  This jurisdictional issue went unaddressed by
         the First-tier Tribunal Judge despite the  Respondent  having  sent
         detailed submissions on the issue on 12th August  2014.   There  is
         also merit in the second ground regarding whether the  judge  ought
         to have considered the  issues  before  him,  if  jurisdiction  was
         established, rather than "remitting" the matter to the  Respondent.



The Authority of Mehmood

20.  I was handed a copy of the decision of Mehmood [2015] EWCA Civ  744,  a
    Court of Appeal decision on a test  case  behind  which  apparently  27
    other appeals had been stayed.  In  Mehmood  the  Appellants  had  been
    given notice by the Respondent of a  decision  to  remove  them  having
    refused their applications for variation of leave pursuant  to  Section
    10(8) of the 1999 Act.  The Court of Appeal stated that there were  two
    questions which arose.  The first was whether a person whose  leave  to
    be in the United Kingdom had been invalidated by the Respondent and who
    had also made a decision to remove the Appellant had an  in-country  or
    an out-of-country appeal.

21.  The second question  related  to  the  Judicial  Review  procedure  and
    concerned the circumstances in which notwithstanding there was a  right
    to an out-of-country appeal it was appropriate for  the  matter  to  be
    dealt  with  in  Judicial  Review  proceedings.   This  gave  rise   to
    considerations  of  whether   the   circumstances   were   sufficiently
    exceptional or special to make it appropriate to use Judicial Review to
    challenge decisions which could  be  challenged  by  an  out-of-country
    appeal.

22.  Interestingly at paragraph  7  the  Court  of  Appeal  raised  a  third
    question known as the sequencing question.  The Court of Appeal put the
    matter thus:

         "Does the sequence of the notices of the decision invalidating [the
         Appellant's] leave and the decision refusing his application for  a
         variation of his leave mean that his  right  is  to  an  in-country
         appeal whatever?  In answer to the first question [whether there is
         an in or out-of-country appeal] is the relevant date  the  date  on
         the decision letter when it was assumed it was made or  is  it  the
         date on which notice in writing of the decision was given  to  [the
         Appellant]?

    Mr Mehmood was found to be working unlawfully.  The second Appellant Mr
    Ali was considered to have obtained his ETS certificate  by  deception.
    The Court of Appeal confirmed the decision in RK  (Nepal)  that  unless
    there were special or exceptional factors an out-of-country appeal  was
    regarded by Parliament as an adequate safeguard for those removed under
    Section 10 of the 1999 Act.  The existence  of  disputes  of  fact  was
    rarely likely to constitute special or exceptional factors.  Procedural
    fairness could be considered in the appellate  process  and  were  also
    unlikely to constitute special or exceptional factors.  The Section  10
    removal notices requiring the Appellant to leave the jurisdiction might
    be a real detriment but the fact that some inconvenience  would  result
    from being required to leave the  United  Kingdom  was  not  in  itself
    special or exceptional."

23.  Finally at paragraph 72 the Court of Appeal stated:

         "... Mr Ali did not receive prior notice  of  the  removal  notice.
         This did not preclude him responding to the notice in  the  way  Mr
         Mehmood did by  making  representations  or  by  providing  further
         evidence to the Secretary of State.  ... At least the gist  of  the
         evidence upon which a removal decision  under  Section  10  of  the
         Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 is taken must  be  communicated  to
         the subject of that decision at the time that the  decision  itself
         is communicated ... That question and other matters  of  procedural
         fairness can be considered in  the  appellate  process.   They  are
         unlikely to constitute a special or exceptional factor and  do  not
         in Mr Ali's case."

The Hearing Before Me

24.  In consequence of the grant of permission the matter came before me  to
    determine in the first place whether there was an error of law  in  the
    judge's decision such that it  should  be  set  aside  and  the  matter
    remade.  For the Respondent reliance  was  placed  on  the  grounds  of
    appeal in the earlier correspondence (see above).   For  the  Appellant
    Counsel argued that the Court of Appeal decision in Mehmood was subject
    to an appeal to the Supreme Court although no permission to  appeal  to
    the Supreme Court had yet been given.  The issue  of  concern  in  this
    case was not so much whether there was a  valid  in  country  right  of
    appeal against the Respondent's decision but rather whether there was a
    valid decision by the Respondent which could give rise to an appeal  at
    all.

25.  There was no date on the IS 151A or the IS 151A Part 2.   The  date  of
    service of these two forms was not filled in in either case.   As  such
    there was no valid decision.  At paragraph 42 of Mehmood the  Court  of
    Appeal had said that Section 4 of the Immigration Act  1971  explicitly
    provided that the power to give leave to remain or to  vary  any  leave
    shall be exercised by notice in writing given to the  person  affected.
    What was legally relevant was the date  and  time  of  the  service  of
    notice in writing to the person affected.  Until then there was legally
    no decision.  If there was  no  decision  the  Appellant's  application
    remained outstanding for the Respondent  to  take.   If  there  was  no
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal the Appellant could  do  nothing  about
    that.  What should happen was that the appeal should be  remitted  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal to investigate the matter further.

26.  For the Respondent it was stated that the IS 151 forms had been  issued
    by an officer of the Respondent.  Those decisions were not  invalidated
    by the omission of dates.   The  notice  of  appeal  could  be  entered
    without signing it and it would still be taken as valid.  The same went
    for the notices. The issue was whether a document  (in  this  case  the
    notices) was what it purported to be.

27.  In reply Counsel submitted that the forms given to the  Appellant  were
    not signed or dated.  Proof of service rested on  the  Respondent.   It
    was the content which was important.  The boxes on the  IS151A  stating
    which  category  the  Appellant  was  in  for  the  giving  of  removal
    directions were not ticked.  The forms were defective even if they  had
    been served on the Appellant.

The Error of Law Stage

28.  The first issue I have to decide is whether there was a material  error
    of law in Judge Lucas's decision such that it falls to  be  set  aside.
    Plainly there was an issue in this case as to whether the Appellant had
    an in-country right of appeal at all.  Judge Lucas did  not  deal  with
    that.  I appreciate the position which Judge Lucas found himself in. He
    was given little assistance by  the  Presenting  Officer  who  did  not
    apparently  draw  to  the  judge's  attention  the  contents   of   the
    Respondent's letter dated 12th August 2014 which succinctly set out the
    Respondent's case that there was no valid in-country right  of  appeal.
    It was nevertheless an error of law for Judge Lucas not  to  deal  with
    that issue.  Even if the Presenting Officer had wrongly  conceded  that
    there was a valid in-country right of appeal, consent  does  not  found
    jurisdiction.  If there was  no  in-country  right  of  appeal  it  was
    incumbent upon the Tribunal to say so.

29.  Following the Court of Appeal decisions in Mehmood and RK it  is  clear
    that a Section 10 removal decision does not give rise to an  in-country
    right of appeal.  It was conceded on  the  Appellant's  behalf  by  his
    Counsel that the Appellant had not made a human rights  application  to
    the Respondent before the Notice of Appeal was filed. Following  Nirula
    the Appellant could not rely on Article 8 matters for the first time in
    his notice of appeal thus he could not  have  an  in-country  right  of
    appeal on that basis.

30.  The result is that there was an error of law in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal such that it should be set aside.   The  issues  in
    this case to be dealt with on the rehearing were very  narrow  and  did
    not involve a  detailed  consideration  of  the  facts  and  there  was
    therefore no need for me to remit the matter  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard again.  I was in a position to take a decision  on
    the rehearing of the appeal.

Findings

31.  In doing so I had to determine whether there  was  a  valid  in-country
    right of appeal before me, the issue not decided  by  Judge  Lucas  but
    which had to be dealt with as a preliminary issue.  Both parties  agree
    that there is no valid appeal before me but for significantly different
    reasons  with  potentially  significantly   different   results.    The
    Appellant argues that he has no in-country right of appeal  because  he
    has not been properly  served  with  a  valid  notices  of  immigration
    decision.  If I were to find that there was no valid right of appeal on
    that basis the  Appellant  would  be  able  to  challenge  any  further
    attempts by the Respondent to remove him by way of Judicial  Review  or
    other proceedings. That is because his removal would not be  lawful  as
    there would be no immigration decision to base it upon. The issue of an
    in-country or out-of-country appeal would not arise.  On the other hand
    if I accede to the Respondent's argument that valid notices  have  been
    served on the Appellant then I would find that there is  no  in-country
    right of appeal because the right  of  appeal  is  exercisable  out-of-
    country only.  This would not give the Appellant any right to challenge
    his removal  and  an  appellate  process  could  only  begin  once  the
    Appellant had returned to India or otherwise had left the jurisdiction.



32.  In finding as I do that there is no  valid  appeal  before  me  I  must
    explain on what basis I find there is no valid right of  appeal.   That
    involves a consideration of whether the  notices  which  the  Appellant
    received are valid notices despite the absence of  certain  information
    on those notices.  There appears to be no dispute  that  the  Appellant
    has received notices indicating to him his liability to  removal  under
    Section 10 nor is there any dispute that the Appellant has received the
    detailed refusal letter which explains the Respondent's  case  both  in
    relation  to  paragraph  322(1A)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
    withdrawal of the CAS.

33.  In her grounds of onward appeal the  Respondent  had  relied  upon  the
    Upper Tribunal decision of CHH [2011] UKUT 121.  This case had examined
    the provisions of  the  Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations  2003.   At
    paragraph 8 the Tribunal set out what were then  the  contents  of  the
    2003 Regulations although it  is  fair  to  point  out  that  the  2003
    Regulations were heavily amended from  6th  November  2014  subject  to
    transitional provisions by virtue of  Statutory  Instrument  2014/2768.
    The 2003 Regulations as now stated provide that a  decision-maker  must
    give written notice to a person of any decision taken in respect of him
    which is appealable under Section 82(1) of the 2002 Act (Regulation 4).
     Regulation 5 sets out the contents of the notice which must include or
    be accompanied by a statement of the reasons for the decision to  which
    it relates.  The notice must advise the person of his right of  appeal,
    whether or not such an appeal  may  be  brought  while  in  the  United
    Kingdom, the grounds on which such an appeal may  be  brought  and  the
    facilities available for advice and assistance in connection with  such
    an appeal.  Regulation 7 provides that a notice required  to  be  given
    under Regulation 4 may be given by hand, sent by fax or sent by  postal
    service and goes on to deal with where there are problems with  serving
    the notice because the Appellant's address  is  not  known.   The  2003
    Regulations do not state that notices given under them  must  be  dated
    nor indeed signed.

34.  Not dating the documents may lead to  enquiry  on  what  the  Court  of
    Appeal referred to the sequencing question.  However the notices  which
    were served on the Appellant which he accepts he received on the  dates
    he stated were in my view valid notices and were properly  served  upon
    him.  It is correct that Form IS 151A notice to  a  person  liable  to
    removal is in the form of two alternative tick boxes.  The  Immigration
    Officer must be satisfied either: (i) that the person liable to removal
    is a person to whom removal directions may be given in accordance  with
    paragraphs 8 to 10A of Schedule 2 to the Immigration  Act  1971  as  an
    illegal entrant or (ii) a person in respect of whom removal  directions
    may be given in accordance with Section 10 as, inter alia, a person who
    has used deception in seeking leave to remain.

35.  Whilst the relevant tick box has not been ticked in  this  case  it  is
    plain from the refusal letter served on the Appellant that he was  well
    aware that the Respondent was satisfied that the Appellant was a person
    who used deception in seeking leave to remain because of the  issue  of
    the ETS test certificate.  Indeed the IS151 itself goes on to say  that
    in terms stating:

         "You are specifically considered a person who had sought  leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom  by  deception  following  information
         provided to us by Education Testing Service (ETS) on 22nd  February
         2012.  An anomaly with your speaking test indicating  the  presence
         of a proxy test taker."

    That the appropriate box was not ticked is unfortunate but  the  notice
    gave a very clear indication to the Appellant of why he was  liable  to
    removal  and  in  my  view  satisfied  the  provisions  of   the   2003
    Regulations.

36.  Form IS 151A Part 2  was  addressed  to  the  Appellant  and  gave  the
    Appellant's Home Office reference.  It informed the  Appellant  that  a
    decision had  been  taken  to  remove  him  and  informed  him  of  his
    entitlement to appeal  the  decision  after  he  had  left  the  United
    Kingdom.  Although that decision was also not dated, the signature  box
    did say "Immigration Officer/on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State".
    That is sufficient to indicate that the form was issued under authority
    and I accept the Respondent's submission on that point  (see  paragraph
    26 above).  Form IS 151A Part 2 was  in  standard  form  and  gave  the
    information required by the 2003  Regulations.   I  consider  therefore
    that that too was a valid document  and  was  properly  served  on  the
    Appellant.

37.  As a result I find that the Appellant did not have an in-country  right
    of appeal in this case.  He had been served with valid notices but they
    only gave him an out-of-country right of appeal.  It follows  therefore
    that the Appellant's appeal must  be  dismissed  because  there  is  no
    jurisdiction to hear it but it also follows that this decision of  mine
    does not prevent the Respondent from removing the Appellant  under  the
    authority  of  the  immigration  decision.   I  therefore  dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to remove him  and
    give him an out-of-country right of appeal only.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it aside.  I have remade the decision  in  this  case  by
dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent  to
remove him and to refuse  to  grant  him  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
Kingdom.

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so  doing.



Signed this 28th day of October 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I therefore make no fee award.


Signed this 28th day of October 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

