

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
IA/31942/2015

                                                 IA/31944/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : Field House                 |     Decision and reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 21 July 2017                        |     On 24 July 2017                |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               manjitder kaur
                               Amandeep Singh
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Praisoody, instructed by Deccan Prime
                    Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Malcolm  allowing  Ms
   Kaur and Mr Singh's appeals against the respondent's decision  to  refuse
   Ms Kaur's application for leave to remain as a Tier 4  (General)  Student
   Migrant and Mr Singh's application for leave to remain as  the  dependant
   of a Tier 4 migrant.

2. For the purposes of  this  decision,  I  shall  hereafter  refer  to  the
   Secretary of State as the respondent and Ms Kaur  and  Mr  Singh  as  the
   appellants, reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal  before
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. The appellants are citizens of India. The first appellant was born  on  5
   January 1985 and the second appellant on 21 December 1984.  They  entered
   the United Kingdom on 1 January 2011 with visas valid  until  30  October
   2012. On 10 October 2012 the first appellant applied for leave to  remain
   as a Tier 4 student and was granted leave to remain from 12 December 2012
   to 30 September 2014, and the second appellant was granted leave in  line
   as her dependant. On 30 September 2014 the first  appellant  applied  for
   further leave to remain as a  Tier  4  student  migrant  and  the  second
   applied for leave to remain as her dependant.


4. The appellants' applications were  refused  on  14  September  2015.  The
   first appellant's application was refused under paragraph 322(2)  on  the
   grounds that she had submitted, in relation to her  previous  application
   on 10 October 2012, a fraudulently obtained TOEIC  certificate  from  the
   Educational Testing Service (ETS) in relation to an English language test
   she claimed to have taken at New London College. The respondent had  been
   informed by ETS that a proxy test taker had been used and that  they  had
   therefore declared the appellant's test result as invalid  and  cancelled
   it. As the appellant's application was refused under one of  the  general
   grounds for refusal, the respondent was not satisfied that  she  met  the
   requirements  of  paragraph  245ZX(a)  of  the  immigration  rules.   The
   application was also refused  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant's  CAS
   (Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies), assigned by The London  College
   (UK), was not valid as the college was not listed as  a  Tier  4  sponsor
   when the Tier 4 Sponsor Register was checked on 14  September  2015.  The
   respondent considered that, since the first appellant's application  fell
   for refusal under paragraph 322(2), she did  not  fall  under  the  Patel
   ruling and therefore no further 60 days were  given  to  her.  The  first
   appellant  was  accordingly  awarded  no  points   for   Attributes   and
   Maintenance and her application was also refused under paragraph 245ZX(c)
   and (d) with reference to  Appendix  A  and  C.  The  second  appellant's
   application was refused in line with that decision.


5. The appellants appealed against that decision. Their appeal was heard  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Malcolm on 9 September 2016 and was allowed  in
   a decision promulgated on 5 December 2016 on the  basis  that  the  first
   appellant's evidence, that she had taken the English language  test,  was
   accepted and that it  was  therefore  accepted  that  she  had  not  used
   deception.


6. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the  respondent,
   and granted on 7 June 2017, on the grounds that the  judge  had  arguably
   erred in law by failing to assess whether the respondent  had  discharged
   the burden of proving deception in line with SM and Qadir v Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden of  Proof)  [2016]
   UKUT 229 and by failing to give adequate reasons for preferring the first
   appellant's subjective evidence to the documentary  evidence  adduced  by
   the respondent.

7. At the hearing before me Ms Praisoody  accepted  Mr  Singh's  submissions
   that the judge had materially erred in law by  failing  to  consider  the
   shifting burden of proof and by failing  to  consider  the  look-up  tool
   which specifically referred to the first appellant. Both  parties  agreed
   that the appropriate course was for the case to be remitted to the First-
   tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.


8. Accordingly, the decision of Judge Malcolm is set aside in  its  entirety
   and the appellant's case is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
   heard afresh.

DECISION

9. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The decision is set aside.

10. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  pursuant  to  section
   12(2)(b)(i) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
   Practice Statement 7.2(b), before any judge aside from Judge Malcolm.






Signed[pic]                                  Date: 21 July 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede

