
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31103/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 17th February 2017                    |On 22nd May 2017                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                          MR SHAMSHIR-UL-ZAMAN KHAN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Beach, Counsel, instructed by F S Law
Solicitors & Advocates
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant is a national of Tanzania.   On  25th  June  2012,  the
       appellant made an application for indefinite leave to remain  in  the
       UK.  The application was refused by  the  respondent  on  30th  April
       2013.   The  appellant  appealed  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal ("FtT").


    2. The appeal was first listed for hearing before FtT Judge  Carroll  on
       2nd January  2014.   The  appellant  claimed  that  the  respondent's
       decision was not in accordance with the law  because  the  respondent
       had failed to consider the claim under her publicly published policy,
       namely the carers' concession. At that hearing before the FtT, it was
       agreed between the parties that the matter should be remitted to  the
       respondent for further consideration by her.  The Judge remitted  the
       matter to the respondent for further consideration.


    3. The respondent reached a further decision on 15th  July  2014,  again
       refusing the application for leave to remain.   The  appellant  again
       appealed and his appeal was dismissed by FtT Judge McWilliams for the
       reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 22nd May 2015.  On  12th
       August 2015, the appellant was granted permission to  appeal  to  the
       Upper Tribunal by FtT Judge Ransley.  That appeal was heard by  Upper
       Tribunal  Judge  Coker  on  12th  January  2016.  In   her   decision
       promulgated on 27th January 2016, the Judge noted that the  appellant
       had  withdrawn  his  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
       remaining challenge was purely an Article  8  challenge.   The  Judge
       stated at paragraph [8] of her decision:


             "I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred  in
             law in failing to assess all of the evidence in the round  and
             failing to give adequate reasons for the findings relied  upon
             to find that the removal of  the  appellant  to  Tanzania  was
             proportionate."


    4. Upper Tribunal Judge Coker  set  aside  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge
       McWilliams insofar as it relates to Article 8 only.  She remitted the
       matter back to the FtT for a decision on the appeal under Article 8.


    5. The appeal was listed for  hearing  before  FtT  Judge  Lawrence  and
       dismissed for the reasons set out in a decision promulgated  on  21st
       July 2016.  Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge
       McWilliam on 10th January 2017.


    6. The matter comes before me to consider whether or not the decision of
       the First-tier Tribunal Judge involved the making of a material error
       of law, and if the decision is set aside, to re-make the decision.






 The decision of FtT Judge Lawrence


    7. At paragraph [2] of his decision,  the  Judge  records  that  at  the
       hearing before him, he heard the evidence of the  appellant  and  the
       appellant's sisters and brother-in-law, namely Farida Khan, Shahe-Gul
       Khan-Sherwani and Farruk Naeem Khan-Sherwani.   The  Judge  notes  at
       paragraph [4] of his decision that it is accepted that the  appellant
       does not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.   He  also
       notes that it is the health of the appellant's mother that amounts to
       the 'compelling circumstances' that take the appeal  outside  of  the
       Immigration Rules (see: SS (Congo) & Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387).


    8. A summary of the background is to be found at paragraphs [6]  to  [8]
       of the decision of the  FtT  Judge.   The  thrust  of  the  claim  is
       summarised at paragraph [7];


             "It  is  claimed  that   the   appellant's   father's   health
             deteriorated significantly. Appellant's  mother,  Fatima  Khan
             Lodhi, had been caring for him but was finding it difficult to
             continue to cope due to her own ill-health. It is claimed  the
             appellant took over the  care  of  his  father  until  he  was
             hospitalised. He died on the 30th of October 2013.  The  death
             of  the  father  affected  Mrs  Lodhi  and  her   own   health
             deteriorated significantly. The appellant took  over  care  of
             Mrs Lodhi on a full-time basis."


    9. The findings of the Judge are to be found at paragraphs [10] to  [37]
       of the decision.  The Judge refers at paragraphs [10] to [22] of  his
       decision,  to  the  medical  evidence  before  him  relating  to  the
       appellant's mother.


   10. At paragraphs [25] to [28] of his  decision,  the  Judge  begins  his
       consideration of the Article 8 claim by reference to the decision  of
       the Court of Appeal in Kugathas -v- SSHD [2003] EWCA  Civ  31.   That
       is, whether the appellants' Article 8 rights and those of his  mother
       and siblings, and their respective families, are engaged.   A  parent
       and an adult child would not necessarily acquire  the  protection  of
       Article  8  without  evidence  of  further  elements  of  dependency,
       involving more than the normal emotional ties.   Article  8  protects
       the rights not only of the appellant, but  also  family  members  and
       each case has to be assessed on its own particular facts.   At  [25],
       the Judge found that there is no Kugathas 'dependancy',  as  claimed,
       between the appellant and his mother.  Similarly, at [28], the  Judge
       found that there is no such dependency between the appellant and  his
       siblings and their respective families.  He states:


             "There is no evidence that there is the Kugathas  'dependency'
             between the appellant and his siblings  and  their  respective
             families. In any event, even if there is 'family life', it can
             be  enjoyed  by  the  relatives  visiting  the  appellant   in
             Tanzania......I find that  even  if  there  is  'family  life'
             between the  appellant,  his  siblings  and  their  respective
             families it can be  enjoyed  in  myriad  of  other  ways.  The
             appellant is able to visit his mother with entry clearance  as
             he has been doing in the past."


   11. At paragraphs [30] to [36] of  his  decision,  the  Judge  sought  to
       engage with the step-by-step process  enunciated  in  the  well-known
       decision of the House of  Lords  in  Razgar.  He  set  out  the  five
       questions posed therein, and considered each question in  turn.   The
       Judge found at [32] that the proposed removal of the  appellant  will
       not amount to an interference with the exercise  of  the  appellant's
       right to respect for his private or family life.  At [33], the  Judge
       found that any such interference would not have consequences of  such
       gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of  Article  8.   The
       Judge found at [34] and [35] that there is no  interference,  but  in
       any event, any interference that there may be, is in accordance  with
       the law and necessary in the interests of proper immigration control.
        Notwithstanding his findings that  the  answers  to  the  first  and
       second of the five questions were answered against the appellant, the
       Judge   nevertheless   considered   whether   the   interference   is
       proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be achieved.  He
       found,  at  [36],  that  if  there  is  any   interference,   it   is
       proportionate to the legitimate aim of  proper  immigration  control.
       At [37], the Judge referred to  and  considers  the  public  interest
       considerations set out in s117B of the 2002 Act. At [38],  the  Judge
       sets out his omnibus conclusion:


             "38. In my view, removal of  the  appellant  does  not  engage
             article 8 of the Human Rights Convention. If it does,  I  find
             removal of the appellant is  proportionate,  on  the  evidence
             presented to me, to the legitimate aim of  proper  immigration
             control."


The appeal before me


   12. Although set out in paragraphs 6(a) to (e) of the Grounds  of  appeal
       as five separate grounds, the appellant advances four  broad  grounds
       of appeal.  First, the Judge has failed to give clear reasons for his
       adverse credibility findings.  Second, the  Judge  erred  in  finding
       that there was no a family life.   Third,  the  Judge  erred  in  his
       assessment of the medical and expert evidence before.   Finally,  the
       Judge failed to consider the issue  of  the  proportionality  of  the
       decision to remove the appellant, and the impact of  the  removal  on
       the appellant, upon the appellant's mother and his siblings,  and  in
       particular, the interference that  would  result  to  their  personal
       lives.


   13. Before me, Ms Beach  submits  that  there  are  a  lack  of  reasoned
       findings in the decision of the FtT.   She  submits  that  the  Judge
       heard evidence from the appellant, his sisters, and  his  brother-in-
       law, but there is a complete absence of any real  assessment  of  the
       oral and written evidence of the  appellant  and  his  family.    She
       submits, the Judge fails to make clear and reasoned  findings  as  to
       the credibility of the appellant and his witnesses.  She submits that
       without clear credibility findings, the  FtT  Judge  cannot  properly
       have assessed the  evidence  before  him,  and  cannot  properly  and
       rationally have reached his conclusions.


   14. Ms Beach submits the Presenting Officer accepted, in submissions made
       to the FtT, that 'some' family life did exist between  the  appellant
       and  his  mother  and  that  the  issue  between  the   parties   was
       proportionality.  In any event, she submts  there  was  a  wealth  of
       evidence set out in the witness statements of the appellant  and  his
       siblings that were before the Judge,  as  to  the  family  life  that
       exists between the appellant  and  his  mother.   She  also  drew  my
       attention to the report of Dr Halari which, at paragraphs 50, 54, 55,
       56, 60, 62, and 64, refers to the reliance placed upon the  appellant
       by his mother.  She submits that all of  that  evidence  should  have
       been considered when the Judge reached his  findings  as  to  whether
       there is  a  family  life  between  the  appellant  and  his  mother.
       Furthermore, the Judge failed to make findings as to the evidence  of
       the witnesses inability to care for their mother, and the  care  that
       they  believe,  would  be  available  to  their  mother  without  the
       appellant.  Ms Beach submits that without any  proper  assessment  of
       that evidence of dependency and the need  for  care,  the  FtT  Judge
       could not carry out a proper proportionality assessment.


   15. Ms Beach also submits the  Judge  erred  in  his  assessment  of  the
       medical evidence that was before him.   She submits the  Judge  notes
       the qualifications of Dr Halari and does not  appear  to  take  issue
       with her expertise.  Later, at [33], of his decision the Judge refers
       to "...'experts' like Dr  Halari..",  suggesting  that  he  does  not
       accept her expertise.  If her expertise is  not  accepted,  Ms  Beach
       submits, it was incumbent upon the Judge to provide clear reasons for
       attaching little or no weight to her evidence.  Ms Beach also submits
       that the fact that Dr Halari based her assessment (to some extent) on
       what was recounted to her by the appellant and his mother,  does  not
       mean that little weight should be placed on her report.  She  submits
       that the Judge erred in his  finding,  at  [33],  that  there  is  no
       evidence from an independent source, apart from wishes  expressed  by
       the appellant and his mother to 'experts'  like  Dr  Halari  and  the
       authors of letters emanating from  the  GP  and  hospital,  that  the
       appellant's  mother  is  likely  to  suffer  adversely,  mentally  or
       physically, should the appellant leave the UK.  Furthermore, the  FTT
       Judge failed  to consider the evidence that was before him  that  the
       on-going psychiatric assessments of the  appellant's  mother  by  the
       Kent  and  Medway  NHS,  also  involved   the   input   of   clinical
       psychologists.


   16. Ms Beach also submits that although the Judge refers to the Care Plan
       dated 9th June 2015,  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the  concerns
       regarding the appellant's mother's mental state.   The  plan  records
       that that she was 'very anxious and agitated' and sets out the day-to-
       day care that she requires with cooking,  preparation  of  meals  and
       prompting to take medication.  She submits that the  opinion  of  the
       expert is that the support and assistance that  is  provided  by  the
       appellant has a positive effect on his mother.


   17. In reply, Mr Parkinson submits it was for the Judge to decide whether
       family life in  the  Article  8  sense  is  established  between  the
       appellant and his mother and or siblings.  He submits that the  Judge
       had before him an extensive  bundle  relied  upon  by  the  appellant
       comprising in excess of 400 pages.  He submits  that  the  Judge  has
       carefully considered the evidence relied upon by  the  appellant  and
       reached findings that were properly  open  to  him.   In  any  event,
       notwithstanding the Judge's concerns about whether the appellant  has
       established that he has a family life with his mother  and  siblings,
       the Judge, in the alternative, went on  to  consider  the  Article  8
       claim by reference to the five stage approach in Razgar.  Mr Pakinson
       submits that having carefully considered all of the  evidence  before
       him, it was open  to  the  Judge  to  find  that  the  needs  of  the
       appellant's mother can be met by Social Services  and  the  NHS.   He
       submits it was open to  the  Judge  to  conclude  that  there  is  no
       independent evidence to establish the claim that the appellant  needs
       to remain in the UK to care for his  mother.   He  submits  that  the
       appellant and his siblings might prefer that  the  care  provided  to
       their mother is provided by the appellant, but that is  a  matter  of
       preference.  The appellant's desire to remain in the UK to  care  for
       his mother does not equate to a right to do so.  Mr Parkinson submits
       that as  there  was  no  evidence  put  before  the  FtT  as  to  the
       alternative care that may be available, it was open to the  Judge  to
       reach the conclusion that he did, that any third party  support  that
       is needed by the appellant's mother,   can   be   amply  accommodated
       by Social Services and the NHS.


 Discussion


   18. I remind myself of the observations made by Mr. Justice Hadon-Cave in
       Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);


             "It is generally  unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for  First-tier
             Tribunal judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in
             a case. This leads  to  judgments  becoming  overly  long  and
             confused and is  not  a  proportionate  approach  to  deciding
             cases. It is, however, necessary for judges  to  identify  and
             resolve key conflicts in the evidence and explain in clear and
             brief terms their reasons, so that the parties can  understand
             why they have won or lost.


   19. I have also had regard to the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
       Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT  00085  IAC
       where it was stated in the head note that:


             "Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of
             the conclusions on the central issue on which  the  appeal  is
             determined,  those  reasons  need  not  be  extensive  if  the
             decision makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted
             by the judge."


   20. In Shizad, the Tribunal also confirmed that although a  decision  may
       contain an error of law  where  the  requirements  to  give  adequate
       reasons are not met, the Upper Tribunal would not normally set  aside
       a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
       misdirection of law, the fact-finding process  cannot  be  criticised
       and the relevant Country Guidance has been taken into account, unless
       the conclusions the Judge  draws  from  the  primary  data  were  not
       reasonably open to him or her.


   21. The issue for me to decide is  whether  the  Judge  was  entitled  to
       dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds for the reasons  set  out.  I
       have carefully read through the decision of the FtT  Judge,  and  his
       findings that are set out at paragraphs [10] to [37] of his decision.




   22. I have carefully read the witness statement of the appellant that  is
       to be found  in  the  appellant's  bundle  and  have  considered  the
       exhibits thereto.  I have also read  the  witness  statement  of  the
       appellant's mother, sisters, and brother-in-law, all of which were in
       the appellant's bundle.  Essentially the appellant's case is that  he
       lives with, and is the primary carer of his mother who has a  history
       of a number of physical and mental  health  issues.  The  appellant's
       sisters live in the UK and they confirm the role  undertaken  by  the
       appellant in respect of their mother's  care,  and  the  burden  that
       would be placed upon them, if the appellant was  no  longer  here  to
       fulfil that role.


   23. I reject the submission that there are a lack of reasoned findings in
       the decision of the FtT and a complete absence of any real assessment
       of the oral and written evidence of the  appellant  and  his  family.
       It is right to note, as Ms Beach submits, the  Judge  does  not  make
       specific reference in his decision to everything that was said by the
       appellant and his witnesses, but as is clear  from  the  authorities,
       that is not necessary or to be encouraged.


   24. The failure to expressly refer to all of the evidence, is not to  say
       that the Judge did not consider that evidence when  he  resolved  the
       key conflicts in the evidence, and explained his  reasons  in  a  way
       that the parties can understand  why  they  have  won  or  lost.   At
       paragraph [3], the Judge notes that he has  taken  into  account  the
       evidence contained in the respondent's bundle, the  evidence  in  the
       appellant's bundle and the various documents submitted on  behalf  of
       the parties, together with the oral  evidence  and  submissions.   At
       paragraph [18], the Judge states:


           "I have considered the medical evidence,  the  contents  of  the
           witness statements, the  oral  evidence,  the  policy  regarding
           carers and the written and oral submissions in the round..."


          I have no reason to doubt that the Judge did consider the evidence
       as a whole, in completing an individual and fact-specific inquiry  as
       to the appellant's Article 8 claim.


   25. The Tribunal must first determine whether Article 8 of  the  ECHR  is
       engaged at all. If it is not, the Tribunal  has  no  jurisdiction  to
       embark upon an assessment of the remaining issues  stages  identified
       in Razgar.  If Article 8 is engaged, the Tribunal  should  go  on  to
       consider the remaining four stages identified in Razgar.


   26. At paragraphs [10] to [23] of his decision, the Judge makes reference
       to the evidence before him.  At paragraph [15] of his  decision,  the
       Judge expressly refers to the opinions expressed by Dr  Halari.   The
       Judge  states  "I  have  considered  them  in  detail.".   The  Judge
       considered the medical evidence  in  the  round,  together  with  the
       evidence of the appellant and his witnesses, and what is said in  the
       care plan.  At paragraphs [18] and [19] of his  decision,  the  Judge
       notes that the care plan relied upon by the appellant does not record
       Mrs Lodhi as being in need of  day-to-day  care  as  claimed  by  the
       appellant and his witnesses.  At paragraph [19], the Judge states:


             "..on careful examination of the medical evidence, it does not
             appear to me that Mrs Lodhi is actually in need, as opposed to
             'wants' or 'prefers', of physical or mental assistance."


   27. At paragraph [22] of the decision the Judge notes, Dr Halari  reports
       Mrs Lodhi is opposed  to  receiving  help  from  Social  Services  or
       strangers entering her property on cultural grounds.  In my  judgment
       it was properly open to the Judge, on the evidence, to find that that
       is a personal choice she  has  made.   Dr  Halari's  report  in  this
       respect was based upon what the appellant and Mrs Lodhi had told her.
        As the Judge notes, "It is not based on  any  objective  independent
       and verifiable assessment by  a  qualified  expert  in  the  relevant
       filed.".   For the reasons identified at paragraphs [22] and [23]  of
       the decision, and having carefully considered the report of Dr Halari
       for myself, in my judgment it was open to the Judge, on the evidence,
       to find that Mrs Lodhi's preference to be cared for by the appellant,
       is a personal one.


   28. Much of what is set out in the findings of the  Judge  at  paragraphs
       [10] to [23] of his decision, might more appropriately have been  set
       out in the  assessment  of  the  Article  8  claim  that  follows  at
       paragraphs [24] to [37] of the decision.  Although I accept that  the
       Judge's decision could have been more clearly expressed, it is  clear
       from a proper reading of what is set out  at  [25]  to  [32]  of  the
       Judge's decision, that the appeal was dismissed by the FtT  primarily
       upon the finding of the Judge that the appellant has not  shown  that
       he has a family life with his mother and siblings, and thus Article 8
       is not engaged.  In the case of adults, in the context of immigration
       control, there is no legal or factual presumption as to the existence
       or absence of family  life  for  the  purposes  of  Article  8.   The
       question whether an individual enjoys family life is one of fact, and
       depends on the relevant facts  of  the  particular  case.  The  Judge
       referred to the care plan relied upon by the appellant, but that does
       not record Mrs Lodhi as being in need of day-to-day care  as  claimed
       by the appellant and his witnesses.  The Judge found that Mrs Lodhi's
       preference to be cared for by the appellant, is a personal  one.  The
       appellant's desire to remain in the UK to care for  his  mother  does
       not equate to a right to do so.


   29. In my judgment, it was open to the Judge to find that  the  appellant
       has not shown that he has a family life with his mother and siblings,
       and thus Article 8 is not engaged,  having  considered  the  evidence
       before him.  The Judge's finding is neither irrational nor  perverse.
       The Judge therefore had no jurisdiction to embark upon an  assessment
       of the remaining stages identified in Razgar


   30. Notwithstanding that, the Judge states at paragraph [31]


             "In the event, I am wrong about my assessment of the  Kuhathas
             'dependency' I turn to  the  'proportionality'  assessment  in
             Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27..."


   31. Although referred to as 'the proportionality assessment',  the  Judge
       carried out an analysis of the Article 8 claim by  reference  to  the
       five-stage approach in Razgar.   At paragraph [32] of  his  decision,
       the Judge again states that the  proposed  removal  will  not  be  an
       interference with the exercise of the appellant's  right  to  respect
       for his private of family life. The appeal was  dismissed  after  the
       Judge had carefully considered the facts  and  circumstances  of  the
       claim and all the evidence before him.  Looking at the matter through
       the five Razgar questions, the Judge found that the appellant has not
       shown that he has a family life with his mother and siblings  and  as
       such the appeal failed at the first hurdle.  That  was  again  in  my
       judgment, a finding that was reasonably open  to  him.   The  finding
       cannot be said to be perverse, irrational or a finding that  was  not
       supported by the evidence.


   32. The Judge nevertheless went on to consider each of the four remaining
       stages of the Razgar  test.  The  appellant  criticises  the  Judge's
       findings,  at  [33],  as  to  whether  any  interference  will   have
       consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage  the  operation
       of Article 8, and the Judge's assessment of the medical evidence.


   33. At paragraph [33], the Judge states:


             "The next Razgar point is "(b) if so, will  such  interference
             have consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the
             operation of Article 8?" The answer is again in  the  negative
             for reasons set out. In so far  as  Mrs  Lodhi  is  concerned,
             there may temporary disturbance to her routine.  This  can  be
             accommodated. I fully note she has expressed  her  desire  for
             the appellant to remain with  her.  This  is  well  documented
             especially in the report by Dr Halari. However,  there  is  no
             independent  source,  apart  from  wishes  expressed  by   the
             appellant and Mrs  Lodhi  to  'experts'  like  Dr  Halari  and
             authors of letters emanating from the GP  and  hospital,  that
             Mrs  Lodhi  is  likely  to  suffer  adversely,   mentally   or
             physically, should the appellant leave the  UK.  She  has  not
             been observed, discreetly, by an independent expert, to  react
             to third party  involvement  in  the  provision  of  care.  Dr
             Halari's report is entirely based on what  the  appellant  and
             Mrs Lodhi said to her. The evidence of the witnesses to me  is
             from the appellant's siblings and  brother-in-law.  They  will
             benefit from the appellant being granted leave in the  UK.  Of
             course they will. However, the issue is whether removal of the
             appellant have an adverse effect of gravity on  them.  On  the
             evidence before me, the answer is in the negative."


   34. I have carefully considered the content of the  psychological  report
       of Dr Rozmin Halari, a Chartered  Consultant  Clinical  Psychologist,
       dated 4th March 2015.   Although  the  Judge  states  that  there  is
       nothing apart from the wishes expressed  by  the  appellant  and  Mrs
       Lodhi to experts like Dr Halari and the authors of letters  emanating
       from the  GP  and  hospital  that  Mrs  Lodhi  is  likely  to  suffer
       adversely, mentally or physically, should the appellant leave the UK,
       the Judge had previously noted the professional opinions set  out  in
       the report of Dr Halari.  At paragraph  [15]  of  the  decision,  the
       Judge records;


             "Dr Halari expresses her opinion that should the appellant  be
             returned  to  Tanzania  Mrs  Lodhi   is   likely   to   suffer
             deterioration in her mental health (para 83); that  she  would
             benefit from counselling  and  cognitive  behavioural  therapy
             (para 84-85);at this stage of her life she would benefit  from
             consistent practical and emotional support (para 86);  she  is
             opposed to idea of social services entering her  home  from  a
             cultural and tradition prospective (para 87); she is receiving
             the support she needs from her son and she is happy (para 88).
             Dr  Halari  sets  out  her  opinions  on  the  rest   of   her
             instructions between para 89-112.  I have considered  them  in
             detail".


   35. Again, in my judgement, the decision could  have  been  more  clearly
       expressed, but  I  reject  the  submission  made  on  behalf  of  the
       appellant that the Judge erred  in  his  assessment  of  the  medical
       evidence that was before him.


   36. The Judge was aware of the opinions expressed by Dr Halari and refers
       to those opinions at paragraph [15] of his decision.  He states  that
       he has considered them.  At paragraph [33] of his decision, the Judge
       addresses whether any interference will  have  consequences  of  such
       gravity as potentially to engage the  operation  of  Article  8.   In
       considering the medical evidence, at paragraph [33], the Judge  notes
       that Mrs Lodhi has not been observed, discreetly, by  an  independent
       expert, to react to third party involvement in the provision of care.




   37. I have carefully considered whether the Judge's decision  read  as  a
       whole, discloses a material error of law.  In  my  judgment,  as  the
       Judge had already found that the proposed  removal  will  not  be  an
       interference with the exercise of the appellant's  right  to  respect
       for his private of family life, the Article 8 appeal  failed  at  the
       first hurdle.  The question of whether  any  interference  will  have
       consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage  the  operation
       of Article 8 did not arise.  The Judge's  conclusions  at  paragraphs
       [33] to [37] of the decision,  could  not  therefore  be  capable  of
       materially affecting the outcome of the appeal.


   38. Overall I am not satisfied that the Judge fell into a material  error
       of law capable of affecting  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.  Although
       muddled in some respects, in my judgment, upon a holistic reading  of
       the decision,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  Judge's  analysis  is
       irrational  or  perverse.  The  Judge  did  not  take  into   account
       irrelevant factors, and the weight that he attached to  the  evidence
       either individually or cumulatively, was  a  matter  for  him.  I  am
       satisfied that  the  Judge's  decision  is  a  sufficiently  reasoned
       decision that was open to him on the evidence.


   39. It follows that in my judgement the decision  of  the  FtT  does  not
       disclose a material error of law capable of affecting the outcome  of
       the appeal and the appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


   40. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       stands.


   41. No anonymity direction is applied for, and none is made.


                                    Date                  10th May 2017



       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




FEE AWARD


As I have dismissed the appeal, no fee award is appropriate.

Signed                                  Date     10th May 2017


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

