
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31364/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6 July 2017                           |On 17 July 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant


                                     and

                                 UMID RUZIEV
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Chohan, instructed by Fadiga & Co Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen of Uzbekistan
    born on 28 December 1979 who has resided in the UK since 26 June 2004
    on a student visa. On 1 July 2014, after ten years of continuous
    residence, he applied for indefinite leave to remain in the UK under
    Paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules. On 8 September 2015 his
    application was refused by the appellant (hereinafter "the Secretary of
    State") on the basis that he had obtained a Test of English for
    International Communication ("TOEIC")  from Educational Testing
    Services ("ETS") fraudulently by use of a proxy test taker. The
    claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was heard
    by Judge Shepherd. In a decision promulgated on 21 November 2016, the
    judge allowed the appeal. The Secretary of State is now appealing
    against that decision.


 2. Judge Shepherd gave two alternative reasons for finding for the
    claimant.


 3. Firstly, he found that the Secretary of State had failed to discharge
    the initial evidential burden of establishing a prima facie case
    against the claimant. The judge contrasted the Secretary of State's
    refusal letter, which stated that the date of the fraudulently taken
    test was 23 November 2012, with the evidence adduced by the Secretary
    of State to show the claimant engaged in deception, which referred to a
    test taken on 20 November 2012. At paragraph 74 the judge stated:

         On this point alone I conclude that, there being such a confusion
         as to the dates for which the test results were found to be invalid
         or questionable, that the [Secretary of State's] evidence is such
         as to fall far below the evidential threshold required.


 4. Secondly, and in the alternative, the judge found that the Secretary of
    State was unable to discharge the legal burden of showing that, on the
    balance of probabilities, the claimant engaged in the alleged
    deception. The judge reached this conclusion after considering the
    claimant's English language ability, educational history, and his
    response to questions posed to him in cross examination. The judge
    found, at paragraph 81, that it was more likely than not that the
    claimant "would have had no discernible reason for wishing to obtain
    and use a fraudulent certificate."


 5. The grounds of appeal make two arguments. The first argument is that
    the evidence correctly records when the claimant took the test and it
    is unclear why the judge found there to be a discrepancy. The second
    argument is that the judge relied on the claimant's English language
    ability without recognising that a person might use a proxy test taker
    even though they speak English at the required level. It is argued that
    the judge erred by failing to give adequate reasons for holding that a
    person who clearly speaks English would therefore have no reason to
    secure a test certificate by deception.


 6. Before me, Mr Wilding argued that the evidence unambiguously shows that
    the disputed test was taken on 20 November 2012 and therefore there was
    no reason for the judge to find there to be confusion about the date of
    the test. He argued that this error undermined not only the judge's
    conclusion about the initial evidential burden not being met but also
    the judge's evaluation of whether the legal burden of showing fraud was
    established, as the judge's starting point in this assessment was that
    the Secretary of State had not managed to demonstrate even a prima
    facie case. Referring to MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 450(IAC),
    he also submitted that the judge failed to consider that a person who
    speaks English could still use a proxy test taker.


 7. Mr Chohan argued that it was the Secretary of State's case, both at the
    hearing and in the refusal letter, that the disputed test was taken on
    23 November 2012 and not 20 November 2012. As this was inconsistent
    with the documentary evidence, the judge was entitled to find that
    there was confusion as to the date and that this undermined the
    Secretary of State's case. He also argued that the judge, having
    correctly directed himself as to the factors relevant to evaluating if
    the claimant had used deception, carried out that assessment
    adequately.


Consideration


 8. In the Secretary of State's refusal letter dated 8 September 2015 it is
    alleged that verification software deployed by ETS detected that a
    proxy test taker took a speaking test instead of the claimant on 23
    November 2012. At the First-tier Tribunal hearing, the Secretary of
    State's representative maintained that the claimant used a proxy test
    taker on an ETS speaking test taken on 23 November 2012. The claimant
    also identified 23 November 2012 as the date of the test.


 9. However, although the parties appear to have been in agreement before
    the First-tier Tribunal that the relevant test was taken on 23 November
    2012, this is not what the documentary evidence in fact shows. In the
    Secretary of State's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal, at page C2,
    is a photocopy of a document headed "Speaking and Writing tests
    Official Score Report". This document contains the claimant's
    photograph along with his name and date of birth. In the section for
    test date the date given is 20 November 2012. The Secretary of State
    adduced a Statement from a civil servant named Hilary Rackstraw.
    Appended to this Statement at Annex A is a document headed "ETS SELT
    Source Data" which shows the claimant's test was categorised as
    invalid. The test date on this document is 20 November 2012.


10. It is apparent that the Secretary of State made a mistake in the
    refusal letter by recording the test date as 23 November 2012 and that
    this mistake was not corrected at the First tier Tribunal hearing.
    However, regardless of what was stated in the refusal letter, the
    evidence unambiguously shows that the date of the claimant's speaking
    test was 20 November 2012, not 23 November 2012 (which was the date of
    his listening and reading test). The Secretary of State's letter is not
    evidence and the fact that it gives a different date than that shown by
    the evidence does not indicate there is confusion in the evidence as to
    the correct date. It merely shows that the Secretary of State mis-
    stated the date.


11. I am satisfied that it was an error of law for the judge to find that
    the initial evidential burden was not met because of "confusion" about
    the date of the test when the evidence before her clearly and
    unambiguously showed that the date of the claimant's speaking test was
    20 November 2012. However, for the reasons set out below, this error
    was not material.

12. After finding that the initial evidential burden was not met, the judge
    proceeded to consider the case in the alternative and address the
    question of whether, if the initial evidential burden had been met, it
    was more likely than not that the claimant had engaged in deception.

13. There are a range of factors relevant to such an assessment, as set out
    in paragraph 69 of SM and Qadir (ETS-Evidence-Burden of proof) [2016]
    UKUT 00229. They include: what a person had to gain from being
    dishonest, what he had to lose, what is known about his character, the
    cultural environment in which he operated, how he performed under cross
    examination, whether his English appears commensurate with the TOEIC
    scores, and whether his academic scores make it illogical or
    unnecessary to cheat.


14. In my view, it is clear from paragraphs 78-81 of the decision that the
    judge has considered a range of factors relevant to whether deception
    was used before reaching the conclusion that on the balance of
    probabilities it was not. In paragraphs 78 and 79 there is
    consideration of the claimant's academic history, English language
    ability, and how he responded to questions posed in cross examination
    (as well as from the judge herself). The judge also raised the issue,
    at paragraph 80, of why someone in the claimant's position would use
    deception, noting that this was not put to the claimant or explored in
    evidence at all by the Secretary of State. At paragraph 81 the judge
    concluded that it was more likely than not that the claimant "would
    have had no discernible reason for wishing to obtain and use a
    fraudulent certificate."

15. The grounds argue that the judge erred by  failing to give adequate
    reasons for holding that a person who clearly speaks English would as a
    consequence have no reason to secure a test certificate by deception.
    This ground mischaracterises the decision. It is clear from paragraph
    80 that the judge was alive to the possibility that someone who speaks
    good English may nonetheless cheat in a spoken English language test
    but that the issue was not explored or developed by the Secretary of
    State. If the claimant's claim that he would not have reason to use
    fraud was not challenged or explored by the Secretary of State (in
    cross examination or otherwise) there can be no error of law in the
    judge accepting the claimant's claim. The burden of proof to show
    deception lay with the Secretary of State and, based on the evidence
    before her, the judge was entitled to find, for the reasons she gave,
    that it had not been discharged.


16. In conclusion: although the judge erred by finding the initial
    evidential burden was not met this error was not material as there was
    no discernible error of law in the judge's consideration of the appeal
    in the alternative where her starting point was that the initial
    evidential burden had been met.


 Decision


17. The appeal is dismissed.


18. The judge has not made a material error of law and the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal stands.


      |                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 14 July 2017                  |


































