
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31949/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 March 2016                               |On 29 March 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                            mr Abdullah Muhammad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Magsood of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing his appeal against a  decision  of  the  respondent
    taken on 29 July 2014 to refuse his application for leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom on the basis of his family life with his wife.

Background Facts

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and was born on 8 January  1991.
    The appellant entered the UK in 2009.  He was granted leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom until 31 May 2014 as a Tier 4 Migrant to study at
    the London College  of  Law  and  Management.   On  28  July  2012  the
    Secretary of State decided to curtail  the  appellant's  leave  on  the
    basis that the sponsor licence for the  appellant's  college  had  been
    revoked.   He  therefore  ceased  to  meet  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules under which his leave had been granted.

 3. On 30 May 2014 the appellant applied for leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of his family life with his wife.  The  respondent
    refused  the  application  on  29  July  2014  having  considered   the
    application  under  paragraph  EX.1  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Secretary  of  State  considered  that  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to his family and private life continuing in  Pakistan.   The
    respondent also considered the appellant's private life under paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  She considered that there  would  not
    be very significant obstacles to family life continuing with  his  wife
    in Pakistan.  The Secretary of State also  considered  whether  or  not
    there were any exceptional circumstances that would warrant a grant  of
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom outside of the Immigration Rules.
     The Secretary of State acknowledged  that  the  appellant  had  raised
    concerns about how his relationship would be received  in  Pakistan  on
    the basis that he is Muslim and his wife is a Christian and that he did
    not believe that his partner would be safe  as  a  British  citizen  in
    Pakistan.  The Secretary of State did not consider  that  these  claims
    represented insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing  in
    Pakistan and that it was also possible for the appellant to  return  to
    Pakistan and attempt to re-enter the UK with valid entry  clearance  in
    order to continue family life in the UK.  The respondent set out in the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter that as the appellant's leave to remain  was
    curtailed to 26 September 2012 the appellant  did  not  have  leave  to
    remain in the UK at the time of his application and therefore there was
    no right of appeal against the decision.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. In  a  determination
    promulgated on 8 December 2014, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  S  J  Pacey
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal  found  that
    although the respondent had not provided anything  to  demonstrate  how
    the letter of 28 July  2012  was  communicated  to  the  appellant,  in
    considering all the evidence before the judge he accepted  that  proper
    notification  of  the  curtailment  of  leave  was  given.   The  judge
    therefore decided that the appellant had no right of  appeal  from  the
    respondent's decision of 29 July 2014.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On 26
    January  2015  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Wellesley-Cole   refused
    permission to  appeal.   The  appellant  renewed  his  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and  on  4  May  2015  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Chalkley granted permission to  appeal.   The  grant  of
    permission sets out that  the  judge  may  have  erred  by  failing  to
    properly apply Syed (curtailment of leave - notice) v SSHD [2013] UKUT
    0014 (IAC).  Thus, the appeal came before me.

Summary of Submissions

 6. The grounds of appeal assert that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred
    in failing to apply the principles in the case of Syed  correctly.   It
    is asserted that the respondent has failed to discharge the  burden  of
    proving when and how she sent the letter and therefore  has  failed  to
    discharge the burden of  establishing  that  the  letter  was  actually
    served on the appellant.  It is asserted that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was wrong to rely on the fact  that  there  was  no  evidence  to
    indicate that the letter was returned  to  the  respondent  marked  not
    delivered.

The Respondent's Submissions

 7. The respondent served a Rule  24  (of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008) response.  The respondent asserts that an attempt
    was made to notify the appellant of the decision to curtail  his  leave
    on 27 July 2012 and was sent via recorded delivery  to  an  address  in
    Hounslow.  It is asserted that  the  judge  made  a  finding  that  the
    appellant  did  not  take  the  exams  because  he  was  aware  of  the
    curtailment of his leave and did not attend  college.   The  judge  was
    entitled to draw the inference that the appellant was  aware  that  the
    college's licence was revoked and that his  leave  was  curtailed.   On
    that basis the application was out of time.

The Hearing Before the Upper Tribunal

 8. At the commencement of the hearing Mr  Avery  informed  me  that,  when
    preparing for the appeal hearing, he had checked the  records  held  by
    the Secretary of State.  In those records he came across a  note  dated
    September 2012 indicating that the package  containing  the  letter  of
    curtailment was returned endorsed with a note saying that the addressee
    had gone away.  Mr Avery conceded that in view of the requirements  set
    out in the case of Syed the procedures were not  acceptable  and  there
    could be no deemed service.  Mr Avery accepted that the  appellant  had
    not been served with a curtailment notice and therefore his  leave  had
    not been validly curtailed.  On this basis Mr Avery indicated  that  it
    was his submission that the best option was for the case to be remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal. Mr Magsood indicated his agreement that, on
    the basis of the fact-finding requirements, the most appropriate course
    of action was for the appeal to be remitted for findings to be made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. In light of the Secretary of State's  concession  and  the  information
    helpfully provided by  Mr  Avery  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    cannot stand.  The  appellant's  leave  had  not  been  curtailed,  his
    application for leave to remain was made whilst he had extant leave and
    he therefore had  a  right  of  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State.  The  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  contains  a
    material error of law.

10. The First-tier Tribunal, quite rightly  in  the  circumstances  of  the
    case, did not go on to consider or make any findings with regard to the
    substantive aspects of the appellant's appeal and therefore a full fact-
    finding hearing is required.

11. I remit the matter  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I  find  that  the
    appellant does have a right of appeal in this case on  the  basis  that
    his application was not made out of time because he was never  notified
    of the curtailment of his leave.

12. I find that there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and I set aside that decision pursuant  to  section
    12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

13. I  have  considered  the  Practice  Statement  concerning  transfer  of
    proceedings. I am satisfied that the nature and extent of judicial fact
    finding that is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
    re-made is such, having regard  to  the  overriding  objective,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

14. I remit the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant  to  section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the TCEA. The date of the hearing to  be  fixed  at  the
    next available opportunity.

Notice of Decision

15. The appellant's appeal is allowed.  The appellant has a right of appeal
    against  the  respondent's  decision   because   no   notification   of
    curtailment of his leave was received by the  appellant  and  therefore
    the appellant's application for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    was made in time.  The case is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    be heard on the next available date.

16. No anonymity direction is made.




Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 13 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

