
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31961/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 23rd August 2017                   |On 15th  September 2017               |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                         mr Norman Washington Roper
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Jamaica whose appeal  was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Malcolm in a  decision  promulgated  on  21st
    December 2016.  Essentially the judge found that the decision to remove
    the Appellant was proportionate in Article 8, ECHR terms and  therefore
    went on to dismiss the appeal.

 2. Grounds of application were made.  In particular it was  said  that  it
    was the Appellant's case that having been granted leave to remain under
    the DLR policy in place  prior  to  July  2012  his  case  fell  to  be
    considered in line with that policy.  Whilst Judge Malcolm had referred
    to the policy and considered that the Respondent had addressed her mind
    to that policy, she had not engaged with its actual terms.  She did not
    consider whether  the  Respondent  had  thus  correctly  exercised  the
    policy.  The grounds refer to chapter 10 of the Respondent's policy  on
    DLR.

 3. In these circumstances the grounds say that the decision  cannot  stand
    and permission to appeal was sought.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert granted permission to appeal  on  the
    basis of what was said in the grounds.  The Secretary of State lodged a
    Rule 24 notice opposing the appeal.  It was said  that  the  Respondent
    argued that the judge directed  herself  appropriately  and  had  given
    regard to the decision of the Respondent and found  that  the  decision
    had properly considered the Appellant's circumstances.

 5. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 6. For the Appellant Ms Akinbolu agreed that the point was a  very  narrow
    one.  She relied on the  grounds.   Judge  Malcolm  had  not  addressed
    whether a significant change had taken place.   The  relationships  had
    continued.  It was argued that it was not enough for the judge  to  say
    in paragraph 55 of the decision that the Respondent had carried out the
    required active review and a decision had  been  made.   In  short  the
    judge's findings were not sufficient on the crucial point mentioned  in
    the grounds.

 7. For the Respondent Ms Ahmad relied on the Rule 24 notice and said  that
    the judge had been entitled to proceed as she had done.  In  particular
    she had said at paragraph 55 that the Respondent had  carried  out  the
    required active review and  thus  there  was  no  error  in  law.   The
    findings of the judge were  open  to  her.   She  had  found  that  the
    Appellant  did  not  meet  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  findings  at
    paragraph 64 that there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration was not challenged.  Essentially  the  Article  8  findings
    were not challenged in any way and the appeal should be dismissed.

 8. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 9. I refer to the Grounds of Appeal and to paragraph 5 which sets out  the
    relevant parts of the Respondent's policy on discretionary  leave.   It
    is said that decision makers must consider  whether  the  circumstances
    prevailing at the time of the original grant of leave continue  at  the
    date of the  decision.   If  the  circumstances  remain  the  same  and
    criminality thresholds do not apply a further  period  of  three  years
    discretionary leave should normally be granted.

10. What has happened in this case is that there was (my italics) a  change
    in  the  Appellant's  circumstances.   In  particular  as  set  out  in
    paragraph 39 of the decision and as the Home Office  submitted  at  the
    hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Malcolm,  there  had  been  a
    material change of circumstances in this case.  The change is that  the
    Appellant was no  longer  in  a  relationship  with  Ms  Banton,  which
    relationship was arguably the more significant aspect  considered  when
    the Appellant was granted discretionary leave.

11. There is  no  dispute  that  the  Appellant  is  now  no  longer  in  a
    relationship  with  Ms  Banton  which  he  was  when  he  was   granted
    discretionary leave on the first occasion.  The Home Office  considered
    the changed factual scenario  and  concluded  that  there  had  been  a
    significant change of circumstances.  In my view this is  unarguable -
    it is a very major step  for  the  Appellant  to  no  longer  be  in  a
    relationship with Ms Banton and as the judge said in paragraph  55  the
    Secretary of State did carry out an active review and  a  decision  was
    made.  In my view the judge required to go no further than  that.   She
    acknowledged the position.  It was per  se  a  significant  change  and
    there is nothing perverse and unreasonable in describing it as such.

12. The judge was then entitled to proceed to go on and decide the  Article
    8 appeal on their merit which is what she did.  There was no  challenge
    to the proposition that the Appellant was no longer in  a  relationship
    with Ms Banton and the judge noted that this was  a  subsequent  change
    which was one of significance.  She accepted that he had established  a
    private life here and he maintained a family life but noted there was a
    lengthy period of time, namely between 2001 and 2010 when he  was  here
    unlawfully.

13. I do not need to say more  about  the  judge's  reasoning  for  finding
    against the Appellant under Article 8 because there was no challenge to
    any of those findings.  The point  of  appeal  before  me  is,  as  was
    acknowledged, a very narrow one but there can be no argument  that  the
    ending of the relationship with Ms Banton comes  under  a  "significant
    change" which was a matter that was bound to be taken into account, and
    was, in any assessment of  whether  the  Appellant  should  be  granted
    further discretionary leave by the Secretary of State.

14. In all the circumstances there is no error in law in the decision which
    must stand.

Notice of Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

16. I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity order is required or made.


Signed          JG   Macdonald                                 Dated    14th
September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
