
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31213/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th December 2015                 |On 6th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                         oluwarotimiM samson jimbola
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Adophy, of Atlantic Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria whose date of birth  is  recorded
    as 23rd September 1973.  He has been granted a residence card  pursuant
    to the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  On  25th
    April 2012 the Secretary of State wrote to  the  Appellant  asking  for
    additional information in support of his claim to be entitled to reside
    in the United Kingdom as the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national.   On  23rd
    October 2013 he applied for a permanent residence card as the spouse of
    Carla Martins, a Portuguese  national  said  to  be  exercising  treaty
    rights.  They, on  their  case,  married  on  18th  April  2009,  which
    marriage, on their case, was not a sham.

 2. The Secretary of State, on 10th April, revoked the  existing  residence
    card on the basis of her contention  that  the  marriage  was  a  sham.
    Reliance was placed on the conviction of a minister who had facilitated
    breaches  of  immigration  laws  by  arranging  sham  marriages  at   a
    particular church.  The minister who in fact conducted the marriage was
    however acquitted after a short trial.

 3. At the hearing before Judge Oliver, sitting at  Richmond  on  22nd  May
    2015, there was a last minute application by the Secretary of State  to
    adduce by way of evidence the  decision in relation to the  Appellant's
    mother in respect of whom it was said that she had at an earlier  stage
    relied on a false document.  There was then something of an issue as to
    what happened.  It is argued on behalf of the Appellant that based upon
    what the judge said, it was thought that no adverse inferences would be
    drawn from that determination in relation to the mother and because  of
    what it is said the judge said at the hearing, the hearing proceeded in
    a way  in  which  it  would  not  otherwise  have  done;  such  is  the
    allegation.  In the  event  the  appeal  was  dismissed.   Perhaps  not
    surprisingly the Appellant made application for permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal; this was done by Notice dated 25th June  2015.   On
    8th September 2015 permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Colyer and on 13th November 2015 the matter came before me.

 4. At that hearing, on 13th November 2015, the Appellant  was  represented
    by Mr Kareem. He was, to say the  least,  upset  by  the  fact  that  I
    suggested to him that if he were to pursue the point he should have had
    some evidence, namely his contemporaneous notes  of  the  hearing,  and
    further, I suggested to him, that  he  could  not  both  be  a  witness
    insofar as he was seeking to tell me  what  had  occurred  and  be  the
    advocate.

 5. I took the view that this was one of those very rare cases in which  it
    was appropriate for the judge to comment.  He has now done  so.   There
    is a clear dispute between the judge and Mr Kareem as to what happened.



 6. The matter has come back before me today, 4th December 2015.  It  seems
    to me that the most important consideration for me must be  that  there
    is a fair hearing and that the hearing is  perceived  to  be  fair.   I
    recognise that two people can be mistaken.  I recognise that two people
    can honestly hold a view or opinion of what transpired, but one or both
    may be wrong.  If I am to resolve this matter and make a finding then I
    am put in the invidious position of having  to  find  either  that  the
    judge was mistaken or that Mr Kareem, who is an Officer of  the  Court,
    is mistaken, or neither, or both, but one thing  is  for  certain,  the
    Appellant would be left, in my judgement, with a sense of injustice.  I
    am not prepared to find that Mr Kareem has acted in any way other  than
    professionally,  advancing  what  he   honesty   believes   transpired.
    Although, as I have noted he did not have a contemporaneous  note,  but
    in fairness nor did the Secretary of State.

 7. At the commencement  of  today's  proceedings,  having  regard  to  the
    guidance in Alubankudi (Appearance of bias) [2015] UKUT 54, in which it
    was said:

         "The interface between the judiciary  and  society  is  of  greater
         importance nowadays than it has ever been.  In both the conduct  of
         hearings and the compilation of judgments, judges must  have  their
         antennae tuned to the immediate and wider audiences. ... It  is  of
         seminal importance that the  fairness,  impartiality  and  detached
         objectivity  of  the  judicial  office  holder  are  manifest  from
         beginning to end. Clearly there is a higher point of  principle  in
         this case than the immediate determination of the merits."

    I canvassed with the parties  whether  in  all  the  circumstances  the
    fairest way to proceed was for me to make no finding whatsoever on  the
    dispute as between the judge and the representative, Mr Kareem, but  to
    recognise the sense of injustice on the part of the  Appellant  and  in
    those circumstances remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be
    heard afresh with no preserved findings,  before  a  judge  other  than
    Judge Oliver.  I raised with Mr Adophy the issue of whether or not  the
    Secretary of State might rely on the determination in relation  to  the
    Appellant's mother.  It seems to me that the question of  admissibility
    of evidence will be a matter for the First-tier Tribunal Judge  because
    I am not preserving any findings. But I make plain that in saying that,
    it should not be inferred in any way whatsoever that  in  my  view  the
    evidence is inadmissible.  I am simply saying that I am neutral on  the
    point and the judge must listen to arguments, if arguments  there  will
    be, as to why, if the Appellant says it is not admissible it  ought  to
    be treated in that way.

 8. In  the  circumstances  I  find  that  there  is  perceived  procedural
    unfairness. By consent this matter is to be remitted to the First  tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside to be heard afresh
    by a judge other than  Judge  Oliver  at  any  of  the  London  hearing
    centres.

10. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

