
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/31863/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 29 October 2015                   |On 29 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                         Mr PAUL BABABUNMI OWODUNNI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright, Counsel (instructed by Perera & Co)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

      1. The Appellant  appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  with  permission
         granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor on 23 July 2015 against  the
         decision and reasons of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grice  who  had
         dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the  refusal  on  21  July
         2014 of his application for leave to remain pursuant  to  paragraph
         276B of the Immigration Rules and on Article 8 ECHR  grounds.   The
         decision and reasons was promulgated on 27 March 2014.

      2. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 16 June 1974.   The
         Appellant claimed to have entered the United Kingdom as  a  visitor
         on  16  September  1996,  with  leave  valid  for  6  months.    He
         overstayed.  On 6 December  2010  he  applied  for  ILR  which  was
         refused without right of appeal on 29 January 2011.  The  Appellant
         requested  reconsideration  of  the  decision,  which  was  finally
         refused on 4 April 2013.  On 14 May 2014 the Appellant  was  served
         with form IS.151A notifying him of his liability to  detention  and
         removal as an illegal entrant.  The Appellant failed to  report  as
         required.  On 21 July 2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
         application which is the  subject  of  the  present  appeal.    The
         appeal  was  certified  under  section  94  of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

      3. The judge found that the certification of the appeal  was  invalid.
         The judge found against the Appellant on  his  family  life  claim,
         recently raised.  The judge went on to find that the Appellant  was
         unable to satisfy the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
         Immigration Rules and that there were no  compelling  circumstances
         requiring an Article 8  ECHR  assessment  outside  the  Immigration
         Rules.  The judge  nevertheless  considered  the  claim  on  Razgar
         [2004] UKHL 27 principles in conjunction with  sections  117A-D  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The judge  found
         that the Appellant had not lost his ties to Nigeria  and  that  his
         removal was proportionate.

      4. Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Chambers but was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor  on  the
         renewed application because she considered that the  argument  that
         the judge should have considered the pre 9  July  2012  Immigration
         Rules in relation to paragraph 276B deserved further exploration.

      5. Standard directions were made by the tribunal, indicating that  the
         appeal would be reheard immediately in the event  that  a  material
         error of law was found.

      6. The Respondent filed a rule 24 notice in the form of a letter dated
         21 August 2015 indicating  that  the  onwards  appeal  was  opposed
         because the issue had been settled by Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74.

    Submissions

      7. Mr Plowright for the Appellant relied on the sole  point  on  which
         grant of permission to appeal had been granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Taylor.  He submitted that on a close reading of Singh [2015]
         EWCA Civ 74, in particular by reference to the submissions recorded
         as made on behalf of the Secretary of State at [44]  to  [47],  the
         issue with which the court had grappled was the application of  the
         post 9 July 2012 Immigration Rules to Article 8 ECHR  issues.   The
         facts of the present appeal where the Appellant relied on  the  "14
         year" rule were significantly different.  The  right  approach  and
         the one which the first instance judge should  have  taken  was  to
         consider the application under the "old" rules.  She failed to have
         done so, which was a material error  of  law  which  warranted  the
         setting aside and remaking of the decision.

      8. Ms Fijiwala for the Respondent relied on the rule 24  notice.   She
         submitted that there was no error  of  law  and  the  determination
         should stand.  The "old" rules were inapplicable.  In any event the
         Appellant had produced  insufficient  evidence  to  have  succeeded
         under the "old" rules.  The onwards appeal should be dismissed.

      9. The tribunal indicated at the conclusion  of  submissions  that  it
         found that there was no material error  of  law  and  reserved  its
         determination, which now follows.

    No error of law finding

     10. Despite the  attractive  way  in  which  it  was  presented  by  Mr
         Plowright, in the tribunal's judgment Singh (above)  laid  to  rest
         any possibility of arguing that the "old" Immigration Rules applied
         to post 9 July 2012 decisions, save  within  the  two-month  window
         open between 9 July and 6 September 2012:  see  [56(2)]  of  Singh.
         The principles familiar from Alvi [2012] UKSC 33 and Odelola [2009]
         UKHL 25 applied, i.e., the Secretary of State's  decision  must  be
         made in accordance with the Immigration  Rules  in  force  at  that
         time.  The goal posts can be moved.

     11. If that view were for any reason mistaken, from  a  review  of  the
         evidence set out in Judge Grice's decision and reasons, it is plain
         that the Appellant could not have succeeded under paragraph 276B in
         any event.  The judge gave a number of secure reasons  for  finding
         that he was an unreliable witness.  The judge did not  accept  that
         the Appellant had entered the United Kingdom  on  visit  visa:  see
         [61] of the decision.  The judge was unable to establish  how  long
         the Appellant had resided in the United Kingdom.  The onus was,  of
         course, on the Appellant to prove 14 years'  continuous  residence.
         There was no independent documentary evidence deserving  of  weight
         produced by the Appellant at  the  hearing  which  was  capable  of
         showing his continuous presence in the United Kingdom for 14  years
         prior to 14 May 2014 when enforcement action  commenced.   Thus  no
         judge properly considering the  evidence  could  have  allowed  the
         claim of 14 years' continuous residence.  It would thus  have  made
         no difference if the "old" rules had been applied, since the result
         would have been the same.   The  Appellant's  claims  had  no  real
         merit.

     12. The tribunal accordingly finds that there was no material error  of
         law in  the  decision  and  reasons  and  there  is  no  basis  for
         interfering with the judge's decision.

    DECISION

    The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and stands unchanged




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
