
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31633/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9 September 2014                             |On 18 September 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                               Mr Murat Ozyurt
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. S. K. Abbas, Legal Representative.
For the Respondent:    Ms. A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                                  DECISION


 1. No application for anonymity has been made  in  these  proceedings  and
    there is no reason why such an order should be made.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born on 10 March 1982.  He applied
    to the respondent  for  a  permanent  right  of  residence  based  upon
    retained rights of residence grounds by reason of being separated  from
    his former EEA spouse by the time he submitted his  application  for  a
    permanent right of residence.   His  application  was  refused  by  the
    respondent on 15 July 2013.

 3. He appealed and in a determination promulgated on 15 May 2014 Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal S Meah allowed the appellant's  appeal  to  the
    limited  extent  that  it  be  remitted  back  to  the  respondent  for
    reconsideration on Article 8 grounds.

 4. The appellant  applied  for  permission  to  appeal.   This  First-tier
    application was refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ford  on  5
    June 2014.

 5. However the application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal  and  granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds on 24 July  2014.   Her  reasons  for  so
    doing were :-

         "1.  It is an arguable error of law for  the  judge  to  reach  the
             conclusion that he could not be the primary decision maker  in
             relation to Article 8 (see paragraph [9]) when it was a ground
             of appeal raised by the appellant, as Section  86(2)  requires
             the Tribunal to determine 'any matter raised as a   ground  of
             appeal.'  It  is  also  an  arguable  error  of  law  to  have
             'remitted back to the respondent for reconsideration' in those
             circumstances, irrespective of  the  fact  that  both  parties
             appeared to agree to that course.  In  the  grounds  there  is
             reference to the representative not agreeing to such remittal,
             despite the determination  reflecting  such  a  consideration.
             This will be required to be evidenced if relied upon  although
             in light of my earlier comments the judge  may  have  been  in
             error in any event.

         2.   The grounds are arguable and I grant permission."

 6. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 7. Mr Abbas stated that the only ground he relied on was  the  failure  of
    the Judge to proceed at  the  hearing  to  deal  with  the  appellant's
    Article 8 claim, and that the judge had materially erred in not wanting
    to become the primary decision maker  resulting  in  him  allowing  the
    appeal to the above mentioned limited extent.

 8. Ms Everett agreed with the submissions of Mr Abbas and  invited  me  to
    remit the appeal back to Judge S. Meah in the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    deal with the Article 8 issues he should have determined.

 9. On my own analysis the judge has materially erred.   It  was  incumbent
    upon him, given that Article 8 was raised in the grounds of appeal,  to
    deal with that issue at the hearing within the First-tier Tribunal.

10. Therefore the appellant's decision to not pursue his  claim  under  the
    EEA Regulations stands and so the  singular  outstanding  issue  to  be
    determined is that of Article 8.

11. Beyond therefore the withdrawal of the appeal against the EEA  decision
    I set Judge S. Meah's determination aside and the appeal  will  proceed
    to a remitted hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal  where  the  singular
    issue will be Article 8 alone.

12. In deciding whether  to  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal under Section 12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act
    2007, I can dispose of the  appeal  in  one  or  two  ways,  either  by
    remitting the case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  by  remaking  the
    decision.  The choice is regulated by paragraph 7  of  part  3  of  the
    Practice Directions of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the  Upper
    Tribunal   which   only   contemplates   remittal   in   very   limited
    circumstances.  This though is such a case.   The  appellant  has  been
    deprived of a fair hearing in respect of his Article 8  claim  and  the
    opportunity of putting his case forward to be considered by the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In those circumstances I remit the case to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal subject to the attached directions.  I  do  so  with  the
    consent of both representatives before me today.


Signed                              Date 18 September 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard


             DIRECTIONS FOR REMITTAL TO THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL


 1. The appeal is to be listed at Taylor House, before Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal S Meah, on the first available date.

 2. The time estimate for the hearing is two hours.

 3. No interpreter is required.

 4. In the event of either party  wishing  to  file  and  serve  additional
    evidence this must be done no later than five working days prior to the
    date of hearing.






Signed                              Date 18 September 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

