
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/31597/2014
                                                               IA/31604/2014
                                                               IA/31593/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th November 2015                |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                            EDO (FIRST APPELLANT)
                           WDO (SECOND APPELLANT)
                            POD (THIRD APPELLANT)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants appeal against a decision dated 17th  February  2015  of
    Judge Gladstone of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT).

 2. The First Appellant is the mother of the Second  and  Third  Appellants
    who are minors.

 3. The Appellants applied for permanent residence in the UK  relying  upon
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  (the  2006
    Regulations).

 4. The applications were refused on  17th  July  2014  with  reference  to
    regulation 15(1)(b) of the 2006 Regulations in relation  to  the  First
    Appellant, and regulation 15(1)(a) in relation to the Second and  Third
    Appellants.  Thereafter the  Appellants  appealed  and  requested  that
    their appeals be decided on the papers without an oral hearing.

 5. The FTT decided the appeals on the papers, which were  dismissed  in  a
    decision dated 17th February 2015.

 6. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    and permission was granted on 17th June 2015 by Designated Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal McClure.  Judge McClure commented, inter  alia,  in
    granting permission;
         "Whilst it may be that it would be better for the first and  second
         named Appellants in this application to present a fresh application
         with all the supporting documents and whilst there is no  guarantee
         that the judge has made an error of law, all the documents that had
         been submitted to the Home Office and the Tribunal  in  support  of
         the various applications ought to have been before  the  judge  and
         considered by the judge.  For whatever reason all the documentation
         and evidence was not before the  judge  and  in  the  circumstances
         there is arguably a procedural error which constitutes an  arguable
         error of law."

 7. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 indicating that the Respondent did not understand the basis of the
    application for permission or the grant of permission  that  refers  to
    documents lodged in part with different applications.  The Respondent's
    view was that it was for the Appellants to establish their  status  and
    provide the evidence relied on.  It was not accepted that the  FTT  had
    erred in law.

 8. The Tribunal issued directions that there should be  a  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FTT  decision  should  be  set
    aside by reason of material error of law.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 9. The First Appellant attended the hearing.  There was  no  need  for  an
    interpreter and proceedings were conducted in English.

10.  The  First  Appellant  confirmed  that  she   did   not   have   legal
    representation and did not require legal representation and was content
    to proceed.

11. Miss Johnstone explained that there had been a separate  decision  made
    by Judge McClure in relation to ROO, who was the husband of  the  First
    Appellant and the father of the Second and Third Appellants,  and  also
    in relation to POD who is the Third Appellant in this application.  The
    decision made by Judge McClure was that the appeals should be  allowed.
    Following that decision the Respondent had granted permanent  residence
    to ROO, EDO, the First Appellant in  this  application,  and  POD,  the
    Third Appellant in this application.  I received from  Miss  Johnson  a
    copy of Judge McClure's decision, and documentary proof that  permanent
    residence had been issued.

12. The only member of the  family  who  had  not  been  granted  permanent
    residence was therefore WDO.

13. I explained to the First Appellant the purpose of  this  hearing  which
    was to ascertain whether the FTT had erred in law.  It appeared  to  be
    somewhat academic so  far  as  the  First  and  Third  Appellants  were
    concerned as both had now been granted permanent residence.

14. I heard submissions from Miss Johnstone as to error  of  law,  and  she
    relied upon the rule 24 response submitting that the FTT had not  erred
    in law, and that the Appellants had not produced evidence to  discharge
    the burden of proof and therefore the FTT was correct  to  dismiss  the
    appeals.

15. I then heard from the First Appellant who told me  that  documents  had
    been sent,  to  prove  that  the  family  were  entitled  to  permanent
    residence.  She said that documents  had  been  sent  to  the  Tribunal
    although she did not have proof with her, as to when the documents were
    sent or what documents were sent.

16. I then reserved my decision, and explained to the First Appellant  that
    I would issue a written decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

17. A procedural error may in certain circumstances amount  to  a  material
    error of law.  Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that  it
    was arguable that there had been a procedural error in this case.

18. I do not find that there has been such an error, and I do not find that
    the FTT erred in law in dismissing the appeals.

19. The appeals  were  decided  on  the  papers,  at  the  request  of  the
    Appellants.  The Respondent did not request an oral hearing.  I do  not
    find that the FTT erred in law in deciding the appeals  on  the  papers
    without an oral hearing.

20. The FTT noted that  the  Respondent  had  not  submitted  a  bundle  of
    documents and neither had the Appellants.  The FTT noted  that  on  5th
    September 2014 the Appellants were advised that  any  written  evidence
    and submission must be received by 3rd October  2014.   The  FTT  noted
    that there was no indication that  any  submissions  or  evidence  were
    sent.  At the hearing before me, there was no indication that  evidence
    or submissions had been sent to the Tribunal prior to 3rd October 2014,
    or prior to the FTT deciding the appeal on 15th February 2015.

21. The FTT Judge who dealt with the appeals on the papers  noted  that  on
    15th February 2015  a  Designated  Judge  had  indicated  that  it  was
    appropriate to proceed, as  sufficient  time  had  been  given  to  the
    parties to supply documentation.

22. The FTT then proceeded to decide the appeals, and found that inadequate
    evidence had been submitted by the Appellants to prove that  they  were
    entitled to permanent residence.  There is no  error  of  law  in  that
    finding.  The Appellants had not provided  evidence  to  discharge  the
    burden of proof.

23. It was the responsibility of the Appellants,  having  elected  to  have
    their appeals decided on the papers, to ensure that  the  documentation
    that they relied upon,  was  before  the  Tribunal.   It  appears  that
    documentation was subsequently sent to the Tribunal, thus  the  appeals
    of two members of the family were allowed by Judge McClure on 23rd June
    2015.

24. I therefore conclude that the FTT did not  materially  err  in  law  in
    dismissing the appeals.  Three of the four members of  the  family  now
    have permanent residence in any event,  and  there  appears  to  be  no
    reason why an application for permanent residence could not be made  on
    behalf of the remaining family member.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeals are dismissed.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity and I see no need to make an anonymity order.


Signed   Date 1st December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeals are dismissed.  There are no fee awards.


Signed   Date 1st December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
