
                                    [pic]

UPPER TRIBUNAL
IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER    Appeal No. IA/31814/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House           |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated:|
|On: 6 April 2016                |On: 10 November 2016            |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan


                                   Between

                                  HONG FANG
                          (Anonymity Order Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Yeo, Counsel, instructed by Coventry Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1     This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  Judge  of
      the First tier Tribunal Lloyd  dated  4  March  2015,  dismissing  the
      Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision of 4 August  2014
      refusing to vary her leave to remain in the UK, and making a  decision
      to remove  her  under  section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
      Nationality Act 2006.

2     The Appellant is a national of China and entered United  Kingdom  with
      Tier 4 General Student entry clearance on 22 August 2010, valid  until
      30 January 2012. Thereafter, she remained in United Kingdom under Tier
      1 Post Study Work leave to remain, valid until 1  March  2014.  During
      her period of leave to remain as a student the Appellant entered  into
      a relationship with her partner, Mr Hall.

3     On 22 January 2014, the Appellant made an  application  for  leave  to
      remain under Appendix FM of the immigration  rules  on  the  basis  of
      being Mr Hall's partner as  defined  under  GEN.1.2(iv),  they  having
      lived together for a period in excess of two years.

4     It is now common ground that Mr Hall meets the definition  of  partner
      under Appendix FM; that he is a British citizen;  that  the  Appellant
      and her partner are in a genuine and subsisting relationship; and that
      the Appellant does not meet the financial eligibility criteria  within
      appendix FM. It was therefore necessary for the Appellant to  seek  to
      assert that she satisfied the requirements of Section Ex  of  Appendix
      FM. She additionally sought to rely, outside the rules, on  Article  8
      ECHR.

5     The Appellant argued before the judge in relation to Section  EX  that
      there were insurmountable obstacles to family life  with  her  partner
      continuing outside the UK. A number of considerations were advanced by
      the Appellant to support that proposition.  At  paragraph  20  of  the
      decision, the judge noted as follows:

           "... The sponsor states that he would not be able to relocate to
           China. He has tried learning the Appellants language but it is a
           notoriously difficult language to learn  and  he  has  struggled
           with it. He tells me that he would not  be  able  to  settle  in
           China as an unmarried partner because China's visa rules do  not
           permit  such  a  category.  He  provides   some   printouts   of
           information about China's immigration rules and these appear  to
           confirm the same. He states that visits to China under "Category
           C" would be possible for up to 30 days, extendable to  60  days.
           He also states that he would not be able to continue his  chosen
           academic interests in China."

6     The judge made the following findings:

           "23.  Overall I  accept  that  there  would  be  at  least  some
           difficulties for  the  Sponsor  to  settle  in  China  with  the
           Appellant. He faces language difficulties, unmarried partners do
           not appear to be recognised for immigration purposes and  it  is
           unclear whether  he  would  be  able  to  utilise  his  academic
           specialty although I make no finding on the latter point.

           24.   However, permanent settlement in  China  is  not  what  is
           required to be able to enjoy  family  life  in  the  Appellant's
           circumstances. She certainly has the option of  making  a  fresh
           application for entry clearance as soon as they  can  show  that
           they meet the financial requirements. The  tribunal  should  not
           indulge  in  detailed  speculation  as  to   whether   such   an
           application would succeed, however on the basis  of  the  issues
           raised in this appeal, there seems to be a good chance that such
           an application would be successful. Extended visits to China for
           30 or 60 days are possible, and I am not given any  evidence  to
           suggest that visits to the UK by  the  Appellant  would  not  be
           possible. Modern methods of communication  also  enable  regular
           contact. Further, it is not unusual for young  professionals  or
           academics to have to spend time apart whilst they pursue  career
           and training goals and I do not find that such separations would
           cause very serious hardship.

           25.   I take all of these circumstances  in  the  round  and  on
           balance I do not find EX1 to be satisfied."

7     At paragraphs 26 to 36 of the decision, the judge  considered  in  the
      alternative whether the Appellant's removal from  the  United  Kingdom
      would amount to a disproportionate  interference  with  her  right  to
      private and family  life  protected  by  Article  8  ECHR.  The  judge
      dismissed the appeal on this alternate basis.

8     There are two sets of grounds of appeal against the judge's  decision,
      one being prepared by Counsel dated  16  March  2015,  and  the  other
      seemingly by Mr  Hale  dated  17  March  2015.  With  respect  to  the
      Appellant and her partner, the grounds advanced  by  Counsel  identify
      the appropriate legal point in this case. It is necessary for me  only
      to consider only one of those grounds, as follows:

           "4.    In  concluding  that  the  Appellant  cannot   meet   the
           requirements of paragraph paragraph EX1 and in  particular  that
           there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  being
           conducted elsewhere the judge has taken into account  irrelevant
           matters, namely: can  the  Appellant  make  an  entry  clearance
           application from China. The test is whether family life  can  be
           continued elsewhere, not  whether  a  further  application  from
           abroad to  enable  the  Appellant  to  return  is  possible.  In
           concluding that family life can continue by means of the  couple
           either  separating  whilst  the  Appellant  applies  for   entry
           clearance or with Mr Hall temporarily relocating to China he has
           failed  to  approach  the  question   of   whether   there   are
           insurmountable obstacles to the couple living together and  thus
           enjoying their family live in China.  The  judge  has  therefore
           applied the wrong test."

9     In granting permission to appeal to this Tribunal, Judge of the  First
      tier Tribunal Nicholson observed as follows in his decision of  5  May
      2015:

           "4.   Whilst language difficulties and the  sponsor's  inability
           to use his qualifications would  not  amount  to  insurmountable
           obstacles, the judge  appears  to  have  accepted  that  Chinese
           immigration  laws  might  prevent  the   sponsor   from   living
           permanently with the Appellant in China. Although the judge  was
           undoubtedly correct to find that 'settlement' in China  was  not
           required to be able to enjoy family life there, it  is  arguable
           that the ability to continue  family  life  outside  the  United
           Kingdom amounts to more than an ability  to  continue  it  on  a
           temporary or sporadic basis only."

10    In a Rule 24 response dated 15 May  2015,  the  Respondent's  position
      was that the judge had not erred in law.

11    I am provided with a skeleton argument from Mr Yeo dated 6 April  2016
      in which  he  argues,  in  relation  to  the  central  ground  I  have
      identified above,  that  the  meaning  of  'insurmountable  obstacles'
      within section EX of Appendix FM  involves  the  consideration  as  to
      whether family life with a partner can continue outside of the UK, for
      the foreseeable future, although he does not insist that  the  partner
      be able to settle permanently in the proposed  location  where  family
      life is to be enjoyed.

12     The  Appellant  also  refers   to   paragraph   EX2   which   defines
      insurmountable obstacles  as  meaning  very  significant  difficulties
      which would be faced by the applicant or their partner  in  continuing
      their family life together outside the  UK  and  which  could  not  be
      overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or  a
      partner.

13    The  skeleton  argument  also  makes  reference  to  the  Respondent's
      relevant policy: Appendix FM 1.0 family life (as a Partner or  Parent)
      and Private Life: 10-Year  routes,  August  2015,  which  provides  as
      follows:

           "This means that an insurmountable obstacle can take two forms:

           1.    A very significant difficulty  which  would  be  literally
           impossible to overcome, so it would  be  impossible  for  family
           life with the applicant's  partner  to  continue  overseas.  For
           example, because they would not be able to  gain  entry  to  the
           proposed country of return; or

           2.    A very significant difficulty which would be faced by  the
           applicant or their  partner  in  continuing  their  family  life
           together outside the UK and which could be  overcome  but  would
           entail very serious hardship for one or both of them."

14    The Respondent's policy also contains the following passage:

           "The factors which might be relevant  to  the  consideration  of
           whether an insurmountable obstacle exists include  but  are  not
           limited to:

           a.    Ability to lawfully enter and stay in another country. The
           decision maker should consider the ability  of  the  parties  to
           lawfully enter and  stay  in  another  country.  Decision-makers
           should consider country policy and information  where  relevant.
           However, the onus is on the applicant to show  that  it  is  not
           possible for them and their family to enter and stay in  another
           country for this to amount to an insurmountable obstacle. A mere
           wish, desire or preference to live in the UK would not amount to
           an insurmountable obstacle." (Emphasis in the original).

15    In submissions before me, Mr Duffy for the Respondent accepted at  the
      outset of the hearing that there was a material error of  law  in  the
      judge's decision, in holding that the potential for the  Appellant  to
      take a short term absence from United  Kingdom  for  the  purposes  of
      making an application for entry clearance resulted  in  the  Appellant
      not being able to satisfy the requirements of Section EX.

16    Mr Yeo argued that although it may have been legitimate for the  judge
      to consider the length of any potential absence of the Appellant  from
      United Kingdom as part of a proportionality  balancing  exercise  that
      was required to be performed under Article 8ECHR, a temporary  absence
      for the purposes of making an application for entrance to  the  United
      Kingdom was irrelevant to the consideration  of  paragraph  EX,  which
      required  the  consideration  of   whether  they  were  insurmountable
      obstacles to family life with a partner continuing, outside the UK.

      Discussion

17    There seemed to be little between the  position  of  the  two  parties
      before me. I find that the judge materially erred in law, as argued in
      the grounds of appeal, and in the way summarised  by  Judge  Nicholson
      granting permission to appeal.  I  find  that  section  EX  is  to  be
      construed so as to require the  consideration  of  whether  there  are
      insurmountable obstacles to family life with  the  Appellants  partner
      continuing outside the UK, for the foreseeable future.

18    The word 'continuing' signifies an ongoing state, which would  not  be
      represented by temporary or sporadic visits by the Appellant's partner
      to China.

19    I find that the judge's findings of  fact  on  Mr  Hall's  ability  to
      enter China are sufficiently clear.  The judge accepts at paragraph 20
      Mr Hall's evidence that he would not be able to settle in China as  an
      unmarried partner because Chinese visa rules  do  not  permit  such  a
      category. Further, as a visitor, he would any be able to enter for  up
      to 30 days, extendable to 60 days. The judge recognised  at  paragraph
      23 that  unmarried  partners  do  not  appear  to  be  recognised  for
      immigration purposes. Further, at paragraph 24 the judge refers to the
      possibility of extended visits for 30 or 60 days.

20    I find that the  restrictions  on  Mr  Hall's  entry  to  China  would
      necessitate regular entry and exit from China, as a  visitor.  I  find
      that such an arrangement cannot be said to  represent  a  family  life
      that is continuing in  China.   Although  the  Respondent's  published
      guidance is not part of the immigration  rules,  I  find  it  entirely
      logical, and consistent  with  my  understanding  of  the  meaning  of
      section EX, that the Respondent treats in her policy an  inability  to
      enter and stay in another country  as  relevant  to  the  question  of
      whether an insurmountable obstacle exists to  family  life  continuing
      outside of the UK.

21    I agree with Mr Yeo's  proposed  construction,  that  if  family  life
      cannot continue outside the United Kingdom for the foreseeable future,
      then it cannot be treated as being capable of  continuing  outside  of
      the UK.

22    I set aside the judge's decision. I find that  the  immigration  rules
      are satisfied in the present appeal, by reason  of  the  existence  of
      insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside of the  UK,
      such that section EX of Appendix FM is satisfied.

23    I allow the appeal under the immigration rules.

24    In those circumstances, it is not necessary for  me  to  consider  the
      Appellant's remaining arguments regarding the  judge's  assessment  of
      the proportionality of the Respondent's decision under article 8ECHR.

      Decision

25     (i)    I  find  that  the  making  of  the  decision  dismissing  the
           Appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of law.

      (ii)  I set aside the judge's decision.

      (ii)  I remake the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal under  the
           Immigration Rules.

Signed:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
Date: 9.11.16
