
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/31662/2014
                                                               IA/31669/2014
                                                               ia/32674/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 February 2016                   |On 3 March 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                           kehinde tokunbo adebayo
                           apinke basirat adebayo
                            mariam busola adebayo
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms M Hannan, Solicitor instructed by Corban
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Wilson made on 12 May 2015 in which he decided the appeals  brought  by
    the Appellants against decisions of the Respondent dated 30  July  2014
    refusing them leave to remain and giving them notice  of  intention  to
    remove them administratively under Section 10 of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999 as overstayers.

2.   The third Appellant is the daughter of the first and second  Appellants
    and was still a minor child at the  date  of  the  hearing  before  the
    judge.  Her date of birth is 23 July 1997 and so by July 2015  she  had
    turned 18.  The present appeal involves the consideration inter alia of
    whether the Judge had adequate regard to  the  best  interests  of  the
    third Appellant in making his decision.  This being  a  fact  sensitive
    and contextual issue, I find it of assistance to explain the history of
    this family's presence in the United  Kingdom  in  some  detail  before
    turning to the Appellants' challenge before me.

3.   The immigration history of the family is set out in greater  detail  in
    an earlier decision of the First-tier Tribunal dated  6  June  2012  in
    which First-tier Tribunal Judge  Raymond  heard  an  appeal  against  a
    similar set of decisions taken by the Respondent  in  relation  to  the
    members of this family.  At  that  time  they  had  argued  that  their
    removal from the United Kingdom would breach their rights to family and
    private life under Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

4.   In a very lengthy decision Judge Raymond  analysed  the  evidence  that
    this family had relied upon in their attempt to demonstrate  that  they
    had resided in the United Kingdom for a prolonged period.  In  summary,
    Judge Raymond held that  the  first  and  second  Appellants  were  not
    credible in the accounts that they gave in respect of  their  dates  of
    entry into the  United  Kingdom.   He  also  set  out  the  conflicting
    evidence as to the date that the third Appellant, Mariam,  had  entered
    the United Kingdom, but eventually accepted that she  had  entered  the
    United Kingdom in 2007.  In conclusions commencing at paragraph 330  of
    his decision the judge drew the  strings  together,  and  concluded  at
    paragraph 339 as follows:

         "339.    I find that the considerable cumulative weight of  all  of
             these factors showing a history of cynical  contempt  for  the
             legitimate  immigration  controls  of  this  country  by   the
             parents, into which world of dishonesty and obfuscation in the
             presentation of the circumstances of their  family  they  have
             sadly not hesitated to initiate their  eldest  child  and  son
             Alie leads me to conclude on a balance of  probabilities  that
             there is no credible evidence to  establish  that  Mr  Adebayo
             senior was the only innocent victim of the dishonesty  of  IEI
             solicitors who relied upon  false  documentation  without  his
             knowledge in  their  2008  application.  (This  refers  to  an
             allegation made by Mr Adebayo senior  that  a  former  set  of
             representatives had submitted false documentation  in  support
             of an application for leave to remain that he had made).   But
             rather that the application was made with the actual dishonest
             knowledge and participation of Mr  Adebayo  senior.   To  what
             extent IEI solicitors  themselves  connived  at  this  becomes
             irrelevant once it is accepted that Mr Adebayo was a party, if
             not, which is more likely, the sole instigator of this attempt
             to deceive the Secretary of State.

         ...

         345. Whereas, in the light of my findings that there  has  in  fact
             been spun a fictitious narrative of the  social,  educational,
             and economic circumstances of the  family  whilst  in  Nigeria
             before 2001, and between 2003 and 2007 when the children  were
             purportedly  left  there  by  their  parents  in  a  state  of
             deprivation.  It  is  much  more  likely  on  the  balance  of
             probabilities  that  the  fictitious   narrative   from   1994
             involving entry of Mr Adebayo senior  legally  as  a  visitor,
             with an attempt to remain and study, that was cut short by the
             loss of his parents killed  in  religious  violence,  and  the
             subsequent  falsely  documented  employment  history  in   the
             cleaning industry, all of which bears an  uncanny  resemblance
             to the latest  employment  history  of  Mr  and  Mrs  Adebayo,
             carries the imprint of and emanates completely from Mr Adebayo
             senior.  He does after all, with his wife, admit to having had
             easy and casual access to forged documentation since  2001  so
             as to support their various employments.  They have also after
             all gone on since to encourage their eldest child Aliu in  the
             same approach over his university education.  I therefore find
             that this 2008 fictitious narrative going back to 1994 was not
             the result of a fertile imagination  of  IEI  Solicitors,  but
             that of Mr Adebayo senior himself personally."

5.   There were further remarks made by the judge as to the  reliability  of
    the evidence given by the witnesses before him in those proceedings  in
    2012.  Clearly that appeal was dismissed.

6.   Notwithstanding the dismissal of that appeal  the  Appellants  remained
    in the United Kingdom. On 8 April  2014  the  Appellants  made  further
    representations to the Respondent that they  ought  to  be  allowed  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, referring to  the  situation  of  various
    members of the family. In  relation  to  the  third  Appellant  it  was
    asserted merely that she was a  Nigerian  citizen;  she  had  no  other
    citizenship; and was aged 16.  The  remainder  of  the  representations
    were not specific to the family's circumstances but set out the various
    authorities and principles of law relating to Article 8 ECHR.

7.   On a date which  is  unclear  the  Respondent  served  a  notice  under
    Section 120  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    requiring the family members to provide a statement of  any  additional
    grounds that they may have for seeking to remain in the United Kingdom.
     That notice is at page C1 of the Respondent's bundle.  In response  to
    that  the  Appellants  provided  further   representations   by   their
    solicitors dated 10 June 2014 which specifically related to  the  third
    Appellant, Mariam.  It was asserted that Mariam should be permitted  to
    remain under paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  The facts asserted in relation  to  Mariam  are
    set out at pages C3 to C4 of those representations which give her name,
    her date of birth, age, nationality, her parents' names, the fact  that
    her three siblings are also said to reside in the United  Kingdom,  she
    lived in the same household as her parents and siblings, and  that  the
    date of her arrival was 15 March 2007. (It is accepted on behalf of the
    Appellants that a later assertion at page C6 of  those  representations
    that the third Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  31  October
    2005 is incorrect).  The representations continue at C4 to assert  that
    the third Appellant arrived in the UK on her own national passport with
    entry clearance, although no evidence of that that was been brought  to
    the attention of either the First-tier Tribunals.

8.   Paragraph 276ADE is referred  to.   It  was  asserted  that  the  third
    Appellant had lived continuously in the UK for at least seven years and
    that it would be not reasonable to expect her to  return  to  her  home
    country for the following reasons:

           o she is attending full-time education in this country;

           o her education has been substantially in this country;

           o she has a number of church members and friends in this country
             and maintains a strong relationship with them:  she  plays  an
             active role in her local church where she  provides  voluntary
             services  for  the  benefit  of  members  of  her  church  and
             locality;

           o she has become fully adapted to life in the United Kingdom  in
             several ways;

           o she believes that her private and  family  life  can  only  be
             lived in this country;

           o she has no family ties remaining in the home country;

           o she has no social or  cultural  ties  remaining  in  the  home
             country;

           o  she  believes  that  her  education  would  be  significantly
             disrupted if she is removed from the  United  Kingdom  to  the
             home country;

           o she has no home or financial resources in her home country;

           o her moral integrity would  be  at  stake  as  a  young  woman,
             homeless and vulnerable.

    The remainder of the submissions are generic and  refer  to  case  law.
    There are no further  specific  references  to  the  third  Appellant's
    circumstances.

9.   Those various representations resulted in a decision of the  Respondent
    dated 30 July 2014 in which each of the  family  members  were  refused
    leave  to  remain.   The  Respondent  addressed  whether  each  of  the
    Appellants had satisfied the requirements for  leave  to  remain  under
    various elements of Appendix FM for family migration and concluded that
    none of them did  so.   The  consideration  of  the  third  Appellant's
    situation is set out at paragraph 29 of the  Respondent's  decision  as
    follows:

         "29. She is now 17 and has lived in the UK for 7 years.   Therefore
             your client's daughter fails to meet parts (iii)  and  (v)  of
             paragraph 276ADE.  Additionally, as your client has lived  the
             majority of her life in Nigeria, it is not accepted  that  she
             has lost all social, cultural and family ties to that  country
             and she also therefore fails to meet 276ADE part  (vi).   With
             regard to paragraph 276ADE part (iv), you have stated that  it
             would be unreasonable to  expect  your  client's  daughter  to
             leave the UK due to not  having  the  support  of  family  and
             friends in Nigeria.  This is not  accepted  as  your  client's
             parents are Nigerian nationals, with no leave to remain in the
             UK and since removal directions have been set against them, it
             is expected that she could return to Nigeria with  them.   You
             have also stated that your client's daughter's education would
             be disrupted if she were to return to Nigeria.  However, it is
             noted from the  evidence  of  education  submitted  that  your
             client's daughter's education is due to end in July 2014.  She
             will therefore have finished her  education  at  the  time  of
             removal.  It is  also  noted  that  the  education  system  in
             Nigeria provides courses for children up to the age of 18  and
             there is also University education available in that country."

10.  It is to be noted that there is no discrete reference to Section 55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  at  that  point  or
    thereafter within the Respondent's refusal letter.

11.  On appeal to the judge  the  first  and  second  Appellants  gave  oral
    evidence as did an adult son of theirs.  The third  Appellant  did  not
    give oral evidence.  At paragraph 4 of the judge's decision he held  as
    follows when setting out the second Appellant's oral evidence:

         "4.   The  statement  asserted  that  Mariam   attended   full-time
             education and has fully integrated with UK culture  (paragraph
             20).  That was the only  reference  to  the  third  Appellant.
             There was no letter from the third  Appellant,  there  was  no
             statement and on enquiry to  her  representative  I  was  told
             there was no intention to call her, but she was in court.  She
             appeared to follow the hearing.  The statement  of  the  first
             Appellant was also adopted and contained identical wording  in
             paragraph 15 relating to the paragraph to the third Appellant.

         5.   In the absence of the Respondent having regard to the need  to
             have the best interests of a young person  under  section  55,
             indeed as pleaded, I considered it appropriate to  ask  a  few
             open-ended  questions  as  to  the  position  of   the   third
             Appellant.   The  second  Appellant  stated  that  the   third
             Appellant was still living with them, she attended Westminster
             College, she was doing social studies, when I asked  her  what
             level she replied stage 3 but looked puzzled as to  what  that
             meant.  She  was  clear  that  the  third  Appellant  was  not
             working, that they supported her, she had lots of friends, she
             did not know if her  daughter  had  a  boyfriend.   The  third
             Appellant's father, the first Appellant also stated  that  she
             was at school and then after a pause said that she  was  at  a
             college, he could not remember the college  name,  he  thought
             she  was  studying  social  services  and  wished  to  go   to
             university.  When asked whether she was working he replied no,
             full-time school."

12.  In relation to the evidence about the third Appellant's  circumstances,
    and specifically dealing with the oral evidence given by the first  and
    second Appellants, the judge held at paragraph 8 that he did not accept
    the  evidence  of  either  parent,  given  their  previous  history  of
    deception as set out in detail by Judge Raymond and which  I  have  set
    out above. From paragraph 9 Judge Wilson held that  there  had  been  a
    change of circumstances since the previous decision, by the passage  of
    time taking place due to the family's ignoring the dismissal  of  their
    prior appeal and the fact  that  they  had  resided  in  the  UK  after
    exhaustion of all appeal rights in August 2012.  He held that  even  if
    the third Appellant had been attending college  with  an  intention  to
    pursue a university education it was clear that she had  completed  her
    main education in July 2014.  He held:

         "9.  I am satisfied  that  the  general  opportunities  for  higher
             education  in  the  United  Kingdom  are   better   and   more
             advantageous generally to students than in Nigeria.  I  accept
             the third Appellant has been here for more  than  seven  years
             and she is under the age of 18.  I do not accept that she  has
             severed all ties with her home country.  She has been  brought
             up in Nigeria until the age of 7. (I pause to note  here  that
             that is a slip on the judge's part as it would appear  if  the
             third Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  in  March  2007
             that she would have been  9,  nearly  10  years  old  at  that
             point).  She has maintained  a  position  within  her  family.
             There was no evidence called of  any  meaningful  relationship
             outside her family other than simply friends.  I am  satisfied
             that while she would have some  difficulties  in  adapting  on
             return to Nigeria and I am  not  satisfied  having  regard  to
             paragraph 276ADE that they  would  be  so  significant  as  to
             prevent her proceeding within the Nigerian  further  education
             system if she so wished.

         10.  Overall while accepting that removal would interfere with  her
             best interests I have to consider, it not being an  overriding
             provision, I now turn to the wider proportionality  assessment
             and as part of that whether  or  not  facts  relating  to  the
             importance of  maintaining  immigration  control  cumulatively
             reinforce or alternatively outweigh the best interests of  the
             child."

13.  The judge then proceeded to consider  in  the  remaining  part  of  his
    decision the position of the family members. The Judge referred [14] to
    the need to maintain a  fair  and  transparent  system  of  immigration
    control, and observed, by reference to the findings of  Judge  Raymond,
    that the first and Second Appellants had consistently  tried  to  evade
    such a system. The Judge stated that he had had particular concern  for
    the third Appellant, but that no attempt had  been  made  to  call  any
    further evidence from her or file documents on her  behalf.  The  Judge
    concluded having regard to the circumstances of the third Appellant and
    her family that the refusal to grant leave  and  maintain  the  earlier
    removal directions were justified

14.  Grounds of appeal were made to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  that
    decision but permission was refused in the first instance  on  10  July
    2015.  The same grounds were adopted in a renewed application dated  21
    July 2015 on which permission was  granted  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Chapman on 14 October 2015.  Those grounds as summarised by Judge
    Chapman are as follows: that the judge erred  (i)  in  concluding  that
    removal of the third applicant  was  'justified  in  the  interests  of
    maintaining  immigration  control',  as  the   test   under   paragraph
    276ADE(iv) is whether it would be  reasonable  for  her  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom; (ii) in not remitting the appeal to the  Respondent  to
    consider the best interests of the third applicant properly, and  (iii)
    because he did not give anxious scrutiny to all the facts  relating  to
    the best interests of the third applicant; it was said that  no  weight
    was given to her length of residence or her age when  she  arrived  and
    the judge did not apply the principle in Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT  197.
    Judge Chapman thought that grounds (i) and (iii) raised arguable errors
    of law but she observed that the judge had expressed  surprise  at  the
    lack of evidence concerning the third applicant and no attempt was made
    to call her and the judge had not been  greatly  assisted  by  this  in
    reaching the decision in respect  of  the  third  Appellant,  thus  the
    materiality of any errors was debateable.  Judge Chapman also indicated
    that the First tier Judge did not  appear  to  consider  the  mandatory
    public  interest  considerations  at  Section  117A  and   B   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

15.  I have heard submissions today from Ms Hannan who appeared  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and who I believe prepared the grounds  of  appeal.
    In relation to the first ground I take this essentially as a suggestion
    that the judge has misdirected himself  in  law  when  undertaking  the
    proportionality balancing  exercise  under  Article  8  ECHR,  or  when
    determining whether under paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  it  was  reasonable
    that the third Appellant should leave  the  United  Kingdom.   This  is
    because the Appellant seeks to contrast the  expressions  used  by  the
    judge at paragraph 9, at which point he is undeniably  considering  the
    application of 276ADE(1)(iv), and the expression that he  uses  at  the
    end of paragraph 15 which is as follows:

         "I have considered Section 55 of the Borders Act and  whilst  I  am
         satisfied as to the assertion that her  removal  to  Nigeria  would
         cause detriment to her education and thus to her best  interests  I
         am satisfied that having regard to the other circumstances  of  her
         and her family that the refusal  to  grant  leave  and  remain  the
         earlier removal directions are justified."

16.  I reject the proposition advanced by the Appellant that  there  is  any
    conflation of the two issues of (i) whether it is reasonable  that  the
    Appellant should leave the United Kingdom, that being the relevant test
    to  be  considered  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv),   and   (ii)   the
    proportionality of the Appellants' proposed removal.  To  my  mind  the
    judge  has  addressed  the  relevant  considerations  arising  out   of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) in the second part of his paragraph 9  which  I
    have quoted above.  There is a reference there to the duration  of  the
    Appellant's stay in the United Kingdom being greater than  seven  years
    and  the  fact  that  she  remains  a  minor.   The  remainder  of  the
    considerations relate to the issue of any difficulty she  may  have  in
    returning to Nigeria.  Those considerations are all in my view  clearly
    relevant to whether it is  reasonable  for  her  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom to return to Nigeria.  There is no misdirection in law  at  the
    end of paragraph  9  and  no  conflation  of  the  two  issues  of  the
    determination of her entitlement to reside under 276ADE(1)(iv)  on  the
    one  hand  and  the  proportionality  of  removing  her   outside   the
    Immigration Rules under Article 8 ECHR on the other.  It is clear  that
    the judge had completed his assessment  under  276ADE  in  paragraph  9
    before turning ('I now turn...') to Article 8 at paragraph 10  onwards.
    I am not shown any authority to establish that  the  use  of  the  word
    'justified' at [15],  in  relation  to  a  proportionality  assessment,
    amounts to a  misdirection  in  law.  There  is  no  challenge  to  the
    rationality of the judge's findings at paragraph 9 and I find that  the
    Appellant's first ground is not made out.

17.  The second ground is that the judge should have held that the  decision
    appealed against was not in accordance with the law under Section 55 of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and that  the  matter
    should have been allowed such that a lawful  decision  remained  to  be
    made by the Secretary of State.  I do not find this ground to  be  made
    out.  The consideration of this ground requires  consideration  of  two
    reported decisions of the Upper Tribunal, being JO & Others (Section 55
    duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 517, and MK (Section 55 -  Tribunal  options)
    [2015] UKUT 223.  In  the  former  case  the  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal gives useful guidance as to the duties  on  the  Secretary  of
    State in considering the best interests  of  a  minor  child.   In  the
    circumstances of that case evidence regarding  a  child  had  been  put
    before the Secretary of State, and the  Upper  Tribunal  held  that  no
    proper consideration had been  given  to  it.   The  head  note  is  as
    follows:

         "(1) The duty imposed by section 55 of the Borders Citizenship  and
             Immigration  Act  2009  requires  the  decision-maker  to   be
             properly informed of the position of a child affected  by  the
             discharge of an immigration etc function. Thus  equipped,  the
             decision maker must  conduct  a  careful  examination  of  all
             relevant information and factors.

         (2)  Being adequately informed and conducting a scrupulous analysis
             are elementary prerequisites to  the  inter-related  tasks  of
             identifying the child's best interests and then balancing them
             with other material considerations.

         (3)  The question whether the duties imposed  by  section  55  have
             been duly performed in any given case will  invariably  be  an
             intensely fact sensitive and contextual one. In the real world
             of litigation, the tools available to the  court  or  tribunal
             considering this question will frequently be confined  to  the
             application or submission made to Secretary of State  and  the
             ultimate letter of decision."

18.  That guidance invites the consideration of  whether  the  Secretary  of
    State or the Tribunal  is  adequately  equipped  to  make  proper  best
    interest assessment.  In the  circumstances  of  the  case  of  JO  the
    President held that the Secretary of State had failed in  her  duty  to
    make clear findings as  to  the  best  interests  of  the  minor  child
    involved in that case,  and  her  appeal  was  allowed  such  that  the
    Secretary of State was obliged to re-make the  decision  in  accordance
    with the judgment.

19.  There is however the case of MK which gives further guidance as to  the
    disposal of appeals before the First-tier or the Upper  Tribunal  where
    it is found that the Secretary of State's duties under Section 55  have
    not been complied with.  The head note of the case provides as follows:

         "(i) Where it is contended that either of the duties  enshrined  in
             section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
             2009 has been breached, the onus rests on  the  Appellant  and
             the civil standard of the balance  of  probabilities  applies.
             There is no onus on the Secretary of State.

         (ii) As regards the second of the statutory  duties  [the  need  to
             have regard to statutory guidance promulgated by the Secretary
             of State], it is not necessary for the decision letter to make
             specific reference to the statutory guidance.

         (iii)    The statutory guidance prescribes a series of factors  and
             principles  which  case  workers  and  decision  makers   must
             consider.

         (iv) Where the Tribunal finds that  there  has  been  a  breach  of
             either of the section 55 duties, one of the options  available
             is remittal to the Secretary of State for reconsideration  and
             fresh decision.

         (v)  In considering the appropriate order,  Tribunals  should  have
             regard  to  their  adjournment  and  case  management  powers,
             together with the overriding objective.  They will  also  take
             into account the facilities  available  to  the  Secretary  of
             State  under  the  statutory  guidance,  the  desirability  of
             finality and the undesirability of undue delay.   If  deciding
             not to remit  the  Tribunal  must  be  satisfied  that  it  is
             sufficiently equipped to make an adequate  assessment  of  the
             best interests of any affected child."

20.  In that head note it is apparent that a finding that a decision is  not
    in accordance with the law, and a "remittal" to the Secretary of State,
    is not the automatic result of any finding that the best interests of a
    child had not been properly taken into  account  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  A number of case management powers may be  utilised  by  either
    the First-tier or the Upper Tribunal, and one  issue  relevant  to  the
    exercise of those powers is whether the Tribunal  can  consider  itself
    adequately equipped to make a finding on Section 55  itself.   However,
    in giving guidance as to what steps might be taken, the Tribunal  rules
    at paragraph 39(c) as follows:

         "In choosing between the two options identified above, Judges  will
         be guided by their assessment of the realities of the litigation in
         the particular case and the basis on which the Secretary  of  State
         has been found to have acted in breach of either  or  both  of  the
         section 55 duties.  It  will  also  be  appropriate  to  take  into
         account the desirability of  finality  and  the  undesirability  of
         undue delay."

21.  In my view, although it is the case that Section 55  was  not  directly
    referred to in the Respondent's decision of 30 July 2014 it  cannot  be
    said that she wholly left out of account a consideration of  the  third
    Appellant's best interests.  Her position is considered in paragraph 29
    of  the  refusal  letter  as  I  set  it  out  above.   Even  if   that
    consideration is insufficient so as to amount to a breach of Section 55
    (which I found that it is not) then the options available to the First-
    tier and Upper Tribunal are varied, as I outline above.

22.  In  my  view  there  can  be  no  criticism  of  the  First-tier  Judge
    proceeding in the way that he did in the circumstances of this  appeal.
    I have quoted above  his  surprise  at  the  lack  of  evidence  either
    directly or indirectly from the third Appellant; specifically there was
    no letter from the third Appellant, no statement and on enquiry to  the
    representative he was simply told that there was no intention  to  call
    her.  The judge did what I view to be his best when he decided  of  his
    own motion (para [5]) to ask some open-ended questions about the  third
    Appellant's circumstances.  In circumstances where the evidence  before
    a Tribunal is in the state it was before  the  present  judge,  and  an
    opportunity was given to those acting for the Appellants to adduce  any
    further evidence that they wished in relation to the third  Appellant's
    circumstances (and such opportunity declined), I cannot see  any  merit
    to the criticism that the judge failed in his duties under Section  55,
    or in any other way, so as to ensure that he  was  informed  about  the
    position of the third Appellant when making an assessment of  her  best
    interests.  I find that the second of the Appellant's grounds of appeal
    discloses no material error of law.

23.  The third ground I can deal with more swiftly.  That is that there  has
    been no anxious scrutiny as to the third Appellant's circumstances  and
    no application of  the  principle  in  Azimi-Moayed  which,  if  I  may
    summarise it in this way, requires decision-makers to  have  regard  to
    the length of residence of a minor child  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    gives guidance that the presence of a child over the age of 4 is likely
    to result in greater ties to the United Kingdom than the presence of  a
    child under the age of 4.  My assessment is that the  judge  was  fully
    aware of the period of time that the third Appellant was present in the
    United Kingdom.  He made reference to the stage she had reached in  her
    education, he  made  reference  to  the  relationships  which  she  had
    established with others in the United Kingdom,  though  principally  he
    held that these were with her other family  members  who  stand  to  be
    removed with her if this appeal does not succeed. I find that there  is
    no failure to give anxious scrutiny to the circumstances of  the  third
    Appellant or to apply any principle arising out of the case  of  Azimi-
    Moayed.

24.  That in my view deals with the grounds of  appeal  as  they  have  been
    advanced by the Appellants.  Judge  Chapman,  in  granting  permission,
    also raised the possibility that the judge had not had adequate  regard
    to the considerations in s.117B NIAA 2002. It is right  to  acknowledge
    that Part 5A of NIAA 2002 was not referred to directly by the judge  in
    his decision, but this is not an error of law in itself: Dube (ss.117A-
    117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC), head note 2; what matters is substance, not
    form. In any event, I find that there is nothing in Part 5A which would
    have been of any assistance to the Appellants,  even  if  it  had  been
    referred to directly by the Judge. Even if the Appellants speak English
    (s.117B(2)) or are financially independent (s.117B(3)) (and I note that
    any earned income of the  Appellants  will  have  arisen  from  illegal
    employment), this would not give rise to a positive right to reside  in
    the UK in any event: AM (s.117B) [2015] UKUT 260  (IAC)  head  note  2.
    Section 117B(4) and (5) would indicate  that  the  Appellants'  private
    life, acquired in the UK whist here unlawfully, should be given  little
    weight. Finally, the question arising in s.117B(6) in relation  to  the
    first and second Appellant's relationship with the third Appellant, who
    had been present in the UK for more than 7 years, is the same  question
    that  the  Judge  considered  and  rejected   in   relation   to   para
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the rules; this question need only be answered once: :
    AM (s.117B) [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) head note 6.

25.  It is to be noted that there is no  discrete  argument  raised  by  the
    Appellants in respect of the dismissal of the appeals of the first  and
    second Appellants.  The position the Appellants adopted before me today
    was that if there was any material error of law in the judge's approach
    to the third Appellant's appeal such that her appeal needs  to  be  re-
    heard, then necessarily the position of the first and second Appellants
    would also need to be reconsidered.  I agree with that position up to a
    point although such argument should have been pleaded in the grounds of
    appeal.

26.  However, in the light of my finding that there is no material error  of
    law in the way the judge  dealt  with  the  third  Appellant's  appeal,
    consequently there can be no criticism of the way the judge dealt  with
    the first and second Appellants' appeals either.

    Notice of Decision

27.  The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  did  not  involve  the
    making of any material error of law.  I do not set aside the First-tier
    decision.  I uphold the First-tier decision and I dismiss  the  present
    appeal.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:  Date 1.3.16

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

