
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration   and   Asylum   Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: IA/31292/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard             at             Field             House,             London
Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On              the              19th              August               2015
 On the 4th September 2015


                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                  Between:

                                MS EMMAH LESA
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr Kannangara (Counsel)
For the Respondent:   Ms Everett (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Owens promulgated on the 16th March 2015.

Background

   2. The Appellant initially entered the United Kingdom on the 1st  October
      2007 with Entry clearance as a student.  Thereafter  she  was  granted
      further periods of Leave to Remain until the 21st March 2014.  On  the
      17th March 2014 she submitted an application for Leave  to  Remain  in
      the United Kingdom on basis of her medical condition, which  initially
      was considered by the Respondent both under Article 3 and Article 8 of
      the ECHR in a decision  dated  the  22nd  July  2014.  The  Respondent
      initially refused the Appellant's application on Human Rights grounds.
      The Appellant then appealed that refusal to  First-tier  Tribunal  and
      that appeal was heard by First-Tier Tribunal Judge Owens on  the  10th
      February 2015, sitting at Richmond. In her decision she found that  it
      had been confirmed on behalf of the Appellant that she  did  not  meet
      the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and that
      it was not being argued that the Appellant could succeed under Article
      3.




   3. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  Appellant  was  not
      critical or terminally ill and that her condition remained  stable  on
      medication and that therefore she did not  meet  the  requirements  of
      Article 3 and that her removal would not amount to  a  breach  of  her
      Human Rights under Article  3.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  then
      considered the Appellant's claim under Article  8  of  the  ECHR.  She
      concluded  that  the  decision  taken   represented   a   proportioned
      interference with the Appellant's private life and that there  was  no
      breach of her human rights under Article 8.




   4. The Respondent  has  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal and permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-
      Tier Tribunal Hollingworth on the 21st May 2015, on the grounds that:




   i. "An arguable error of law has arisen in relation to the  consideration
      of Article 8. At paragraph 66 the Judge has stated that ultimately the
      Appellant did not satisfy the Immigration Rules in respect of  private
      life. The Judge went on to state that she found that Article 8 did not
      provide a remedy for those who could not satisfy the Rules.




  ii. Given this reference appearing at this juncture of the decision it  is
      arguable that the Judge's approach to the application of the  criteria
      appertaining to Article 8 outside of the Immigration  Rules  has  been
      affected."





Submissions

   5. Mr Kannangara on behalf  of  Appellant  relied  upon  the  Grounds  of
      Appeal. He argued that the First-Tier Tribunal Judge materially  erred
      in law in her consideration of the proportionality issue  at  the  5th
      stage of the Razgar test. He referred me specifically to paragraphs 65
      and 66 of the decision and argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
      finding that, "I find that Article 8 does not  provide  a  remedy  for
      those who cannot satisfy the Rules" amounted to a  material  error  in
      law in her assessment of the Appellant's claim  under  Article  8.  He
      argued that the case law following Nagre v Secretary of State for  the
      Home Department [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)  had  made  it  clear  that
      situations could arise where Appellants would succeed  in  respect  of
      their Article 8 claim outside of the Immigration Rules, even  if  they
      did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  that  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge had placed too much weight, when considering
      the public interest element in the Respondent's side of the  balancing
      exercise, on the fact that the Appellant did not meet the requirements
      of the Immigration Rules. He asked me to allow the appeal on the basis
      there was a material error of law in this regard.




   6. Ms Everett on behalf  of  the  Respondent  relied  upon  her  Rule  24
      response and argued that  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  fully
      considered the Appellant's claim  under  Article  8  and  all  of  the
      considerations that were  relevant  to  the  balancing  exercise.  She
      argued that Judge Owens had properly taken account of section 117B  of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and that although the
      wording of paragraph 66 was "unhelpful" she argued that the Judge  had
      still given the proper consideration as to the factors to be  balanced
      for the purpose  of  determining  whether  or  not  the  decision  was
      proportionate under Article 8 and that in any event, even if the Judge
      had erred in law, such error was not material as there were no grounds
      of finding that the decision would have amounted to a  breach  of  the
      Appellant's Human Rights under Article 8.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

   7. First-Tier Tribunal Judge Owens properly set out the  five-stage  test
      pursuant to the House of Lords decision  in  Regina  v.  Secretary  of
      State for  the  Home  Department  (Appellant)  ex  parte  Razgar  (FC)
      (Respondent [2004] UKHL 27 at [50] and  properly  considered  that  in
      line with the Court of Appeal case of GS  (India)  and  others  v  The
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 40 that the
      failure of the Appellant's claim under Article 3 on health grounds did
      not necessarily entail failure under Article 8,  but  that  Article  8
      could not prosper without some separate or additional factual  element
      which brings the case within the Article 8  paradigm.  The  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge went on to consider the factors set out at section  117
      B of the Nationality, Immigration and Immigration Act 2002  and  noted
      that the Appellant did speak fluent English having  been  educated  in
      English to Masters level and that she has been financially independent
      [64]. The First-Tier Tribunal Judge further at  [65]  found  that  the
      Appellant's private life had been built up a time when her status  was
      not precarious and she said that she gave the Appellant's private life
      a lot of weight and had taken into account that she  had  carried  out
      charity work and assisted more  vulnerable  people  in  the  community
      [65].




   8.  However, although having properly considered the factors weighing  in
      favour  of  the  Appellant  for  the  purposes  of   considering   the
      proportionality issue, sadly, it  seems  clear,  reading  the  Judge's
      decision at [66] that the First-Tier Tribunal Judge did err in law  in
      finding that, "ultimately however the Appellant does not  satisfy  the
      Immigration Rules in respect of private life. I find  that  Article  8
      does not provide a remedy for those who  cannot  satisfy  the  Rules."
      Further at paragraph [16], Judge Owens found  that  "Although  I  have
      found the Appellant has made strong private life ties to the  UK  over
      the time she has lawfully spent here, I find that she cannot meet  the
      requirements of the Rules and there is no good reason why  it  is  not
      reasonable to expect her to resume her life in Zambia." The First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge's findings in this regard clearly indicate that she has
      in fact placed too much weight in carrying out the  balance  exercise,
      on the fact that the Appellant could not meet the requirements of  the
      Immigration Rules and has considered that the Appellant's  failure  to
      satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules precludes her from a
      finding that the decision  is  not  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
      public aim sought to be achieved. It is an error of law to state  that
      "Article 8 does not provide a remedy for those who cannot satisfy  the
      Rules."




   9. Clearly, Article 8 is not a general dispensing  power  and  cannot  be
      used simply to circumvent the provisions of the Immigration Rules, but
      if there are compelling circumstances that are not  dealt  with  under
      the Immigration Rules, then a decision by the Respondent to remove  an
      Appellant can still amount to a  breach  of  her  Human  Rights  under
      Article 8 and the decision taken can still be disproportionate. It  is
      a matter of balancing, in  order  to  determine  whether  or  not  the
      interference is proportionate to the legitimate public aim  sought  to
      be achieved.




  10. In my judgement, the First-Tier Tribunal Judge's finding that "Article
      8 does not provide a remedy for those who cannot  satisfy  the  Rules"
      clearly amounts to an error of law. Further, given that  this  finding
      appears from her decision to be the basis on which it is said that the
      decision  taken  was  proportionate,  despite  the  Judge's   findings
      regarding the exceptional circumstances in the Appellant's  case  that
      required consideration of her claim under Article 8 in respect of  her
      very strong ties and her health condition, I find that  the  error  of
      law is material. It is simply  wrong  to  suggest  that  an  Appellant
      cannot succeed, irrespective of the strength of the ties, if she  does
      not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules. I  therefore  find
      that the entirety  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judges  decision  in
      respect of the proportionality issue has been infected by the error of
      law, and it is impossible to separate out this finding from her  other
      findings in respect of proportionality, in order to say whether or not
      she would have reached the same decision irrespective  of  the  error.
      The  error  having  infected  the  entirety  of  her   proportionality
      assessment, I find that the decision on the  Article  8  issue  cannot
      stand and is thereby set aside.




  11. As there has not been  an  adequate  consideration  given  as  to  the
      factors that might  count  against  the  Appellant  in  terms  of  the
      decision being proportionate to the legitimate public aim sought to be
      achieved, other than her simply not meeting the  requirements  of  the
      Immigration Rules, and given that  I  have  not  had  the  benefit  of
      hearing directly from the Appellant herself regarding her  links  with
      the church, her friends and her charity work, Judge Owen simply having
      found  she  had  strong  ties  in  this  regard,  I  consider  that  a
      substantial amount of further fact-finding would in fact  be  required
      by the Upper Tribunal involving in effect a complete remaking  of  the
      weight to be given to each of the factors  regarding  proportionality,
      in order to properly carry out the  balancing  exercise,  that  it  is
      appropriate given the material  error  of  law  for  the  case  to  be
      remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  in  Richmond,  to  be  heard
      before any judge other than First-Tier Tribunal Judge Owens.



Notice of Decision

The decision of First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  Owens  did  contain  a  material
error of law and  is  thereby  set  aside  and  the  appellant's  appeal  is
allowed.  The  case  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal   for
rehearing, to be heard at Richmond  before  any  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
other than First-Tier Tribunal Judge Owens.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-Tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014 and no application for an anonymity order was made before me.  No
such order is made.



Signed


[pic]

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McGinty
  Dated 19th August 2015

