
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31314/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th October 2015                 |On 23rd October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    mr Shehzad Abdul Razzak Abdul Sattar
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart
For the Respondent:    Mr S Vokes


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  I shall refer to the Appellant as "the Secretary of State" and to  the
    Respondent as "the Claimant".

 2. The Secretary of State has appealed,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  North)
    promulgated on 5th February 2015 allowing the Claimant's appeal against
    the Respondent's decision of 15th July 2014 refusing to grant him leave
    to remain in the UK  on  human  rights  grounds.   The  appeal,  it  is
    important to note though, was  only  allowed  on  the  basis  that  the
    decision under challenge was not in accordance with the law such that a
    lawful decision by the Secretary of State was awaited.

 3. By way of background, the Claimant, a national of Malawi, was  born  on
    2nd March 1981.  He came to the  UK  in  November  1995.   There  is  a
    history of his having made  a  number  of  applications  for  leave  to
    remain, all of which were refused.  With  respect  to  the  application
    which has led to this appeal, he sought to rely upon  his  relationship
    with and subsequent marriage to a British citizen and the fact that the
    two have a British citizen child who was born on 29th March 2012.

 4. The Respondent's position with respect to the Appellant's  most  recent
    application was set out in a "refusal letter" of 15th July  2014.   The
    letter contains a consideration of  the  claim  under  the  Immigration
    Rules regarding the Appellant's statement as a partner and as a parent.
     There is consideration as to private life arguments under Rule  276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules and, with respect to Article 8 of the European
    Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) a consideration of whether there  are
    exceptional circumstances.  All of those matters were resolved  against
    the Appellant.  As to any considerations pursuant to Section 55 of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 the author of the refusal
    letter said this;

         "8.  The Immigration Rules stated above reflect  the  duty  of  the
             Secretary  of  State  under  Section  55   of   the   Borders,
             Citizenship   and   Immigration   Act   2009   and   therefore
             consideration of the best interests of the children have  been
             taken into account when assessing leave under Article 8."

 5. There is, though, it is fair to say, very little in the way of, perhaps
    it is  more  accurate  to  say  nothing  in  the  way  of,  a  specific
    consideration directed to the  best  interests  of  the  child  in  the
    context of the Section 55 duty in the remainder of the letter.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal was clearly unimpressed with the  Secretary  of
    State's treatment of the Section 55 issue. It considered, in  light  of
    that concern, that the appropriate course of action would be  to  allow
    the appeal on the basis that the decision was not  in  accordance  with
    the law so that the Secretary of State could go on  to  make  a  lawful
    decision.  It explained its reasoning, in this regard, in this way;

         "9.  The  Appellant's  representative  argued  in  the  Grounds  of
             Appeal, in the skeleton argument lodged with  the  Appellant's
             bundle, and at the  hearing  that  the  Respondent  had,  when
             considering  the   Appellant's   claim,   not   given   proper
             consideration to the  best  interests  of  the  child  of  the
             Appellant and his partner as required by  Section  55  of  the
             Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  The  Appellant
             says that their  child  was  born  in  2012  and  that  he  is
             significantly  engaged  in  the   child's   upbringing.    The
             Respondent accepts that the child's nationality is British.  I
             am satisfied it was therefore incumbent on the  Respondent  to
             consider and promote their  child's  best  interests.   On  my
             reading  of  the  refusal  letter,  there  is  no  substantive
             reference to Section 55, on  the  information  before  me  the
             Respondent cannot maintain that the decision was made lawfully
             after consideration of all relevant factors.  It may  be  that
             after consideration,  the  Respondent  might  reach  the  same
             conclusion; however, that is a matter for the Respondent."

 7. The First-tier Tribunal, thus, went on  to  allow  the  appeal  to  the
    extent that the Secretary of State's decision  was  not  in  accordance
    with the law.  It was clearly  anticipated  that,  what  would  follow,
    would be a new and lawful decision.

 8. The Secretary of State, instead of making a new  and  lawful  decision,
    sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  grounds  of
    application were to the effect that the First-tier Tribunal "was seized
    of the matter" and that it had "a  statutory  duty  to  determined  the
    matters put before it".  Thus, it was contended, it was "a clear  error
    in law" to fail to determine the appeal.  It was said, in support, that
    the judgment in AJ (India) [2011] EWCA Civ 1191, was binding.

 9. Permission was granted by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  JN
    Reid) on 17th April 2015.

10. There was, thereafter, a hearing before me.  At that hearing  Mr  Smart
    acknowledged that the judgment in AJ, cited above, did not go so far as
    to say that a First-tier Tribunal must proceed to determine the Section
    55 issues for itself rather than remit.  However,  in  this  case,  the
    First-tier Tribunal had failed to properly explain why it was  that  it
    was not making a decision  itself  rather  than  remitting.   Mr  Vokes
    contended, in effect, that the consideration of the Section  55  duties
    in the refusal letter was perfunctory, that the First-tier Tribunal had
    concluded that it did not have sufficient facts before it  to  properly
    decide the issue and that, therefore,  it  was  the  proper  course  to
    remit.  It was open to it to do that.

11. During the course of argument, in addition to AJ, I was referred to  JO
    and Others (Section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT  00517  (IAC)  and  MK
    (Section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC).

12. It seems to me that, on the facts, this is a relatively straightforward
    matter.  Although the grounds appeared to suggest that the judgment  in
    AJ was to the effect that First-tier Tribunal Judges have to make their
    own decision regarding Section 55 issues, that is not so.  As Mr  Vokes
    points out, with the agreement of Mr Smart, that judgment  was  to  the
    effect that First-tier Tribunal Judges are able to take that course  of
    action if they wish.   It  was  not  said  that  they  were  invariably
    required to do so and it did not shut out the  option  of  allowing  an
    appeal on the basis of the decision not being in  accordance  with  the
    law such that a new and lawful decision would  be,  as  a  consequence,
    awaited.

13. JO was a decision taken into  account  by  the  Tribunal  in  MK.   The
    rationale in MK was that one option where the First-tier Tribunal found
    a breach of the Section 55 duties, on the  part  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, was remittal to the Secretary of State for  reconsideration  and
    for a fresh decision.  It was said that if deciding  not  to  remit,  a
    First-tier Tribunal must be satisfied that it is sufficiently  equipped
    to make an adequate assessment of the best interests  of  a  child  for
    itself.

14. It was said that in choosing between the two  options  (being  deciding
    matters for itself and remitting)  the  First-tier  Tribunal  would  be
    guided by its assessment of the realities  of  the  litigation  in  the
    particular case, the basis on which the Secretary  of  State  had  been
    found to have acted  in  breach  of  the  Section  55  duties  and  the
    desirability of finality.

15. It is clear, in this case, that the First-tier Tribunal did  find  that
    the Secretary of State had failed in  her  Section  55  duties  through
    failing to  substantively  consider  the  provision  at  all.   It  was
    certainly open to it to reach that conclusion given  the  very  limited
    reference to the provision and the  lack  of  any  subsequent  reasoned
    reference to the best interests of the child.  It was implicit in  what
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  to  say  in  the   paragraph   of   its
    determination  I  have  set  out  above,  that  it  did  feel  it   had
    insufficient information before it to safely make its own  decision  on
    the facts.  Its reference to  what  it  felt  to  be  the  Respondent's
    inability to maintain that the decision was a lawful one on  the  basis
    of the information before it, suggests that to be the  case.   It  was,
    therefore, acting in accordance with case law,  not  contrary  to  case
    law, particularly having regard to all of what was said in MK, when  it
    decided to allow the appeal on the basis  of  the  decision  not  being
    lawful and to remit.

16. In light of the above I conclude that there was no error  of  law  such
    that this appeal to the Upper Tribunal falls to be dismissed.

Conclusions

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.   I  do  not  set  aside  the
    decision.

Anonymity

18. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I make a full fee award.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
