
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31704/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 October 2015                    |On 13 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  YING CHEN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mold, Counsel, instructed by An Easy Visa Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department in the case of a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lal
    which was promulgated on 18 May 2015.  It relates to a  decision  taken
    by the Secretary of State on 30 July 2014 refusing to vary Ying  Chen's
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

2.   The First-tier Tribunal's decision is unusual: first,  because  of  its
    brevity and second, because of  the  paucity  of  legal  reasoning  and
    explanation.  It would appear that some preliminary point was taken  by
    Mr Mold, counsel for Ms Chen, indicating that in his  view  the  matter
    should be remitted on the basis "that it was not in accordance with the
    law as the appellant has been faced with a number of  issues  that  had
    been raised for the first time in the Reasons for Refusal Letter."

3.    That  preliminary  submission  was  opposed  on  behalf  of  the  Home
    Secretary and it was contended that the matter should be considered  as
    the First-tier Tribunal would ordinarily do although accepting that the
    Tribunal was precluded from considering evidential  material  that  had
    not been before the respondent at the material time.

4.   The Tribunal's  decision  is  found  in  one  short  paragraph,  namely
    paragraph 8, which reads as follows:

         "The Tribunal considered the evidence before it with some care.  On
         balance it is prepared to accept that the approach advocated by  Mr
         Mold, namely for the Tribunal to remit the matter on the basis that
         it is not in accordance with the law  as  the  appellant  has  been
         faced with matters that have been raised for the first time in  the
         refusal letter.  The Tribunal notes the evidence that the appellant
         now raises a response to the refusal letter and the Tribunal  notes
         that the appellant has always been in the  UK  with  lawful  leave.
         Now she knows what the issues are it will allow the  respondent  to
         properly consider the evidence that the appellant as  produced  and
         which is material to the issue in the appeal." (emphasis added)

5.   Ms Everett who acts  for  the  Home  Secretary  indicates  that  it  is
    difficult to find, still less follow, the reasoning of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in taking the decision to remit the matter  as  he  did.
    There is a bold assertion that the Secretary of  State's  decision  was
    "not in accordance with the law" and it is also said that the appellant
    has been faced with matters "that have been raised for the  first  time
    in the refusal letter".

6.   However, the First-tier Tribunal Judge does  not  indicate  what  those
    matters may have been. He does not state why they preclude  the  First-
    tier Tribunal from making a proper evaluation of the  matter  and  from
    determining the appeal and  they do not specify why the decision of the
    Secretary of State was not in accordance with the  law.  I  confess  to
    some sympathy for Ms Everett in that I find it next  to  impossible  to
    discern the reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal Judge as to why he did
    not feel able to determine the matter which was before him.

7.   Mr Mold today makes the sensible concession that the  determination  is
    not as full as it ought to be and that there should have been a  couple
    of additional paragraphs in order to make clear the judge's  reasoning.
    He seeks  to  argue  for  the  upholding  of  the  decision  by  making
    reference, among other things, to the case  of  Naved  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2012] UKUT 14 (IAC).  I am not sure  how
    much he is assisted  by  this  case  which  merely  recites  the  basic
    principle that a First-tier Tribunal cannot consider evidence which was
    not before the original decision maker  when  the  refusal  letter  was
    sent. The case of Naved is  a  full  and  detailed  decision,  not  the
    perfunctory paragraph which we have here.

8.   In all the circumstances there is a clear  material  error  of  law  in
    this inadequate determination and I have no hesitation  in  setting  it
    aside.

9.   Having set it aside, what then do I do?  Although counsel for the  Home
    Secretary initially pressed me to dismiss the underlying appeal,  I  do
    not consider that would be appropriate. There is yet to be a proper and
    lawful consideration of the matter by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    fallback position of Ms Everett is that the matter should  be  remitted
    to another First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  determination.   Mr  Mold
    agrees that if I were against him and set aside  this  decision  (as  I
    have), the proper course is to  remit  for  a  fresh  determination.  I
    respectfully agree. This matter needs to be looked  at  properly  by  a
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal and I remit it accordingly.

    Directions

    Appeal allowed.

    Remit the matter to First-tier Tribunal for  fresh  determination  (not
    before Judge Judge Lal). Time estimate one hour.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill QC  Date 13 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

