
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31386/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th March 2017                            |On 6th July 2017              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                              miss sadia kanwal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Robertson promulgated  on  18th  June  2016,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 17th June 2016.  In the determination,  the
    judge allowed the appeal of the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Respondent
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Pakistan, and she was  born  on
    9th March 1983.  She appealed against the decision of the Respondent to
    refuse to vary her leave to remain in the UK, dated 7th September 2015,
    on the basis of her alleged deception exercised of the  taking  of  the
    Educational Testing Service  (ETS)  scores.   The  relevant  Rules  are
    paragraph 322(2) and paragraph 245ZX(a) of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that  she  came  to  the  UK  as  a  Pakistani
    national in July 2011, on a student visa.  She made her claim  in  June
    2014.  She was allowed to  continue  her  studies  by  the  Centre  for
    Teaching and Management on condition that she  provide  a  valid  visa.
    She chased up her application.  There was no response.  She  ultimately
    had to cease her studies in March 2015.  During this entire period, she
    received  no  correspondence  from  the  Home  Office.    The   Sponsor
    subsequently surrendered their licence but  she  was  unaware  of  this
    until  she  received  a  decision  seventeen  months  later  after  the
    application.  The Appellant states that the documents she submitted are
    genuine including the ETS, TOEIC certificate,  which  she  obtained  on
    merit of her English language skills.  The Respondent was alleging that
    the evidence she had submitted was fraudulent but there  was  no  proof
    provided of this by the Respondent.  She had personally sat  her  test.
    She had looked it up on the internet.  She had chosen the  test  centre
    that was closest to her home and the date that was most  convenient  to
    her.  The test  was  in  four  parts,  including  listening,  speaking,
    writing and reading.  There were multiple choice  questions  and  there
    was writing.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge heard submissions from the Respondent's  representative  that
    the Respondent had acted on information provided by a third  party  and
    was not at fault.  The issue was not the  broad  question  of  the  ETS
    testing but the specific  circumstances  of  the  Appellant.   She  had
    failed to fully address the basic  questions.   No  evidence  had  been
    submitted as to why she had chosen that particular centre  to  sit  the
    test.  She had made no enquiries or challenged it on learning that  the
    test result had been held to be invalid.

 5. The judge's findings were that the Appellant was  a  credible  witness.
    She gave evidence without an  interpreter.   She  spoke  English.   The
    judge held that, "she had little difficulty under cross-examination but
    I am cautious to conduct an assessment of her language  skills  on  the
    basis of her fluency at the hearing.  I am not a linguistic expert ..."
    (paragraph 13).  Nevertheless the  judge  went  on  to  hold  that  the
    Appellant has "already successfully completed elements of  her  diploma
    having passed four out of the six modules before the revocation of  the
    licence which are considered to be a better indication of her  language
    skills" (paragraph 13).

 6. The judge also noted that the Appellant's leave was curtailed following
    the ETS findings.  It was alleged that she  had  fraudulently  obtained
    her results by using a proxy test taker.  The judge observed that, "the
    only basis for this assertion  is  information  provided  by  the  ETS.
    There is no  expert  linguistic  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  test
    results available.  I have only a computer printout which  provides  no
    information as  to  how  this  Appellant's  test  result  was  invalid"
    (paragraph 14).

 7. It was, of course, true that  there  was  now  an  additional  expert's
    report from Professor French and this was "in respect of the likelihood
    of false positives" (paragraph 15).  Nevertheless,  the  judge,  having
    considered the evidence comprehensively came to the conclusion that she
    found the Appellant's explanation to be plausible, that she  had  taken
    the test at a particular centre in Soho Road, as it was near  her  home
    in Smethwick, and she had looked on the internet and chosen this centre
    as it was only 20 to 30 minutes away on the bus  (paragraph  16).   The
    judge's conclusion was that the Respondent had not discharged the legal
    burden of proving that this Appellant's TOEIC certificate was  procured
    by  dishonesty.   The  evidence  relied  upon  was   generic   evidence
    (paragraph 18).

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me, Mrs Pettersen, relying upon  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal by the Respondent Secretary of State, submitted that  the  judge
    had not done enough to come to the conclusion that she had.  It is true
    that reliance was placed upon the case of Qadir by the judge, but there
    had since then been the expert report of Professor  Peter  French,  and
    this document was in the  evidence,  "but  the  judge  has  ignored  it
    completely and failed to consider its contents"  (paragraph  2  of  the
    grounds).  Professor French  had  commented  on  the  large  number  of
    rejected matches by trained listeners  which  indicated  that  the  ETS
    system was robust.  Only 55.7% of matches out of 58,464  were  accepted
    by trained listeners.  This was indicative of the stringent  conditions
    of declaring an invalid result and any doubt  resulting  in  the  match
    being rejected (see paragraph 11 of the grounds).

 9. For his part, Mr Ahmed submitted that this appeal by the  Secretary  of
    State  could  not  succeed  because  there  was  no  challenge  to  the
    credibility findings of the judge.  Professor French's report  was  not
    specific to the Appellant.  The evidential  burden  remained  upon  the
    Appellant, but  the  legal  burden  was  on  the  Secretary  of  State.
    Paragraph 102 of the Qadir decision makes it clear that the  assessment
    of any situation is fact-sensitive.  In this  case,  the  HOPO  at  the
    hearing had undertaken extensive cross-examination and  yet  the  judge
    had found the Appellant to be entirely credible.  The appeal could  not
    succeed.

10. In reply, Mrs Pettersen submitted that the credibility findings are not
    the relevant question.  The  judge  should  have  looked  at  Professor
    French's report.

11.  Following  the  Hearing,  at  the  end  of  the  day,  I  dreafted  my
    determination.



No Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should aside the decision.  My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  The Grounds of Appeal are extensive  and  place  overwhelming
    reliance upon Professor French's report, and the suggestion is that the
    judge had "ignored it completely and failed to consider  its  contents"
    (paragraph 2).  Nothing could be further from the truth.

13. The judge very early on has regard to the evidence, which has  included
    Professor French's report (see paragraph 8).  The judge then goes on to
    make findings of fact,  where  she  again  does  not  ignore  Professor
    French's report, and indeed indicates that this report is  "in  respect
    of the likelihood of false positives"  (paragraph  15),  which  is  the
    clearest indication of the judge having appraised herself of the report
    by Professor French.  Having done  so,  the  judge  then  provides  her
    reasoning for why the report cannot be of assistance in this particular
    case by quoting at length what Mr Justice McCloskey in Qadir had to say
    about the "unknown number of false positive results".

14. As against this, the judge had the  evidence  that  the  Appellant  had
    given evidence in English herself, had  passed  four  out  of  the  six
    modules before the revocation of the licence  (paragraph  13)  and  had
    provided a credible reason for why she had chosen to sit  the  test  on
    Soho Road, close to her home.

15. The challenge in this case amounts to nothing more than a  disagreement
    with the findings of the judge.  I have had regard to the helpful  Rule
    24 response by Mr Ahmed dated 14th March 2017 and  I  have  accordingly
    come to the conclusion that this  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    cannot succeed.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 6th July 2017

