
[pic]






In the matter of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal))  Rules  2008  (as
amended)

Appellant:  Mr Mohammed Zaman Sarkar

Respondent: SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

NOTICE

 1. This matter was last before me on 29 March 2019.  On  that  occasion  I
    directed that if no further representations  were  received  within  14
    days, this matter should be listed for re-hearing pursuant to paragraph
    1(c.) of my previous Notice dated 11 January 2019.

 2. No further representations have been  received.  The  initial  decision
    stands set aside and the matter should have been referred to a tribunal
    case worker at Taylor House for listing directions.  For  reasons  that
    are not immediately apparent, the matter has remained  at  Field  House
    and has been referred back to me.

 3. I can therefore only repeat my previous Direction that:

      a. HMCTS shall remit this matter to the Taylor House venue and list
         this matter for re-hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on the
         next convenient date.

      b. Further Directions in relation to submissions and evidence shall be
         issued by a Tribunal Case Worker when this matter is listed, but
         both parties are invited to provide any further submissions and
         evidence as soon as reasonably practicable.

 4. For completeness, I observe that a Bengali interpreter is required.


                                                                 Signed[pic]

                                                 JUDGE M SUTHERLAND WILLIAMS
                                                           Date: 29 May 2019
                                                     -----------------------
In the Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                    Appeal No: IA/31134/2015
                                              Decision & Reasons Promulgated
                                                             On 11 June 2019

Decision by:   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sutherland Williams


