
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31283/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 22 April 2015                              |On 5 May 2015                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     MRS Marie Christine Yvette Bertrand
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Unrepresented

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent, Marie  Christine  Yvette  Bertrand,  is  a  citizen  of
    Mauritius and her date of birth is 7 April 1967.  I will refer  to  the
    respondent as the appellant as she was before the First-tier  Tribunal.



2.   On 19 May 2014 the appellant made an application for  leave  to  remain
    in the UK  as  the  spouse  of  a  person  present  and  settled.   Her
    application was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision  of  17
    July 2014.  The application was refused  under  the  Immigration  Rules
    (Appendix FM).

3.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and her appeal was allowed  by  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  A
    Khawar, in a  decision  that  was  promulgated  on  12  December  2014,
    following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 5 November 2014.   Judge  Khawar
    allowed the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  (Appendix  FM).   He
    dismissed the appeal under paragraph  289A  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    (relating to victims of domestic violence) and under Article 8  of  the
    1950 Convention on Human Rights.

4.   The Secretary of State appealed against the decision  of  Judge  Khawar
    and permission was granted by judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Lambert
    in a decision of 9 February 2015.  Thus the matter came before me.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

5.   The judge heard  evidence  from  the  appellant  who  had  applied  for
    further leave to remain as the spouse  of  British  citizen,  Mr  Louis
    Harry Navarre, the sponsor who is a British citizen and settled in  the
    UK.  It was agreed by the parties that the  appellant  and  Mr  Navarre
    were married on 31 March 2014.

6.   The appellant lawfully came to  the  UK  on  29  December  2008  as  Mr
    Bertrand's (her first husband) dependent  spouse.     The  judge  heard
    that the marriage broke down as a result of his violence  against  her.
    A decree absolute was granted on 30 August 2013 She  was  then  granted
    discretionary leave to remain in the UK post her divorce until  30  May
    2014.

7.    The  application  was  refused  as  the  appellant  had  not  met  the
    requirements of Appendix FM in relation to the English  language  test.
    The appellant had raised Section 289A of the Immigration  Rules  having
    been served with a one-stop notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act.

8.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the  appellant  submitted
    an English language test certificate.  She maintained that the same had
    been served and filed some time ago (the certificate  was  not  on  the
    Presenting Officer's file.)

9.   The judge found that the appellant had not  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof in relation to the cause of the breakdown of her first  marriage.
    In relation to Article 8 the judge recorded in his  determination  that
    the appellant's husband was present at the hearing but was  not  called
    to give evidence and there was no  witness  statement  from  him.   The
    judge found that he had little option but to conclude that it  had  not
    been established that there were insurmountable  obstacles  for  family
    life to be enjoyed in  Mauritius  and  recorded  that  the  appellant's
    appeal must fail under Article 8 whether it was  considered  under  the
    Immigration Rules or outside them (see [18]).  The  judge  went  on  to
    make findings in relation to the English language certificate which was
    produced by the appellant and which was issued on 25 July 2014  and  he
    made the following findings:

         "In relation to the respondent's  refusal  under  the  partner-five
         year  route,  the  appellant   had   submitted   English   language
         certificates issued on 25 July 2014 (Pearson  Edexcel  entry  level
         certificate (in ESOL - skills for life) speaking and  listening)  -
         these  indicate  she  attained  entry  level  3  for  speaking  and
         listening.  During  his  submissions  the  Home  Office  Presenting
         Officer Mr Shane  indicated  that  he  was  not  sure  whether  the
         certificates  meet  the  requirements  under  Appendix  O  of   the
         Immigration  Rules  and  they  have  not  been  considered  by  the
         caseworker in question because  they  were  only  served  with  the
         grounds of appeal.


    20.  The appellant's representatives  submitted  that  the  grounds  of
         appeal were filed some considerable time ago,  on  4  August  2014.
         The Home Office had clearly not considered them as the respondent's
         bundle dated 16  September  2014  makes  no  reference  to  English
         language  certificates.   As  the  conclusion  of   submissions   I
         indicated  to  both  representatives  that  I  would   remit   this
         particular issue to the respondent  for  further  consideration  as
         neither party was able to provide the Tribunal a copy of Appendix O
         applicable as at the date of  the  decision  in  this  case.   Upon
         further reflection however I am satisfied that the English language
         certificates, submitted by the appellant,  albeit  submitted  after
         the respondent's decision dated 17 July 2014, meet the requirements
         of E-LTRP.4.1(b) - i.e.  a  minimum  level  of  A1  of  the  Common
         European Framework of  Reference  for  Languages  with  a  provider
         approved by the Secretary  of  State.   There  is  no  evidence  to
         suggest that Pearson is not an approved  provider.   The  appellant
         has clearly obtained entry level 3 in relation to both speaking and
         listening.  There is no evidence that this  is  not  equivalent  to
         level A1  of  the  CEFR.   Accordingly  I  am  satisfied  that  the
         appellant meets the requirements of the aforesaid Immigration  Rule
         and that she is entitled  to  succeed  in  this  appeal  under  the
         partner-five year route."

The Grounds Seeking Permission to Appeal and Oral Submission

10.  The grounds maintain that the judge erred in taking  into  account  the
    certificate that was produced post the date of  the  decision  and  the
    judge erred in the assessment of paragraph 117B of the 2002 Act and  in
    respect of  Article 8 generally.

The Immigration Rules

11.  R-LTRP.1.1:

         "The requirements to be met  for  limited  leave  to  remain  as  a
         partner are -

             (a)  the applicant and their partner must be in the UK;


             (b)  the applicant must have  made  a  valid  application  for
                  limited [or indefinite] leave to remain as a partner;  and
                  either


             (c)  (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal under Section
                      S-LTR: Suitability leave to remain; and


                  (ii) the  applicant  meets  all  of  the  requirements  of
                      Section E-LTRP: Eligibility for leave to remain as  a
                      partner; or


             (d)  (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal under Section
                      S-LTR: suitability leave to remain; and


                  (ii) the applicant meets the requirements of paragraphs E-
                      LTRP.1.2 - 1.12. and E-LTRP.2.1.; and


                  (iii)    paragraph EX.1 applies."

12.  E-LTRP.4.4.:

         "If the applicant  has  not  met  the  requirement  in  a  previous
         application for leave as a partner [or parent], the applicant  must
         provide specified evidence that they-


         (a)  are a national of a majority English speaking  country  listed
             in paragraph GEN.1.6.;

         (b)  have passed an English language test in speaking and listening
             at a minimum of level A1 of the Common European  Framework  of
             Reference for  Languages  with  a  provider  approved  by  the
             [Secretary of State];

         (c)  have an academic qualification recognised by [UK NARIC] to  be
             equivalent to the standard of a Bachelor's or Master's  degree
             or PhD in the UK, which was taught in English; or

         (d)   are  exempt  from  the  English  language  requirement  under
             paragraph E-LTRPT.4.2.; unless paragraph EX.1. applies."

13.  Mr Tufan submitted Appendix FM-SC  which  specifies  the  following  at
    D(a):

         "In deciding an application in  relation  to  which  this  Appendix
         states  that  specified  documents  must  be  provided,  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer or Secretary of State ('the decision-maker') will
         consider  the  documents  that  have  been   submitted   with   the
         application, and will only consider documents submitted  after  the
         application where sub-paragraph (b) or (e) applies."

14.  At paragraph 27 of Appendix FM-SC  contains  the  evidence  of  English
    language requirements and reads as follows:

         "Evidence of passing an  English  language  test  in  speaking  and
         listening must take the form of either:


         (a)  A certificate and/or other document(s) for the  relevant  test
             as specified in Appendix O that:


             (i)  is from an English language test provider approved by the
                  Secretary of State for  these  purposes  as  specified  in
                  Appendix O of these rules;


             (ii) is a test approved by the Secretary of  State  for  these
                  purposes as specified in Appendix O of these rules;


             (iii)    shows the applicant's name;


             (iv) shows the qualification  obtained  (which  must  meet  or
                  exceed level  A1  of  the  Common  European  Framework  of
                  Reference); and,


             (v)  shows the date of the award.


             or


         (b)  A printout of the online  score  from  a  PTE  (Pearson)  Test
             which:


             (i)  is a test approved by the Secretary of  State  for  these
                  purposes as specified in Appendix O of these Rules;


             (ii) can be used  to  show  that  the  qualification  obtained
                  (which must meet or exceed level A1 of the Common European
                  Framework of Reference); and,


             (iii)    is from an English language test provider approved by
                  the Secretary of State for these purposes as specified  in
                  Appendix O of these Rules."

15.  Appendix O indicates that the Pearson Test  of  English  academic  (PTE
    academic) awarded by Pearson is approved by the  Home  Office  and  the
    levels recorded by the test are A1 - C2.  The test validity  is  for  a
    period of two years and the documents required with the application are
    a printout of online school report.  In addition  Appendix  O  requires
    that the scores are sent to the Home Office online  and  it  is  stated
    that Pearson does not issue paper certificates.

Error of Law

16.  The  appellant  attended  the  hearing  unrepresented.   She  had  been
    represented before the FtT when she gave evidence in French through  an
    interpreter.  There was  no  interpreter  at  the  hearing  before  me;
    however, I was satisfied that the appellant understood  the  issues  at
    the hearing and I gave her the opportunity to address me. There was  no
    need for the appellant to give evidence  in  order  for  me  to  decide
    whether  or  not   the   FtT   had   made   an   error   of   law.   No

                                           further   evidence   had    been
    submitted in accordance with the directions of the Tribunal.

 17.    The document submitted by the appellant is a Pearson  Edexcel  entry
    level certificate and it indicates that the test was a  ESOL  -  skills
    for life (speaking and listening) and that the level attained is  entry
    3 and that the appellant had completed an approved  programme  at  East
    London Skills for Life.  The certificate was awarded in July 2014.

18.      The appeal was dismissed under article 8,  but  allowed  under  the
    rules because the judge accepted that the appellant had  satisfied  the
    English language requirement of the rules.  The  certificate  indicated
    that the appellant had completed not a Pearson Test of English academic
    (PTE academic), but a skills for life test which is  not  a  test  that
    features in Appendix O.  The judge made an error of law when  he  found
    that the appellant had satisfied the English  language  requirement  of
    the Rules. In any event,  having  found  that  the  appellant  had  not
    established that there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with
    her husband continuing outside the UK, it was not open to the judge  to
    allow the appeal under the Rules. The judge made a  material  error  of
    law in allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

19.   I  set  aside  the  decision  pursuant  to  Section  12(2)(a)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.  I remake the decision  and
    dismiss the appeal under the Rules pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(ii).

20.  Mr Tufan argued that it  was  not  open  to  the  judge  to  admit  the
    evidence in relation to the English language certificate. Section 85 of
    the 2002 does  not  apply  in  this  case  because  it  is  a  specific
    requirement of the Rules that  specified  documents  must  be  provided
    (subject to exceptions which do not apply in this case).   He  referred
    me to Appendix FM-SE (see above). Mr Tufan  also  relied  on  SSHD  and
    Pankina [2010] EWCA Civ 719 specifically at [39].  However,  I  do  not
    need to determine this issue as it is not material to  the  outcome  of
    this appeal.

21.   I set aside the decision of the FtT to  allow  the  appeal  under  the
    rules pursuant o section 12  (2)  (a)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and remake the appeal under  section  12  (2)  (b)
    (ii) of the 2007 and dismiss the appeal under the Rules.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 1 May 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

