
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31103/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 January 2016                   |On 27 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                           shamshir-ul-zaman khan
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Beach
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby- Weller


                                  EXTEMPORE
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this case withdrew his appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules (including paragraphs 318B and  276ADE)  against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision of Judge McWilliams which was promulgated on 22 May
    2015 following a hearing on 26 March 2015.

2.   The remaining challenge to the decision  can   be  characterised  as  a
    pure Article 8 challenge: namely that the judge has failed to  reach  a
    decision on the proportionality of the decision to remove  him;  failed
    to make proper  credibility  findings  on  the  evidence,  the  witness
    evidence and the documentary evidence that was  before  him,  and  that
    that fed into the proportionality decision; that there was a failure on
    the part of  the  judge  to  give  reasoned  findings  as  to  why  the
    relationship that the appellant has with his mother did not  amount  to
    family ties over and above the usual family ties such  that  Article  8
    was engaged.

3.   The appellant also asserted that there was a lack of reference  to  the
    psychiatric report and the impact of the removal on the mother  of  the
    appellant's removal from the UK. Although there is extensive  reference
    in the decision to the  evidence  of  the  various  witnesses  and  the
    documentary evidence and to the submissions made by both parties at the
    hearing this does not translate into specifi findings.

4.   The findings insofar as Article 8 are concerned are sparsely  reasoned.
     There is no reasoned finding why the  care  the  appellant  claims  he
    gives to his mother does not demonstrate  family  ties  such  as  would
    engage Article 8. Given the extensive evidence that is quoted it  would
    have been appropriate for a more detailed finding to be given.

5.   Of more concern, however, is the approach of the judge to  the  carers'
    concession. The judge reviews the respondent's  decision  and  makes  a
    finding in paragraph 48 that the respondent was  entitled  to  exercise
    her discretion in finding that there were not  sufficiently  compelling
    or compassionate grounds that would lead to a grant of leave to  remain
    under the carers concession.

6.   Whilst it is quite proper for the respondent to reach a conclusion  and
    it may well be that the respondent reached a decision she was  entitled
    to make, it is not the role of the Tribunal to review such  a  decision
    of the respondent. The role of the Tribunal is to take account  of  all
    the evidence before it and to reach a decision on that evidence.

7.   This judge has not done that. Having made that  finding  in  connection
    with the carer's concession he then goes on in paragraph 49 to consider
    the evidence in respect of the appellant's claim under  Article  8  but
    refers only to the impact on the  proportionality  on  removal  on  the
    appellant, not in terms of the relationship that he has with his mother
    or the extent to which his removal could affect the mother.

8.   I am satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  law  in
    failing to assess all of the evidence in the round and failing to  give
    adequate reasons for the findings relied upon to find that the  removal
    of the appellant to Tanzania was proportionate.

Notice of Decision

10.  I therefore set aside the decision insofar as it relates to  Article  8
    only.  The decision under paragraphs 317 and 276ADE of the  Immigration
    Rules stands, the appellant  having  withdrawn  his  appeal  under  the
    Rules.

11.  The Tribunal being required to make findings of  fact  with  regard  to
    Article 8 and in the light of the practice direction,  this  appeal  is
    remitted to the Firt-tier Tribunal for a decision on the  appeal  under
    Article 8 to be made.


[pic]

Signed        Decision delivered orally on 12th January 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
