
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31612/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 28 September 2017                     |On 6 October 2017                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                Muhammad atif
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Syed Ahmed (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                     (Given orally on 28 September 2017)


 1. This is an appeal by Mr Muhammad Atif against a decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wellesley-Cole, promulgated on 18 November 2016.

 2. The context of the appeal to the Upper Tribunal can be summarised thus.
     First-tier Tribunal Judge Wellesley-Cole identifies  in  her  decision
    that the appeal before her was brought against a decision made  by  the
    Secretary of State on 5 June 2015, refusing to issue the appellant with
    an EEA residence card.  She concluded, for  reasons  set  out  in  Sala
    (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411, that the First-tier Tribunal
    had no jurisdiction to entertain such an appeal.

 3. Judge Wellesley-Cole is wrong in  all  respects,  having  been  clearly
    misled by the Presenting Officer and the majority of  the  contents  of
    the Secretary of State's bundle.

 4. The appeal before the Judge was in fact brought against a decision made
    by the Secretary of State on 9 September 2015, not 5 June 2015. This is
    clear from examining the contents of the  IAFT-1  (which  is  dated  22
    September 2015). Furthermore, the appeal was  not  against  a  decision
    refusing to issue an EEA residence card to an EEA national, but  rather
    against decisions refusing to vary leave the appellant's leave  and  to
    remove the appellant from the United Kingdom  -  the  appellant  having
    previously made of an application  for  leave  under  the  points-based
    system. That this is so is clear from examining the decision letter  of
    9 September 2015.

 5. As a consequence, it is clear that the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  have
    jurisdiction to entertain the appeal before it. It is plain from what I
    have said that the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  contains  multiple
    errors of law. Mr Kotas submitted,  albeit  in  only  the  briefest  of
    terms, that such errors were not material because the appeal was in any
    event hopeless.  With the greatest respect to Mr Kotas,  if  that  were
    the appropriate course in a matter such as this  then  there  would  be
    little point in having an appeal right at all. This  is  an  appeal  in
    which there has  not  been  even  the  briefest  consideration  of  the
    appellant's case by a judge. The proper place for that consideration to
    take place is before the First-tier Tribunal, not in the context  of  a
    consideration by the Upper Tribunal  as  to  whether  to  exercise  its
    discretion under section 12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement
    Act 2007 to set aside of a decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. For all these reasons, I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and remit the appeal back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    decided afresh by a judge other than Judge Wellesley-Cole.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. The appeal is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to consider afresh.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
