
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/31653/2015
     IA/31661/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Oral Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 5 February 2018                            |On 21 March 2018                      |
|                                              |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                       binjalbahen dharmeshkumar patel
                      dharmeshkumar ravindrabhai patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr L Lourdes, Counsel, Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of Mrs Patel against the determination of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Beg whose determination was  promulgated  on  5  October
    2017 dismissing her appeal against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State dated 15 September 2015 refusing to vary their leave and  setting
    in train their removal by a decision made under s. 47 of the 2006  Act.



 2. There are in fact two appellants to the appeal but it is the appeal  of
    Mrs Patel which is the significant one. It arises  because  of  a  test
    that was taken at a centre at the London College of Social  Studies  in
    Bermondsey.  The test was taken on 20 March  2012.   The  Secretary  of
    State reached her decision on the basis that  ETS  had  considered  the
    test taken at this college and concluded that a  proxy  test-taker  had
    been used.  The process of examination had included the  use  of  voice
    recognition but it  had  also  been  listened  to  by  two  independent
    listeners who had, in each case, determined that a proxy had been used.



 3. The evidence which we now know to  be  the  generic  evidence  was  the
    generic evidence that was given by Mr Milligan and Ms  Collings.   That
    evidence had been looked at on a number of occasions and in  particular
    had been looked at by the Tribunal in the case of SM  &  Qadir  (ETS  -
    evidence - burden of proof) [2016]  UKUT  00229.   This  was  the  same
    generic evidence that had been provided in the case before us  and  the
    Upper Tribunal decided that the evidence was  sufficient  to  discharge
    the evidential  burden  of  proving  that  the  certificates  had  been
    procured by  dishonesty.   There  were  however  frailties  within  the
    generic evidence so that it could not be a guarantee  of  accuracy  and
    accordingly it was open to an individual to  put  forward  evidence  to
    establish that an innocent explanation could be provided as a  response
    to the generic evidence.

 4. Each of these cases is of course fact-sensitive.   In  this  particular
    case the Secretary of State  did  not  however  simply  rely  upon  the
    generic evidence as I have  already  described  but  also  relied  upon
    specific evidence in relation to this test centre.  That was  supported
    by a statement by Reema Bassi made on 27 September 2017  in  which  she
    set out the specific documents as they relate to  the  applicant.   The
    test was recorded as being 'invalid'.  This was a record that was  made
    on the test taken on 22 March 2012.

 5. In addition to this, the results taken on  that  day  from  the  London
    College of Social Studies were examined generally; in  the  tests  that
    were done, there were some 35 tests taken which  equalled  69%  of  the
    total and of those 35, 69% were said to be invalid.  That did not  mean
    that the remaining  sixteen,  or  31%,  were  valid;  merely  that  the
    evidence in relation  to  them  could  only  properly  be  said  to  be
    questionable.  It is not  a  question  of  an  incorrect  result  being
    attributed to this appellant because we have a list  of  all  of  those
    takers.  The appellant's test is 009010 and that was a result which was
    declared to be invalid on the test taken in the afternoon.

 6. This however was not the only evidence that  was  relied  upon  by  the
    judge in  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  she  did  because  in  her
    determination she remarks in paragraph 25 that the generic evidence was
    augmented by the specific test results and it unequivocally shows  that
    the  appellant  took  the  test  in  the  afternoon.    However,   that
    contradicted the evidence given by the appellant  herself  because  she
    said she took the first test, that is the speaking and writing test, at
    11:30 in the morning.  Consequently, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was
    satisfied that the respondent had  discharged  the  initial  evidential
    burden of proof by providing evidence which it was  susceptible  to  be
    outweighed by an innocent explanation.

 7. The judge then went on  to  consider  whether  there  was  an  innocent
    explanation and concluded in paragraphs 26 to 29 that this had not been
    done.  I can deal with those paragraphs.

 8. In paragraph 26 the judge records that she went to the  London  College
    of Social Studies which was located in Bermondsey and  she  did  so  by
    going on the District Line and the Jubilee Line.  One  of  the  matters
    that was relied upon by the judge was her decision to chose the  London
    School of Social Studies.  Her explanation was that someone at Richmond
    College had told her to take the  test  at  London  College  of  Social
    Studies because it was a good centre.  However, there was  no  evidence
    that the appellant made any attempts to find out whether there were any
    other centres closer to where she lived where  she  could  more  easily
    take the test.  It was therefore a sustainable finding on  the  judge's
    part that anybody choosing a particular college would make some attempt
    to justify from her own knowledge why she  might  go  to  a  particular
    college rather than the one that was located closer to her.   There  is
    no evidence that she ever made those enquiries, merely relying on  what
    Richmond College had told her.

 9. The test was taken on 20 March 2012 and  the  Home  Office  letter  was
    written on 15 September 2015 which accused her of using deception  but,
    when that accusation was made, the judge relied upon the fact that  the
    appellant accepted the contents of the letter without taking any  steps
    to contradict it.  It was said on behalf of the  appellant,  'Well,  it
    was three years after the test had  been  taken  and  consequently  she
    could not be expected to make any enquiries.'  The judge did not accept
    that as an adequate explanation.  It seems to me that it  was  open  to
    the judge to find that, if the college had so badly let her  down  when
    she genuinely attended the college and she genuinely took  a  test  and
    genuinely  got  the  scores,  it  was  reasonable  for  her   to   seek
    verification from the college to say that she had properly applied for,
    and sat the test.  At least, if they were not able  to  do  that,  they
    might have been able to say that they had no  further  records  of  her
    test taking or that they could not comment on what she was saying.  The
    judge took the view that anybody who was accused of deception  in  this
    way would have made attempts to seek to get to the bottom  of  it  were
    she to have been innocent.  It may not be  that  it  is  the  strongest
    point but it was open to the judge to comment on the  fact  that,  when
    somebody is accused of deception, it would be a normal reaction to  try
    and take whatever steps available to  her  to  give  the  lie  to  that
    accusation.

10. The judge also considered the way she gave  her  evidence.   The  judge
    said:

         "I find that  throughout  the  cross-examination  there  were  long
         pauses and silences from the appellant when she had no real answers
         to give to the questions that were being asked of her.  She  stated
         that she understood what was being  asked  of  her.   I  find  that
         questions had to  be  repeatedly  asked  of  her  before  she  gave
         answers."

    Accordingly, insofar as there was an evidential burden placed upon  her
    to give an innocent explanation, the evidence that she provided was not
    satisfactory.

11. In paragraph 29 there is an additional source of material.   The  judge
    recorded that she appeared to be unaware that a college was required to
    be on a Tier 4 sponsor list nor did the appellant  know  what  the  CAS
    meant.  She said that she believed it was to do with registration.  The
    appellant was asked what she did when she found out that  the  original
    college, Khalsa College, had lost its licence.  She said that  she  did
    nothing and took no action after 15 September 2015  when  she  received
    the Home Office letter saying that she had used deception.  All in all,
    the judge was not impressed by the evidence that was  provided  by  the
    appellant and, in a fact-sensitive case where  the  initial  evidential
    burden had been discharged by the Secretary of State, it  was  open  to
    the judge to consider that the evidence that had been provided  by  the
    Secretary of State was, on balance, better than the evidence  that  was
    provided by the appellant herself.  Accordingly, it  was  open  to  the
    judge to find that, on balance of  probabilities,  deception  had  been
    used.

12. That is the simple way in which decisions on fact  are  made;  weighing
    the evidence in one direction,  weighing  the  evidence  in  the  other
    direction and forming a conclusion, on balance, as to whether deception
    had been used.

13. There were in  my  judgment  many  reasons  why  this  case  should  be
    considered different from those cases which have gone before the  Upper
    Tribunal and the Court of Appeal where  decisions  have  been  made  in
    favour of the claimants.  In those cases the evidence of the  claimants
    had been found to be satisfactory, there had been reasons  provided  by
    the Upper Tribunal or reasons which were relied upon by  the  Court  of
    Appeal  which  indicated  that  satisfactory  explanations   had   been
    provided.  Accordingly these matters of fact were resolved in favour of
    an applicant on the basis that the applicant had provided the  innocent
    explanation such that the legal burden that formally  rested  upon  the
    Secretary of State had not been discharged.  In this case  I  am  quite
    satisfied that the evidential burden which was  initially  placed  upon
    the shoulders of the Secretary of State had been  discharged  and  that
    the attempts made by the  appellant  were  inadequate  to  counter  the
    matters which were raised by the Secretary of State.  Consequently  the
    legal burden  had  been  discharged.   That  was  what  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge found.  In the circumstances of this case,  that  was  a
    matter which it was open to her.  For those reasons she concluded  that
    the certificate was properly declared invalid by ETS  and  consequently
    that the  appellant  was  not  entitled  to  the  leave  that  she  had
    originally sought.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no error of law and her determination  of
the appeal shall stand.

Date: 20th March 2018

                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
