
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31757/2013
                                                               IA/31772/2013
                                                               IA/31762/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |          Decisions and Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 6 August 2015                         |          On 14 August 2015          |
|                                         |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                                      M
                                      J
                                      N

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jafar of counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Pal, a Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. No application for an anonymity order was made to me and  there  has  not
   previously been an anonymity order made in  respect  of  the  appellants.
   However, given the young ages of the children I have decided to  make  an
   anonymity order pursuant to Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
   Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269). Unless the Upper Tribunal or a  Court
   directs otherwise,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the  original
   Appellants. This direction applies to, amongst others, all  parties.  Any
   failure to comply with this direction could  give  rise  to  contempt  of
   court proceedings.


2. This is an appeal by the appellants. The appellants are a mother and  two
   daughters. They are citizens  of  St  Vincent  and  the  Grenadines  ('St
   Vincent'). M (the mother of the two children appellants) was  born  on  9
   April 1967. The two daughters are; J now aged 10, and N now aged 8.


Immigration History

3. The appellants entered the United Kingdom as visitors in April 2010  with
   a visit visa allowing a visit of no more than 6 months.   The  appellants
   currently reside with M's daughter, Ms G and G's husband Mr W.

4. The appellants applied on 8 April 2013 for leave to remain in the  UK  on
   the basis that removal would breach their Article 8  family  and  private
   lives in the UK. The respondent refused to grant leave  to  remain  in  a
   decision dated 22 August 2013 and issued Notice of a decision  to  remove
   the appellants under s 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999.  The
   appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  decision  of
   the respondent to remove them on 29 August 2013.




5. There was a hearing of the  appellants'  appeal  by  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Geraint Jones QC. In a determination  promulgated  on  12  November
   2013 he dismissed the appellants' appeals.


6.  The  appellants  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  Judge  Jones's
   decision. Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein granted permission. An error  of
   law hearing was held before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge and in  a
   determination promulgated on 10 April 2104 she found that the  First-tier
   Tribunal decision was vitiated  by  error  and  set  the  decision  aside
   without preserving any facts. The appeal was remitted to be  re-heard  by
   the First-tier Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant's  Decision  ('the  First-tier  Tribunal
decision')

7. After a re-hearing, in a decision promulgated on 19 February 2015, First-
   tier Tribunal Judge Grant (the judge') dismissed the appeals.  The  judge
   found that the appellants 'have  not  shown  that  their  removal  to  St
   Vincent and the Grenadines is disproportionate to the aim of  maintaining
   effective immigration control.'


Permission to Appeal

8. The appellants applied to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  permission  to
   appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the judge's decision. Permission  to
   appeal was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Heynes.  The  judge
   summarised the lengthy grounds of appeal identifying the  salient  points
   as; the judge erred in stating that an agent could  remove  the  children
   subject to a prohibited steps order without leave, that the evidence from
   the family court was of no assistance in determining the  best  interests
   of the children and in making a flawed  assessment  of  risk  on  return.
   Judge  Heynes  granted  permission  to  appeal   stating   that   '...the
   determination is detailed, through and  well-reasoned.  It  is,  however,
   arguable that the assertion that a residence order has no impact upon the
   respondent is a material error of law.'


9. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Mr  Jafar  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellants and Ms Pal on behalf  of  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department.


Error of Law

10. There were 3 grounds of appeal set out in  the  appellants'  application
   for permission to appeal, i) failure to consider the  evidence  from  the
   family court, ii) failure to consider section 55, and iii) irrationality.


Ground i)

11. In respect of ground i) it is  asserted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   judge erred in finding that the evidence from the family court was of  no
   assistance in determining the best interests  of  the  children.  It  was
   submitted that the judge failed to understand  the  implications  of  the
   family court orders which are; that the court accepted that  the  welfare
   of the children requires residence jointly with their mother, sister  and
   brother-in-law, that they should remain within the jurisdiction and  that
   there was no other means of ensuring the children's welfare. Set  out  in
   ground iii) there is a further assertion linked to  this  ground,  namely
   that the residence and prohibited steps order represent a conclusion from
   the family courts that the first appellant was not capable of placing her
   children's best interests first.


12. In oral submissions Mr Jafar, in  answer  to  an  inquiry  made  by  the
   Tribunal, indicated that he reserved his  position  with  regard  to  the
   finding of the judge in paragraph 29 that the prohibited steps order 'has
   no impact on the power of the Secretary of State to  remove  aliens  from
   the United Kingdom'. His position was that the  important  part  of  that
   paragraph in relation to error of law was  the  finding  that  'Thus  the
   family proceedings add nothing to the assessment of the  children's  best
   interests that I have to make'.

13. Mr Jafar's central case can be summarised briefly - the judge failed  to
   take into consideration the evidence that was before the  family  courts,
   namely, that the children were at risk from M as she had abused them.  Mr
   Jafar was asked how the judge would have known about evidence of abuse by
   M that was before the family courts. The only information made  available
   to the First-tier Tribunal by the  family  court  were  the  Orders,  the
   application for the Orders and the CAFCASS report  which  did  not  raise
   concerns about M abusing the children. They concerned a risk that M would
   remove them from the UK to St Vincent where they  would  be  at  risk  of
   violence from their father. In response Mr Jafar  submitted  that  G  had
   made a further application to the family court as a result of M  behaving
   erratically, because M was a risk to the children, beat the children  and
   had no ability to protect the children. Real concerns for the  children's
   welfare led to the family proceedings, M resisted the application,  there
   was a contested hearing, and  M  was  represented  separately.  Mr  Jafar
   advised that M had  now  been  referred  for  counselling  following  the
   breakdown of her son, who is the  army, and who made 'allegations'  about
   M. He described M as a broken woman and that she had  turned  to  abusing
   her own children,  which  was  not  unexpected  as  victims  of  domestic
   violence often also abuse their children.  When asked  where  details  of
   the violence by M was in the evidence before the judge Mr Jafar said that
   G had given evidence to the Tribunal and had referred  to  the  contested
   family proceedings and the  evidence  that  was  given  there  about  M's
   violence. He referred to the bundle of documents prepared for  the  Upper
   Tribunal that was before the First-tier Tribunal judge. I set  out  below
   the principal evidence referred to by Mr Jafar from that bundle:


    . Page 46, paragraph 8 (grounds of appeal) '...there were strain in  M's
      behaviour towards everyone, this triggered the couple to consult  with
      solicitors to seek advice on how to obtain parental responsibility  in
      order to keep the children in the UK and prevent M from removing  them
      unceremoniously. Obviously an application had to be sought on the best
      interests of the children'
    . Page 156 (an Initial Assessment carried out  by  Redbridge  Children's
      Trust following a referral from N's  school  dated  8  December  2010)
      'N...did not want to go home as she was scared of  her  mum...I  don't
      want to go home early because my mummy will be really angry  and  with
      me and I am scared. I am not allowed  to  go  home  early...her  mummy
      would beat her...her mummy hits her with a belt on her legs.'
    .  P100  (core  assessment  dated  31  October  2013)   'M   had   legal
      representative at recent court hearing and was  able  to  present  her
      case to the court. She felt that that made things better  as  she  was
      not cross examined in a manner she could not express herself,  as  her
      legal representative spoke on her behalf.'

14. Mr Jafar, in summary, said that given all the evidence that  was  before
   the family court and the fact that the  court  cannot  make  a  residence
   order unless it  considers  that  the  children's  welfare  can  only  be
   safeguarded if an order is made the judge  took  a  completely  erroneous
   view that the family proceedings had no bearing on Article 8.


15. Ms Pal for the respondent submitted that the CAFCASS report, set out  in
   detail by the judge, expresses the view that there  are  no  safeguarding
   risks to the children and questions whether there is any need for  anyone
   other than M to have parental responsibility. It was  not  implicit  from
   the family court orders that the  family  court  viewed  M  as  having  a
   detrimental effect on the children. If the family court considered that M
   was a risk they would not have make a residence order in M's favour.  The
   judge fully considered the CAFCASS report  and  given  the  very  limited
   information in the court orders the judge was correct in finding that the
   family proceedings  did  not  add  anything  to  the  assessment  of  the
   children's best interests.

16. I have considered the record of proceedings.  Mr  Jafar  submitted  that
   the evidence of M's abuse of the children was put before the judge at the
   hearing by G. There is nothing in the record of  proceedings  to  support
   that assertion. She referred solely to the violence of the father.  I  do
   note in the record of proceedings that G said in cross examination -  'at
   some point in 2010 she agreed not to go  back  to  St  Vincent  with  the
   children. Yes that is when she made the extension application.  There  is
   nothing in G's witness statement  to  indicate  that  she  considers  the
   mother is a risk to children. I note that in Mr  W's  witness  statement,
   dated 25 February 2014 at  para  6,  that  he  explains  the  reason  for
   applying for the residency order  was,  '...wife  and  I  have  taken  on
   responsibility for the children....therefore we thought it appropriate to
   formalise that arrangement by applying to the court for a joint Residence
   Order over the two girls shared with their mother. This makes  it  easier
   to participate in the girl's upbringing and to make day to day  decisions
   about their care.'


17. I do not consider that the judge made an error of law  in  finding  that
   '...the  family  proceedings  add  nothing  to  the  assessment  of   the
   children's best interests that I have to make'. My reasons are that I can
   find no support in the First-tier Tribunal  proceedings  for  Mr  Jafar's
   submission that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  was  made  aware  of  the
   allegations of abuse and risk to the children at the hands of M that were
   part of the family court proceedings and were the reason for  the  orders
   being made. The only evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  of
   alleged abusive behaviour by M was the referral made by N's  school  that
   Mr Jafar referred me to which was in 2010.  I note the following from the
   evidence:


       i.    CAFCASS report dated 25/7/13 in which G  and  Mr  W  indicated
          that there were no concerns regarding the care of  the  children.
          The report notes the referral in 2010  regarding  the  allegation
          made by N of abuse and that no further action was taken.


      ii.    Application for residence order dated 10/10/13 which states  -
          'respondent instability is not trusted with removing children  to
          her violent partner... residence order only solution to save  the
          two children respondent is not opposing this either.'


     iii.     P162 of the bundle (an  Initial  Assessment  carried  out  by
          Redbridge Children's Trust following a referral from  N's  school
          dated 8 December 2010) 'Manager's comment: it  appears  from  the
          special worker's account that N and siblings  are  safe  and  not
          exposed to any risk. Mum denied hitting N  who  equally  made  no
          disclosure and rather observed to be happy, content  and  relaxed
          in mum's company'


      iv.    P152 of the bundle referred to above  (an  Initial  Assessment
          carried out by Redbridge Children's Trust  following  a  referral
          from N's school dated 8 December 2010) Ms M  reported  that,  she
          has not resided  in  the  UK  permanently  since  1980,  and  she
          frequently travels to and from St Vincent where she has  4  other
          children living. When M is in the UK, she resides with G and  her
          husband, however J and sibling reside permanently with G and  her
          husband.


       v.     P152  (an  Initial  Assessment  carried  out   by   Redbridge
          Children's Trust following a referral from  N's  school  dated  8
          December 2010) 'Mr W was present during the  home  visit  on  2nd
          December 2010... Mr W also reported that he does  not  understand
          why N's sibling may have made the allegation against her mother'


      vi.    P100 (core assessment dated 31 October 2013-  in  response  to
          referral  from  CAFCASS)  'The  home  visit  completed   on   two
          occasions...have not brought any issues for M to change her  mind
          about not contesting the application put  forward  by  G  and  Mr
          W...M clarified that since the children have been to England they
          have not visited St Vincent. She was not intending to  take  them
          to St Vincent for good or to see their father, whom both children
          have alleged physical abuse, and unfortunately there has not been
          an opportunity for him to defend himself... M has assured me that
          she is in support of the application [for a residence  order]  as
          she is of the opinion that it would be in the best  interests  of
          the girls'


18. The evidence before the judge  pointed  to  the  residence  order  being
   granted by the family court on the basis of a risk from the father if the
   children were returned to St  Vincent  and  to  assist  G  and  Mr  W  in
   undertaking the responsibilities that they  had  voluntarily  assumed  in
   relation to the children. The only evidence of risk in relation to M  was
   in relation her not being trusted by  her  daughter  not  to  remove  the
   children and to make appropriate decisions in order to protect  them  and
   the referral from N's school in 2010. However, there  was  also  evidence
   (as set out above) that M did not intend to remove the children  and  the
   investigation into the allegation in 2010 had not resulted in any further
   action, the conclusions being that the children were not at risk.


19. I do not accept Mr Jafar's submission that G gave evidence to the First-
   tier Tribunal regarding evidence in the  family  court  proceedings  that
   raised a risk to the children of physical abuse at the hands of M and the
   need for a residency order to protect them from M's abuse - the record of
   proceedings does not bear that out and there is no witness  statement  in
   evidence to that effect.


20. The judge gave very careful consideration to the CAFCASS report  and  to
   the evidence in relation to the obtaining of the orders that  was  before
   the First-tier Tribunal. From the evidence specifically set  out  by  the
   judge (and the evidence that I have outlined above) I do  not  find  that
   there was an error of law in the approach of the judge  in  finding  that
   the family court proceedings added nothing to the assessment she  had  to
   undertake with regards to the best interests of the children.

Ground ii) - section 55


21. The grounds of appeal asset that the judge fails to  take  into  account
   materially relevant evidence and failed to make  substantial  conclusions
   on the best interests of the children. Reference in the grounds  is  made
   to the family court material that indicated that there were  concerns  as
   to the welfare of the children unless  supported  by  G  and  Mr  W.  The
   evidence points to a parental role of G and Mr W and that N  had  special
   educational needs.


22. The judge  correctly  cites  relevant  case  law  on  the  approach  the
   Tribunal should adopt when considering the best interests of the children
   (paragraph 35). The judge set out the evidence that might have a  bearing
   on where the best interests of the children lie. The judge  sets  out  in
   detail  in  paragraphs  27-29  and  33-34  the  evidence  that  she   has
   considered. The judge notes that 'She [G] does not trust  her  mother  to
   make good decisions because her mother previously brought a  violent  man
   into the family home who went on to abuse G...Understandably G  does  not
   trust her mother to make the right decision to look after  her  children'
   (para 38). However, the judge found that M  could  re-locate  to  another
   area of St Vincent, that it was clear that the father had no interest  in
   the children (para 39) and that therefore  she  was  satisfied  that  the
   children were not at risk from their father if returned  to  St  Vincent.
   The judge accepted that in the past M may have made poor life choices but
   the judge considered that with the support of her mother, sister,  eldest
   daughter and son-in-law M  would  not  return  to  the  village  she  had
   previously lived in (para 42). The judge also considered that the support
   of G and Mr W was likely to continue when M and the children had returned
   to St Vincent. The judge took into consideration that the  children  were
   settled in school (para 45). She considered the background  material  and
   concluded that that there are schools and support for both children in St
   Vincent. The judge had taken into account the CAFCASS report  wherein  it
   was recorded that G and Mr W had indicated that there  were  no  concerns
   regarding the children's welfare and the report records that there are no
   safeguarding issues. The judge found that  the  reason  for  seeking  the
   order appeared to arise from G and Mr W already  being  involved  in  the
   children's care and M's trips abroad. Mr  W's  evidence  in  his  witness
   statement bears that out.


23. Taking into account all the evidence that  was  before  the  judge,  the
   factors specifically identified by the judge and  the  relevant  evidence
   set out above in paragraph 17 the findings  of  the  judge  on  the  best
   interests of the children were reasonable. The children  will  be  within
   the family unit consisting of their mother and two siblings  and  support
   of extended family in St Vincent. I find that there was no material error
   of law in the judge's approach to, and consideration of,  the  children's
   best interests.


Ground iii) - Irrationality


24. The grounds assert that the bulk of  the  evidence  suggested  that  all
   four of M's children had been at risk because of M and her  inability  to
   make decisions that would protect  them.  The  residence  and  prohibited
   steps order represent a conclusion from the family courts that M was  not
   capable of placing her  children's  best  interests  first.  The  judge's
   conclusions as to the risks from the children's father are unsustainable.


25. An assertion of irrationality is a high  hurdle  to  overcome.  In  this
   case the judge considered that the  risks  presented  by  the  children's
   father were relevant if M were to return to the  same  village  as  their
   father. The judge acknowledges this at paragraph 36. The judge considered
   very carefully the options of relocating, finding that the  father  would
   not pose a risk in other parts of St Vincent.  In  my  view,  it  is  not
   evident that  the  residency  and  prohibited  steps  order  represent  a
   conclusion from the family courts that M was not capable of  placing  her
   children's best interests first. The residency order was made jointly  in
   favour of M, G and Mr W.   Given  the  findings  of  the  judge  and  the
   evidence taken  into  consideration  overall  (as  discussed  above)  the
   findings of the judge are not irrational. There is no material  error  of
   law.


26. Serious allegations were made at the hearing that M posed a risk to  the
   children because she abused them physically which caused me to raise with
   Mr Jafar the question as to whether he had any conflict  in  representing
   all three appellants and also  whether  his  submissions  amounted  to  a
   serious question as to whether M's interest and the childrens'  interests
   were in conflict. It is open to the children  appellants  to  make  fresh
   representations to the Secretary of State on this basis if there  is  new
   evidence to support the allegations.


Conclusions


27. There was no material error of law such that the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal should be set aside.


Notice of Decision


   The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 11 August 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw








