
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31354/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 27 July 2017                        |On 10 August 2017                   |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                         omodolapo temitayo solomon
                       (anonymity direction Not MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. M. West, Counsel instructed by Harrison Morgan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge Cooper, promulgated on  4  January  2017,  in  which  he
     dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
     refuse to grant a residence card as confirmation of his right to reside
     in the United Kingdom.


  2. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
     Judge McCarthy as follows:


     "The judge did not make findings about whether  the  appellant's  proxy
     marriage was lawful under Nigerian law and he did not make any  finding
     about whether the marriage was recognised in England  and  Wales.   The
     judge also decided that  he  did  not  have  jurisdiction  to  consider
     whether the appellant was in a durable relationship.


     It is arguable, given  the  Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in  Awuku  v
     Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 178 that the
     judge erred in the approach he took.  In addition, it is arguable  that
     the judge erred in  his  refusal  to  consider  the  issue  of  durable
     relationship since the Upper Tribunal's decision in Sala  (EFMs:  Right
     of Appeal) Albania [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC) limited the  right  of  appeal
     but not the grounds of appeal once a person has established that he has
     a right of appeal, as in this case."


  3. In the Rule 24 response the Respondent stated as follows:


     "The grounds of appeal do not expressly cite Awuku v Secretary of State
     for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 178.  They  do  however  assert
     that the First-tier judge erred in failing to address the  validity  of
     the appellant's marriage in Nigeria.   The  instant  determination  was
     heard and promulgated prior to Awuku.  The Respondent is  of  the  view
     that the appeal should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
     fresh hearing."


  4. In the light of this concession from the Respondent, and in  the  light
     of the case of Awuku, at the hearing I set the  decision  aside  as  it
     involved the making of a material error of law.  I remitted the  appeal
     to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.


Error of Law

  5. As stated in the Rule 24 response, the judgment of Awuku had  not  been
     promulgated prior to the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
     Appellant had appealed against the decision to refuse him  a  residence
     card as the family member of an EEA national.  The judge relied on  the
     case of Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU  law)  [2014]  UKUT  00024  (IAC),
     setting out the relevant parts of the head note at [27].


  6.      At [30] the judge found that  there  was  nothing  before  him  to
     confirm that the marriage by proxy was a valid marriage under Hungarian
     law.  He therefore found that he was not  satisfied  that  the  parties
     were validly married for the purposes of Regulation 7 [31].  He did not
     address the validity of the Appellant's marriage in Nigeria.


  7. I have considered the case of Awuku, in particular paragraphs 18 to 21.
      Paragraph 21 makes it clear that there is no need to defer to the  law
     of the state of nationality of the EEA national, in this case, Hungary.
       The  domestic  law  rules  of  private  international  law  apply  in
     ascertaining whether a proxy marriage is a valid marriage.


  8. The Court of Appeal found in Awuku that the Upper Tribunal  were  wrong
     in finding that a proxy marriage had to be shown as valid in the  state
     of nationality of the EEA national.  Doing so  displaced  international
     law, and there was no provision  in  EU  law  for  the  recognition  of
     marriage in this way.  The judge cannot be criticised for following the
     case of Kareem, but the case of  Awuku  has  now  held  that  this  was
     wrongly decided.  The decision involves the making of a material  error
     of law in finding that the Appellant did not qualify under Regulation 7
     as he had not shown that his marriage was valid under Hungarian law.

 9. Further, the judge did not go on to consider whether the Appellant  had
    a right to reside under Regulation 8.  The  judge  cited  the  case  of
    Sala.  However, as acknowledged by Mr. Wilding before me, and as stated
    in the grant of permission to appeal, the  case  of  Sala  limited  the
    right of appeal, not the grounds of appeal.  The Appellant had a  right
    of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal as he had applied on  the  grounds
    that he was a family member under Regulation 7.  As he had a  right  of
    appeal, it was for the judge to consider any basis on  which  he  might
    qualify for a residence card under the Regulations.  The case  of  Sala
    does not prevent the First-tier Tribunal from  considering  whether  an
    appellant is in a "durable relationship" under  Regulation  8  when  he
    already has a right of  appeal.   Therefore,  by  failing  to  consider
    whether the Appellant had a right to reside  under  Regulation  8,  the
    judge made a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

10. The decision involves the making of a material error of law and  I  set
    the decision aside.

11. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.

12. The First-tier Tribunal is to consider whether the Appellant  qualifies
    for a residence card under Regulation 7.   If  it  is  found  that  the
    Appellant does not meet the requirements of Regulation  7,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal must proceed to consider whether the Appellant  qualifies
    as an extended family member under Regulation 8.

13. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 10 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


