
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia313282015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 May 2017                                |On 22 May 2017                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MS LIKEZO SERA LUTOMBI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Adophy, Solicitor instructed by Rana & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    The  appellant  (hereafter  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
    Department or SSHD) has permission to challenge the  decision  made  by
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  (FtTJ)  Cameron  sent  on  3  October  2016
    allowing the appeal of  the  respondent  (hereafter  the  claimant),  a
    citizen of Namibia, "to the limited extent that a  lawful  decision  is
    still to be made".  Judge Cameron considered that  the  SSHD  had  been
    wrong to refuse the claimant's  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain (ILR) on the basis of ten years'  lawful  residence  under  para
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  The reasoning of the  SSHD  had  been
    that the claimant had only had lawful  leave  to  remain  (first  as  a
    working holidaymaker, then as a student) from 11 June 2004 to  30  June
    2008.  Thereafter she has acquired a right to reside as the  spouse  of
    an EEA national, being issued a residence card on 3 July 2008  with  an
    expiry date of 3 July 2013, but not renewed as they had divorced.  On 6
    June 2013 the claimant applied for permanent  residence  on  the  basis
    that she had retained an EEA right of residence upon divorce.  The SSHD
    refused this application on 9  October  2013.   The  claimant's  appeal
    against this refusal was dismissed by a Tribunal judge on  9  September
    2014.

2.   FtTJ Cameron considered that  the  SSHD's  refusal  of  the  claimant's
    application for ILR incorrectly rejected the claimant's submission that
    her "leave under the EEA Regulations gave  rise  to  s.3  leave".   The
    judge also considered that the SSHD had wrongly considered  "the  issue
    of human rights".

3.   The thrust of the SSHD's grounds of appeal was that recognition of  the
    right to reside under the EEA Regulations does not constitute  a  grant
    of leave for the purposes of  s.3C  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  as
    amended.  The claimant's Rule 24 notice averred that the requirement of
    ten years' lawful residence was satisfied "for at no time was her right
    to remain in the UK unlawful or specifically revoked by the  [SSHD]  or
    by operation of law".  Section 3C(2)(b) was said to extend leave  where
    there  is  an  appeal  under  s.82(1)  NIAA  2002   with  reference  to
    Regulation 36(ii) EEA Regulations 2016".  In the alternative  the  Rule
    24 notice contended that in the event that s.3C(2)(b)  does  not  apply
    "the [claimant's] right to remain in the UK does not become unlawful as
    the [SSHD] cannot lawfully remove during the  pendency  of  an  appeal,
    Regulation 40(2) EEA Regulations 2017".

4.   At the hearing I raised with the parties whether, even  if  I  accepted
    that the claimant had the benefit of s.3C leave I could  avoid  finding
    that the FtTJ materially erred in law.  I pointed out that in order  to
    qualify for ILR under para 276B, the claimant had to be  able  to  show
    she had continuous lawful residence for  ten  years.   It  was  not  in
    dispute that her husband had been removed from the UK on 9 August  2011
    following a conviction and prison sentence for importation of  class  A
    controlled drugs.  His absence broke his personal  right  of  residence
    and that of the claimant too.  At best the claimant could only pray  in
    aid approximately four years of limited leave to remain between 11 June
    2004 and 30 June 2008 and a further period of EEA  residence  up  to  9
    August 2011 i.e. a total of just over seven years.

5.   Mr Adophy's response was that the  point  I  identified  had  not  been
    raised as a ground of appeal and it was not  one  which  was  therefore
    before me.


My Decision

6.   I am in no doubt that the FtTJ materially erred in law.

7.   I do not find Mr Adophy's invocation of Regulation 36(ii) and 40(2)  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 helpful since
    they concern appeal rights.  More to  the  point  is  Regulation  29(2)
    which provides that a person who is a family member of an EEA  national
    is to be treated as if that person were a person seeking leave to enter
    the UK.  Even however if that provision and its  predecessors  sufficed
    to establish that the claimant was to be treated as continuing to  have
    leave to enter or remain in the years and months  between  2008  and  9
    August 2013, the resultant period of residence fell well short  of  ten
    years.

8.   Mr Adophy has submitted that I  disregard  this  point  as  it  as  not
    raised in the SSHD's grounds of  appeal.   I  reject  that  submission.
    Whether or not the decision of the FtTJ was  vitiated  by  legal  error
    depends upon a correct application of the law.  The claimant could  not
    meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  governing  ILR  even
    assuming her EEA period of residence were treated as leave  to  remain.
    Hence the only conclusion the judge could have reached was  to  dismiss
    the claimant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.  The Upper  Tribunal
    is not barred from applying the law simply  because  an  obvious  point
    regarding it is not taken by a party:  see RM (Kwok  on  Tong,  HC  395
    para 320) India [2006] UKAIT 00039.

9.   I note that in any event the  SSHD's  refusal  decision  relied,  inter
    alia, on the failure of  the  claimant  to  demonstrate  that  she  had
    continued, after August 2009, to be residing in the  UK  in  accordance
    with the 2006 Regulations (see pp3-4  of  refusal  decision);  so  this
    point was in play and was one which the judge should have addressed  in
    any event.

10.  The FtTJ also purported to allow  the  appeal  (to  a  limited  extent)
    because the respondent had "not properly considered the issue of  human
    rights".  However, the SSHD did address the claimant's human rights  in
    detail in her refusal decision.  The SSHD specifically noted  that  the
    claimant had not raised anything that led her to believe  she  had  any
    children in the UK.  At the  hearing  before  FtTJ  Cameron,  when  the
    claimant sought to rely on a  witness  statement  indicating  that  the
    claimant had given birth to a daughter in December 2012, the Presenting
    Officer's confirmed that the SSHD did not consent to this matter  being
    raised as a new issue.  The FtTJ gave no  reasons  for  rejecting  this
    information.  The submission regarding that  information  was  properly
    based on s.85 of the NIAA 2002 and the FtTJ was wrong to reject it.

11.  For the above reasons the FtTJ materially erred in law.

12.  In light of the reasoning set out above, it will be apparent  that  the
    only decision I can re-make is to dismiss the claimant's  appeal.   She
    could not succeed under the Immigration Rules  on  the  basis  of  long
    residence.  Her human rights claim was properly considered by the  SSHD
    and she had singularly  failed  to  show  that  there  were  compelling
    circumstances warranting a grant of permission outside the  Rules.   As
    regards the claimant's attempt to raise as a new matter  the  existence
    of a child born to her in December 2012, the SSHD has not consented  to
    it being raised in this appeal.

     To conclude:

     The FtTJ materially erred in law:

     The decision I re-make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 18 May 2017
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

