
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31904/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Tribunal                             |                                     |
|On 20 April 2017                     |On 11 May 2017                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                              mr douglas Willon
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Norman, Counsel, instructed by RBM Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Malawi, has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Juss sent  on  9  September  2016
    dismissing his appeal against the decision made by the respondent on 17
    June 2015 refusing him leave to remain.

2.   The appellant's grounds have two main limbs.   First,  issue  is  taken
    with the judge's statement at paragraph 14 that "there is  no  evidence
    of substantial and ongoing influence over their development"  [that  of
    the two British citizen children born  in  July  2007  and  March  2011
    respectively.]  The grounds continued  that  the  appellant  had  shown
    clear evidence that he has direct contact with his  children  at  their
    school and attends their sports days and parents' evenings.   Reference
    was made to a letter the appellant provided from his daughter's  school
    to that effect.

3.   In oral submissions Ms Norman advanced a second point  which  was  that
    the judge had also erred in the same paragraph in respect of the  legal
    criteria he had to apply whether or not there would  be  disruption  of
    the contact arrangements.  (At paragraph 14 the judge wrote  that  "...
    the evidence is not such as to demonstrate that any disruption  to  the
    current arrangements between the appellant and the children is going to
    have a detrimental effect on the children's lives.").

          I  am  grateful  to  both  representatives   for   their   concise
    submissions.

4.   I should mention that Ms Norman informed the Tribunal at the  start  of
    the hearing that there was a Family Court order  made  on  13  December
    2016 stopping direct contact between the appellant and the children and
    a further order dated 16 March 2017 directing a fact-finding hearing to
    consider allegations made by the appellant's ex-partner.   I  explained
    that I am tasked with deciding whether the FtT judge erred  in  law  in
    the decision he made and in deciding that matter I cannot  have  regard
    to evidence that was not before the judge.  Nevertheless I conclude  it
    was right of Ms Norman to apprise the Tribunal of the  latest  position
    and such evidence would of course be relevant if  I  found  a  material
    error of law.

5.   I am not persuaded however, that there was a  material  error  of  law.
    It will assist if I first of all set out what Judge Juss said  in  full
    in paragraphs 14 and 15:-


         "14. First, although there are emails  between  the  Appellant  and
             [YM] (see C1 to C3) and a parenting agreement (see C4  to  C8)
             as well as various other e-mails (see  C9  to  C17),  together
             with academic reports that the Appellant has produced (see  D1
             to D7), the evidence is not such as to  demonstrate  that  any
             disruption to the current arrangements between  the  Appellant
             and the children is going to have a detrimental effect on  the
             children's lives.  I notice that there are photographs in  the
             bundle  showing  the  Appellant  in  close  contact  with  his
             children.  Nevertheless, there is no evidence  of  substantial
             and ongoing influence over  their  development.   Although  my
             attention has been drawn to the case law, and in particular to
             JA (meaning of 'access rights') India  [2015]  UKUT  225,  and
             although that case stands as an authority  for  the  principle
             that, 'indirect' access  to  a  child  by  means  of  letters,
             telephone calls, etc., as well as to those who spend time with
             a child ('direct' access), can come under  the  definition  of
             'access rights', the evidence  before  this  Tribunal  is  not
             persuasive that the Appellant has got such indirect access  to
             the children in the manner alleged.  In  his  evidence  before
             the Tribunal, the Appellant stated that  he  had  not  as  yet
             initiated court proceedings to have formal access, although he
             was minded to do so.  However, it is clear that  the  evidence
             at present does not come up to the requisite level.

         15.  Second, as  far  as  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  his
             current partner, Ms [N] is concerned, I note  that  she  is  a
             British citizen, and  my  attention  has  been  drawn  to  the
             document at H14 in the form of a  gas  bill  for  the  address
             where they live together, there is no reason why the Appellant
             cannot  return  back  to  his  country  and  make   a   formal
             application for entry clearance to join Ms [N] in this country
             in the appropriate manner.  The Appellant cannot succeed under
             the Immigration Rules for the reasons that have been  set  out
             in the refusal  letter.   However,  he  cannot  succeed  under
             freestanding Article 8 jurisprudence either."

6.   From the above I am satisfied firstly that the judge  took  account  of
    all the evidence that  was  placed  before  him  including  the  school
    letters.  Secondly, I am satisfied that  when  the  judge  referred  to
    there  being  "no  evidence"  he  meant  only  to  denote  evidence  of
    substantial and ongoing influence over the children's development.   He
    was plainly aware there was some contact and some degree of  influence.
    Third, I consider this to be a finding of fact that was  entirely  open
    to him on the evidence.  The appellant has not lived with the  children
    for several years.   He  resides  in  Birmingham;  his  ex-partner  and
    children reside in Worthing.  In the case of the oldest child,  he  was
    not in the country for the first four years of  her  life.   Since  the
    appellant and his partner became estranged, he has had  direct  contact
    but the evidence before the judge did not demonstrate that such contact
    with the children was regular and frequent.  The direct contact he  was
    enjoying with them at the date of the hearing was limited to attendance
    at school events and did not extend to him seeing the children  outside
    of school or the children going to stay with him.  The last time he was
    allowed to take the children to his own accommodation was  in  February
    2015.

7.   It must be borne in mind that what the  judge  had  to  assess  in  the
    first instance was whether the appellant met  the  requirements  of  E-
    LTRP.2.4 of the Immigration Rules which require that:


         (a)  the applicant must provide evidence that they have either -

             (i)  sole parental responsibility for the child, or  that  the
                  child normally lives with them, or

             (ii) access rights to the child; and

         (b)  the applicant must provide evidence that they are  taking  and
             intend to continue to take, an  active  role  in  the  child's
             upbringing.

8.   In the appellant's case he had not provided evidence of  access  rights
    to the children.  He had provided evidence of family mediation  and  Ms
    Norman is right to mention that family mediation is often a step  prior
    to Family Court proceedings, but the fact remains that at the  date  of
    hearing he did not have any access rights.  Further and in  any  event,
    the evidence he had provided of contact was  reasonably  considered  by
    the judge not to demonstrate that he was and would continue to take  an
    active role in the children's upbringing.  Ms Norman is  quite  correct
    to emphasise that the Upper Tribunal held in  JA  (meaning  of  "access
    rights") India [2015] UKUT 225 (IAC) that taking an  active  role  does
    not necessarily require having regular face to  face  access,  but  the
    Tribunal in that decision went on to state in paragraph 14:

         "Having said that, a  person  (including  a  parent  with  parental
         responsibility) who has only 'indirect' access rights  to  a  child
         and who is not involved in either the day to day care of the  child
         or in making important decisions regarding  the  child's  life  may
         find it difficult to prove that he/she is 'taking an active role in
         the child's upbringing'."

9.   Given that the appellant's direct contact in this case was  limited  to
    school events. I  consider  this  paragraph  deals  properly  with  the
    evidence that the judge had to assess and that it confirms  that  there
    was no error in the judge's approach to the issue of "active role".

10.  As regards the second limb of the grounds as developed  by  Ms  Norman,
    (regarding legal criteria  to  be  applied  to  disruption  of  contact
    arrangements) I find  it  lacks  merit.   For  one  thing  the  judge's
    statement in paragraph 14 was clearly intended to provide his  response
    to the point made by the  appellant's  representative  as  recorded  in
    paragraph 8 ("Mr Nyamayaro said that the appellant to leave the country
    would have a detrimental effect on  his  children  given  that  he  was
    having direct contact with them at present").  It was not intended as a
    statement  regarding  the  legal  test  he  had  to  apply  under   the
    Immigration Rules.  For another thing, one of the requirements  as  set
    out in. E-LTRPT.2.4. is that an  applicant  must  provide  evidence  of
    current active involvement in the children's  upbringings  as  well  as
    evidence of an intention to continue taking such  a  role.   Hence  the
    judge was fully entitled. to have regard to the  current  arrangements.
    In addition, insofar as the judge was required to consider  prospective
    contact and active involvement, he clearly had future  developments  in
    mind when he noted at the end of paragraph 14 that  the  appellant  had
    stated he had not yet initiated contact  proceedings  although  he  was
    minded to do so.  The judge observed that "However, it  is  clear  that
    the evidence at present does not come up to the present level".   I  am
    also satisfied that the judge was clearly entitled  to  take  the  view
    that there was no basis for considering that any  steps  taken  by  the
    appellant through the Family Court was not forseeably likely to  result
    in any significantly greater degree of involvement by the appellant  in
    his children's lives.

11.  For the above reasons I conclude that the appellant's grounds  fail  to
    demonstrate a material error of law.  Accordingly the decision  of  the
    FtT judge to dismiss the appellant's appeal must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 8 May 2017

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
