
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31207/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 24 October 2017                           |On 6 November 2017             |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mr Olisaemeka Odume
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan (Home office presenting officer)
For the Claimant: Mr C Alara (Legal Representative)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State in respect  of  a  decision
    and reasons by First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid (FTJ) promulgated  on  5
    October 2016 in which he allowed  the  Claimant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's refusal to grant a residence card as the spouse of
    an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

2.   The grounds of  appeal  assert  that  the  FTJ  erred  in  refusing  an
    application made by  the Claimant's representative  (and  supported  by
    the  Presenting  Officer)   for   an   adjournment.    The   Claimant's
    representative produced evidence from the Claimant's wife on the day of
    the hearing.  The evidence related to the alleged cohabitation  between
    the Claimant and his EU wife. The wife was unable to attend on the  day
    of the hearing. A letter from the wife's alleged employer  stated  that
    she was not able to take time  off  work.   It  was  the  Secretary  of
    State's case that this was a sham marriage.  The  grounds  argued  that
    the FTJ erred by not granting the adjournment.

3.   In the decision the  FTJ  [4]  indicated  his  understanding  that  the
    Claimant's wife was unwell and  therefore  unable  to  attend  for  the
    hearing.  The FTJ took the view  that  he  could  rely  on  the  wife's
    witness statement in which she stated that the parties married in  2013
    and had since lived together. The grounds argued that  the  refusal  of
    the adjournment effectively  prevented  the  Secretary  of  State  from
    checking the details provided and  from cross-examining the EU national
    wife.  Furthermore it was argued that the FTJ reached a decision  prior
    to the hearing based on the contents of the  wife's  statement  and  in
    effect this amounted to a pre-judgment and acceptance of the  facts  in
    the absence of any cross-examination.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal McClure on 19 May 2017.

5.   I heard no detailed submissions as both representatives  conceded  that
    the grounds of appeal were made out and that there were material errors
    of law in the decision which could not stand.

Decision

6.   I find material errors of law in the decision which is set aside.   The
    grounds of appeal are made out. The FTJ erred in failing  to  grant  an
    adjournment and by accepting the contents of a witness  statement  thus
    preventing the Secretary of State from challenging  the  evidence.  The
    matter is remitted for  rehearing  at  Taylor  House  (excluding  Judge
    Majid).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 3.11.2017

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 3.11.2017

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

