
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/31161/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS





|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 5 September 2014                      |On 11 September 2014        |
|                                         |                            |
|                                         |                            |


                                   Before



                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA



                                   Between



                             MR MUHAMMAD RAFIQUE

                                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                  Appellant



                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation



For the appellant:     No appearance

For the respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Presenting Officer






                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who  appealed  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal against the decision of the respondent  dated  1  November  2013
   refusing to grant him a Residence Card as confirmation of  his  right  of
   residence as the spouse of an EEA national exercising her  treaty  rights
   in the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  regulation  6,  7  and  8  of  the
   Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  (hereinafter  the
   2006 Regulations).

2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  and
   found that the appellant's marriage was one of  convenience.   First-tier
   Tribunal Judge PJM  Hollingworth  granted  the  appellant  permission  to
   appeal stating that the First-tier Judge made an arguable error of law in
   relation to the burden and standard of  proof  in  his  analysis  of  the
   totality of the evidence given that the appeal was decided on the  papers
   and not after an oral hearing.

3. Thus the appeal came before me.



   4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made the following findings.




   i. The evidence is that the appellant and his EEA national married on  18
      November 2012 in the United Kingdom. The respondent  doubts  that  the
      marriage is genuine and relies upon  a  marriage  interview  conducted
      with the appellant and his wife on 24 May 2013 and  acknowledges  that
      whilst the appellant and his wife know each other and elements of each
      other's life finds that there were occasions  when  questioned  during
      their interview about their relationship that the parties were  unable
      to provide consistent answers when recalling basic,  sometimes  recent
      events and moments in their life together.




  ii. There are discrepancies in the transcript of the interview between the
      appellant and his sponsor.




 iii. There is a paucity of evidence submitted by the appellant to test  the
      parties' relationship. There  are  no  photographs  other  than  their
      wedding photographs or any statements from their friends and relations
      to confirm the existence of their  relationship.  The  appellant  only
      mentions two of his wife's friends and his wife is unable to state the
      appellant's brother's full name saying that he is also called Muhammad
      as is the appellant, whom she calls Rafique partly because "there  are
      so many Muhammad's". It is not  credible  that  the  appellant's  wife
      would not know the name of the appellant's brother who attended  their
      wedding who  he  says  is  called  Anis  or  be  unable  to  name  the
      appellant's friends who also attended their wedding.  It  is  striking
      that the only friends of  the  appellant's  wife  who  attended  their
      wedding other two friends that she and the appellant have  in  common;
      Adams and Alinas.




  iv. There are further discrepancies in  the  answers  given  to  questions
      relating to accommodation which the appellant and his wife  share.  It
      is not credible that the appellant would not  know  when  or  how  the
      appellant  told  his  parents  of  his  plans  to  marry   given   the
      implications of such a decision such as his desire to seek  to  remain
      in the  United  Kingdom  and  the  cultural/familial  significance  of
      marriage within Pakistani society.




   v.  On  the  totality  of  the  evidence  and  noting  the  lack  of  any
      satisfactory objective evidence of the claimed relationship  which  it
      is reasonable to assume that the appellant  could  have  provided  but
      failed to do, the parties have not demonstrated that they have entered
      into a  genuine  marriage  and  find  that  the  marriage  is  one  of
      convenience.


5. The grounds of appeal state the following which I  summarise.  The  first
   ground of appeal is that the Judge  at  paragraph  4.2  stated  that  the
   burden is upon the appellant and that the  standard  of  proof  is  on  a
   balance of probabilities and that the appellant has  to  prove  that  the
   decision of the respondent was not in accordance with the law. The  Judge
   materially erred in law by not setting out the correct burden of proof in
   marriages of convenience under the EEA regulations. Had  the  Judge  used
   the correct formulation and burden of proof,  he  may  have  noticed  the
   problem  in  his  findings  of  the  respondent's  evidence,  instead  of
   apparently accepting them without scrutiny.

6. The second ground of appeal is that the Judge made mistakes  of  fact  in
   his determination. The problem lay in the Judge's interpretation  of  the
   answers and there was no material discrepancies between the appellant and
   the sponsor's evidence at the interview.

7. Other errors in the determination  were  that  the  Judge  expected  that
   there should be correspondence between the parties  without  taking  into
   account that they met in London and have lived together and  there  would
   be no need to send letters to each other. The  Judge  also  misunderstood
   the evidence in his finding at paragraph 57 that the  appellant  said  he
   has two brothers in the United Kingdom whereas, the sponsor said that  he
   had only one brother. At question 100, they both said  that  the  sponsor
   has two brothers. The Judge by failing to consider the  evidence  failing
   to a material error of law.

8. Before the hearing  I  received  a  faxed  letter  from  the  appellant's
   representative, MA Consultants asking that the appeal be decided  on  the
   papers as their clients current financial circumstances do not permit him
   to instruct them to appoint a counsel to represent him at the hearing.

   The hearing

9. I heard submissions from the senior presenting officer.  He  argued  that
   the answers given by the appellant  and  his  sponsor  in  the  interview
   record were clearly contradictory which the Judge took  into  account  as
   set out in his determination. In respect of  the  discrepancies,  it  was
   argued that there  were  at  least  20  different  discrepancies  at  the
   interview between the appellant and his sponsor. He submitted  that  even
   if there was an error in setting out the correct burden of proof, it  was
   not material because the outcome of the appeal would not be different.




   Decision on error of law


  10. The first complaint made against the Judge is that he  failed  to  set
      out the correct burden and standard of  proof  in  his  determination.
      Paragraph 4.2 of the determination it is recorded "The burden of proof
      lies upon the appellant and the standard of proof is on the balance of
      probabilities and the appellant has to prove to that standard that the
      decision of the respondent was not in accordance with the law and  the
      relevant Immigration Rules.


11. In the case of Papajorgi (EEA  spouse-marriage  of  convenience)  Greece
   [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC), it was made clear that there is  now  burden  at
   the outset of an application on the claimant to demonstrate that marriage
   to an EEA national is not one of convenience. In the case of IS (marriage
   of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 31, establishes only that there is an
   evidential  burden  on  the  claimant  to  address  evidence   justifying
   reasonable  suspicion  that  the  marriage  is  entered  into   for   the
   predominant purposes of securing residence rights.

12. There is clearly an error of law in the  determination  by  the  Judge's
   failure to set out in his determination upon whom the  burden  falls  and
   the standard of proof required. It is trite law that the burden is on the
   respondent to prove that  they  have  a  reasonable  suspicion  that  the
   marriage is one of convenience. The burden then shifts to  the  appellant
   to demonstrate that his is not a marriage of convenience.

13. The Senior Presenting Officer in the submissions argued that  the  error
   was not material because the Judge clearly understood that the burden was
   on the respondent which had been proved by providing the interview record
   of the appellant and  his  sponsor  in  which  there  were  at  least  20
   discrepancies as listed in the refusal letter.

14.  The  respondent  in  their  refusal  letter   clearly   set   out   the
   discrepancies in the evidence of the appellant and  his  sponsor  at  the
   interview record. The Judge clearly took these discrepancies into account
   as the respondent having satisfied the suspicion that  the  marriage  was
   one of convenience.

15. On the full reading of the determination, it is implicit that the  Judge
   found that the respondent had demonstrated that the discrepancies in  the
   evidence of the appellant and his sponsor at their interviews,  raised  a
   suspicion, that the marriage was one of convenience  and  the  respondent
   had thereby satisfied her burden of proof. In the determination the Judge
   finds that the appellant has  not  provided  evidence  which  rebuts  the
   respondent's suspicion that his marriage was not one of convenience.

16. Therefore, although there was an error of law in the  determination  but
   I find it was not material in this appeal. Considering all  the  evidence
   in  the  appeal,  the  decision  would  remain   the   same   given   the
   inconsistencies in the appellant's  and  sponsor's  interview  record.  I
   therefore find the first ground of appeal has no merit.

17. In respect of the second  ground  of  appeal  that  the  judge  did  not
   consider the evidence judiciously is no more  than  a  quarrel  with  the
   findings of the Judge on the evidence. The Judge took  into  account  the
   many discrepancies in  the  interview  record  of  the  sponsor  and  the
   appellant.  The  respondent's  refusal   letter   sets   out   about   20
   discrepancies in the interview record.

18. The grounds of appeal set out a few discrepancies which they claim  were
   not  inconsistent  but  these  explanations  do  not  indicate  that  the
   appellant and his sponsor  were  consistent  in  all  their  answers.  At
   paragraph 5.7, the Judge clearly sets out some of the  answers  given  by
   the sponsor such as why she calls the appellant Rafique  instead  of  his
   name Muhammad because as the sponsor said "there are so many Muhammad's".
   The Judge also points out that the appellant did not know the name of the
   brother who attended their wedding, amongst other discrepancies.

19. The Judge was entitled to find on  the  evidence  before  him  that  the
   appellant's marriage is one of convenience and there is no material error
   of law in those findings.  The  Judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
   appellant did not meet the requirements of the 2006 Regulations.


  20. I conclude for the above reasons that the  First-tier  Judge  did  not
      material err in law and I uphold his determination.




   Decision




   The appellant's appeal is dismissed




        Signed by



        Mrs S Chana

        A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal       Dated this 10th day of
September 2014











