
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31891/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19th August 2014                             |On 5th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              samiratu fuseIni
                      (Anonymity has not been directed)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representative



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of  Ghana  born  on  22nd  July  1984.   She
    appealed  against  the  Respondent's  decision  dated  10th  July  2013
    refusing her an EEA residence card as the extended family member of  Mr
    Nazir Tchelenon (the Sponsor) a German national living  in  the  United
    Kingdom (UK).  Her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Stokes on 28th March 2014.  He allowed the appeal under the Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006 as amended, in a  determination  promulgated  on
    15th May 2014.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Fisher on 25th  June  2014.
    The grounds seeking permission assert that the judge erred  in  law  by
    concluding that the Appellant had evidenced prior  dependency,  on  the
    basis that the Sponsor had remitted to her, funds for school  fees  and
    additional expenses associated with  her  education.   The  judge  also
    found that the Appellant had been living with her mother prior  to  her
    departure for the UK and that  her  mother  had  always  supported  her
    financially until that point in time.  The permission states that it is
    arguable that the payment of school  fees  and  associated  expenditure
    does not establish that the Appellant's essential needs were being  met
    by her Sponsor and the Appellant was in fact dependent upon her  mother
    before he came to the United Kingdom.



The Hearing

 4. The Appellant's Sponsor Nazir Tchelenon, a German  national  living  in
    the United Kingdom and  the  first  cousin  of  the  Appellant  on  his
    mother's side, submitted that the Appellant had been unable to  find  a
    representative and that he wanted to deal with the hearing himself.   I
    explained that this hearing is about an error of  law  and  recommended
    that he and the Appellant employed a solicitor to represent them but he
    did not want to do that and the hearing went ahead.

 5. I explained the procedure to the Sponsor and the Appellant who was also
    attending the hearing.

 6. The Presenting Officer submitted that he is relying on the  grounds  of
    application referred to in the permission.  I was referred to paragraph
    29 of the determination in which the judge states that it  is  credible
    that the Sponsor's remittances  to  the  Appellant  were  required  for
    school fees and additional expenses in relation to education.   Because
    of this the judge found that the Appellant had been  dependent  on  the
    Sponsor prior to her arrival in the United Kingdom.

 7. I was referred to paragraph 26 a and b of the determination.  The judge
    refers to the Appellant's evidence that her mother  always  financially
    supported her until her arrival in the United Kingdom.

 8. The Presenting Officer submitted that there were discrepancies  in  the
    evidence.  At paragraph 10 the Appellant's evidence was that she  could
    not remember when the Sponsor had started supporting  her  financially.
    At paragraph 15 the Sponsor gave evidence that the Appellant would  ask
    him for money, for example for school fees and he would  remit  to  her
    the amount she had requested.  He remembered that he had paid  all  the
    appellant's tertiary education fees.  At paragraph 14 the Sponsor  gave
    evidence that he has been financially supporting  the  Appellant  since
    2006.  At paragraph 26 b it is stated that the  Appellant  thought  the
    Sponsor's financial support began in 2010.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that the issue in this case  is  prior
    dependency.  He submitted that present dependency is  not  in  dispute.
    He referred me to paragraph 14 of the determination relating  to  prior
    dependency. This states that the Appellant mainly lived in  Kumasi  and
    visited her mother in Accra.  She went to secondary  school  in  Kumasi
    and then Kumasi Polytechnic.   This  paragraph  states  that  when  the
    Sponsor visited Ghana he always stayed at his  family  home  in  Kumasi
    where the Appellant also lived as part  of  the  same  household.   His
    father's property is a compound.  Paragraph 14 states that the  Sponsor
    and the Appellant had formed part of the same household  prior  to  the
    appellant's entry to the UK and subsequently.  The paragraph goes on to
    state that the  Sponsor  had  also  supported  the  Appellant's  mother
    financially.  The  Presenting  Officer  referred  to  the  evidence  of
    financial remittances which are dated 2005, 2006 and 2011.

10. At paragraph 29 of the  determination  it  is  stated  that  university
    education is not free in Ghana and the Appellant  was  accommodated  by
    her mother.  In this  paragraph  it  is  credible  that  the  Sponsor's
    remittances were required  for  school  fees  and  additional  expenses
    relating to her education.  He submitted that the question is "what  is
    dependency" in an EEA case.

11. I was referred to the case of Lim [2013] UKUT 437 (IAC).  At  paragraph
    24 it is stated that for dependency to arise it is not necessary that a
    person be fully  or  even  mainly  dependent.   If  a  person  requires
    material support for essential needs in part, that is sufficient.   The
    Presenting Officer submitted that university and school  fees  are  not
    essential needs.  He submitted that essential needs are food,  clothing
    and accommodation.  He submitted that these things were provided by the
    Appellant's mother,  based  on  the  evidence  before  the  judge.   He
    submitted that the remittances in 2005 and 2006 are too  remote  to  be
    relevant, relating to prior dependency before the Appellant came to the
    United Kingdom.  He submitted that the later money transfers  were  not
    for essential needs.

12. The Sponsor made his submissions.

13. He submitted that the money he gave the Appellant was not only for  her
    university course.  He  submitted  that  he  has  been  supporting  the
    Appellant for a long time but has been unable to produce all the  money
    receipts because he had not realised they would be relevant.   He  said
    he often gave money to friends going to Ghana to give to the Appellant.
     None of these friends were in court to support  his  evidence  at  the
    First-tier hearing.  He said he also gave these people  clothes,  shoes
    etc to give to her sometimes at her request.  He submitted that he gave
    the Appellant money for her essential needs.  He said that at the First-
    tier hearing the wrong questions were asked. The Appellant had not been
    staying  with  her  mother  in  Ghana.   At  paragraph  26  a  of   the
    determination, he submitted that although the judge said the  Appellant
    was living with her mother and was supported by her that  was  not  the
    case.  The Sponsor submitted that the Appellant was  not  staying  with
    her mother in Accra in 2000. She went to live in  his,  the  Sponsor's,
    family home in Kumasi.  He said she was there  from  2001  until  2004.
    The Sponsor said that at that time he was supporting his mother and his
    mother  was  supporting  the  Appellant.   From  2005  until  2008  the
    Appellant was at Kumasi Polytechnic and he was still sending her money.
     He submitted that he had been in Germany at  that  time  and  all  the
    remittances were sent to Kumasi.

14. I asked if the Appellant's mother was sending money to her at that time
    and he said not that he is aware of.  He said that in  his  culture  it
    would be frowned on for his  mother  to  send  the  Appellant's  mother
    money. It would be an insult.  He said that when he sent money  to  the
    Appellant's mother in Accra he did not want his own mother to know.

15. The Sponsor referred to the case of Dauhoo  [2012]  UKUT  000079  (IAC)
    relating to prior  dependency.   He  said  that  the  First-tier  Judge
    misinterpreted the evidence relating to prior dependency.  He said that
    the First-tier Judge however came to the right conclusion  by  allowing
    the appeal.  He said that the Appellant did her national  service  from
    2009 until 2010  and  then  in  2011  she  moved  to  Accra  to  go  to
    university.  He said that at that time she was  not  staying  with  her
    mother. She was staying in a hostel in Accra and the judge was wrong to
    say that she had been living with her mother in Accra.

16.  He  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Judge  had  made  an  error   by
    misinterpreting the evidence.

17. The Presenting Officer submitted that the evidence being given in court
    today  is  new  evidence  and  it  does  not  help  the  error  of  law
    determination.  He submitted that there is an error of law and the  new
    evidence has raised credibility issues.

18. The Presenting Officer referred to paragraph 23 which states  that  the
    Appellant lived in the  Sponsor's  father's  household  in  Kumasi  and
    completed her secondary tertiary education there.  I  was  referred  to
    the money receipts going to Accra and I was referred to the application
    form which refers to her attending  Greenhill  College  in  Accra.  The
    judge found that the Appellant's mother  supported  her  when  she  was
    there until she arrived in the United Kingdom.  He submitted  that  the
    Sponsor has now stated that she was not living with her mother at  that
    time although she moved to Accra in 2011.

19. The Presenting Officer referred me  to  the  money  transfer  receipts,
    submitting that none of the names on these are  the  Appellant's  name.
    The names vary from Samra Fusseini to Samila Fuseni and yet the Sponsor
    is stating that they were all meant for  the  Appellant.   The  Sponsor
    submitted that every remittance has a code and if  the  name  does  not
    tally all the Appellant has to do is give the code.  He  said  all  the
    remittances were for the Appellant.  He submitted that  based  on  said
    case of Dauhoo not only was there prior dependency by the Appellant  on
    him there was also prior membership  of  his  household.   The  Sponsor
    stated that he had told the First-tier Judge that he had lived with the
    Appellant's mother when he was small before he moved to Kumasi.

20. He stated that he and the Appellant have a brother/sister relationship.



21. I asked the Sponsor what would have happened if he had not  sent  money
    to the Appellant and he said that the Appellant was  dependent  on  his
    mother who was dependent on him and the Appellant's  mother  could  not
    have taken care of all her needs.  I asked what needs he was  referring
    to and he said clothes, accommodation etc.  He said he gave  her  money
    for essential needs as well as for university.  He said  that  although
    he did not send her money to cover all her needs part of the money  was
    for her essential needs.

22. The Presenting Officer submitted that much of  the  evidence  given  at
    this hearing was not before the First-tier Judge.   He  submitted  that
    much of this evidence contradicts the evidence given to the  First-tier
    Judge  but  there  is  still  insufficient  evidence  to   show   prior
    dependency.  He submitted that none  of  the  evidence  given  at  this
    hearing changes this.

23. He submitted that the correct test  is  that  in  the  case  of  Lim  -
    essential needs:- Based on this there is a material error of law in the
    approach taken by  the  First-tier  Judge  and  the  appeal  should  be
    dismissed.

24. He submitted that  the  determination  refers  to  Regulation  8  only,
    Regulation 17  has  not  been  addressed.   He  submitted  that  a  new
    application can be made by the Appellant but that there is  a  material
    error of law in the existing  First-tier  determination  and  the  case
    should be reheard.



Determination

25. Based on what was before the First-tier Judge there is an error of  law
    in the determination.  Based on what seems  to  have  been  before  the
    Judge, the Sponsor was not responsible for  the  Appellant's  essential
    needs but was responsible for  supporting  the  Appellant  through  her
    university education.

26. Due to  the  fact  that  the  evidence  given  today  by  the  Sponsor,
    contradicts much of what was  before  the  judge,  my  decision  is  as
    follows.



Decision

27.  There  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the   First-tier   Judge's
    determination.  I am setting that decision aside.

28. A second stage hearing before me will go ahead on 28th October 2014  at
    Field House on all issues.

29. Anonymity has not been directed






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
