
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/31201/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 10 February 2015                  |On 11 February 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                 FAWAD AHMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant: Mr M Iqbal, instructed by Pride Solicitors
For the respondent: Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is Fawad Ahmed, a national of Pakistan.  He  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of  State
    dated 13 August 2013 to refuse his application for leave to remain as a
    Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under the Points Based System  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Turquet  dismissed
    his appeal. He now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. On 6 January 2015 I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Turquet for the reasons set out below;

       . The issue in this case relates to the English language requirement.
         The appellant sat a Pearson English test and provided a certificate
         but, because he had not provided website  access  to  the  UKBA  to
         verify  the  English  score  by  the  date  of  the  decision,  the
         respondent did not award him the required points for his CAS.

       . It is the respondent's case that the appellant was required to make
         his Pearson test scores available for the Home Office  to  view  on
         the Pearson online verification system. It is  contended  that  the
         respondent emailed the appellant on 4 July 2013 requesting that  he
         assign the Pearson test score to the respondent within 7  days  but
         that he did not do so and when the respondent checked  the  Pearson
         website on 11  July  2013  the  score  had  not  been  assigned  as
         required. The appellant's case is that he did not receive the email
         and that when he received the decision he assigned the score report
         to the Home Office on 22 August 2013.

       . The First-tier Tribunal Judge was not satisfied that the  appellant
         had submitted evidence that his test score was available to view by
         the Home office on the Pearson online verification system with  the
         application or within the time requested. The Judge considered that
         the appellant said that he had checked his  hotmail  email  address
         but that this was not the same  as  the  livemail  address  on  his
         application form.

       . The appellant contends in the grounds of appeal that the First-tier
         Tribunal Judge erred in relation to the email addresses because  it
         is contended that livemail and hotmail are the  same.  It  is  also
         contended that the Judge erred in failing to consider  whether  the
         respondent had complied with paragraph 245AA of the Rules in  light
         of the appellant's assertion that he did not receive the email.

       . In granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt  pointed
         out that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  not  make  an  entirely
         clear finding as to whether the email was correctly sent or  as  to
         whether the appellant's evidence  that  it  was  not  received  was
         reliable. She noted that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  suggested
         that the appellant checked the wrong email account [14] however  it
         is asserted that livemail and hotmail are the same.

       . The problem so far in this appeal is that the  respondent  has  not
         provided a copy of the email alleged  to  have  been  sent  to  the
         appellant. The Upper Tribunal hearing was previously  adjourned  to
         enable the respondent to produce a copy of the  email  but  at  the
         resumed hearing only a record of a case note was available.

       . Mr Ehtesham Khan relied on the  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in  Syed
         (curtailment of leave - notice) [2013] UKUT 00144 IAC. He submitted
         that the principles in that case were the same here. He referred to
         paragraph 28 where the tribunal said;

           o "28. In the absence of an order made by  statutory  instrument
             under section 4(1) of the Immigration Act  1971  dealing  with
             the giving of notice of variation of leave where there  is  no
             right of appeal, the Secretary of State  has  to  be  able  to
             prove that notice of a decision varying leave to remain  under
             section 3(3)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971 where there is  no
             right of appeal was communicated to the person  concerned  for
             it to be effective. Where there is no  "immigration  decision"
             the Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations  2003  do  not  apply.
             Communication  would  be  effective  if  made  to   a   person
             authorised to receive it on that person's behalf, see Hosier v
             Goodall [1962] 1 All E.R.  30,  but  the  Secretary  of  State
             cannot rely upon deemed postal service."

       . This situation is not directly comparable as an email  request  for
         further information does not have the  status  of  a  notice  of  a
         decision varying leave. However it could rarely be possible to even
         find deemed service of an email without a copy of the email.  As Mr
         Ehtesham Khan pointed out the email could have  been  sent  to  the
         wrong email address or the sender could  have  misspelt  the  email
         address given. In a case such as this where the decision  turns  on
         whether the appellant provided requested information there must  be
         more evidence than just an assertion that an email had been sent.

       . Mr Nath submitted that the appellant should have made  his  Pearson
         scores available  at  the  time  of  the  application.  However  Mr
         Ehtesham Khan contended that neither Appendix O, submitted  by  the
         Mr Walker at the previous hearing, nor the  application  form  told
         the appellant how to do this. It is not clear whether the appellant
         could  have  made  his  scores  available  at  the  time   of   his
         application. It may be that the Pearson website told him how to  do
         this, however there is no evidence to indicate  that  this  is  the
         case. If the appellant should have made his score available  online
         at the date of the  application  then  it  is  not  clear  why  the
         respondent did not check the Pearson website upon  receipt  of  the
         application before emailing the appellant on 4 July 2013. It is not
         clear whether the email said to have been sent to the appellant  on
         4 July 2013 was the first time it would have been explained to  the
         appellant how to make the scores available.

       . I further note that the version of Appendix O provided by Mr Walker
         at the previous hearing dates from 20  November  2013  whereas  the
         application in this case was made on 7 June 2013 and  the  decision
         was made on 13 August 2013.

       . I am satisfied that there is a lacuna in the evidence  in  relation
         to this issue.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  appears  to  have
         decided that the appellant could have  made  the  scores  available
         online at the time of his application and that he failed to respond
         to  the  email  which  was  properly  sent.   However   there   was
         insufficient evidence on which to  base  such  findings.  In  these
         circumstances I am satisfied that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         made an error of law. I therefore set aside the First-tier Tribunal
         Judge's decision.

       . In light of the gaps in the evidence as to  the  procedures  to  be
         followed in relation to the respondent accessing the  Pearson  test
         scores online and the lack of evidence as to  the  content  of  the
         email of 4 July 2013 I agreed to adjourn the hearing to  allow  the
         parties to obtain further evidence  to  enable  me  to  remake  the
         decision.

 3. I directed that the parties file further evidence as follows;

       . all witness statements and documentary evidence upon  which  it  is
         intended to rely at the hearing

       . a copy of the relevant Immigration Rules applicable at the date  of
         the application and decision in this case

       . information in relation to the procedures applicable for making the
         appellant's Pearson test scores available to the respondent at  the
         relevant time.

       . The respondent was further directed to provide a copy of the  email
         sent to the appellant on 4 July 2013 or  alternatively  information
         in relation to the respondent's  procedure  for  accessing  Pearson
         test scores at the relevant time.

 4. At the resumed hearing on 10 February 2015 Mr Nath submitted a copy  of
    the appellant's Parson Test scores which he has accessed online  and  a
    copy of Appendix O as it applied at the date of the  decision  appealed
    against. Mr Nath advised that he has been unable to obtain  a  copy  of
    the email recorded as having been sent to the appellant on 4 July 2013.
    He also said that he understands  that  the  Pearson  Test  scores  are
    assigned  by  way  of  a  system  between  the  Home  Office  and   the
    institution.

 5. It seems that there is no further evidence  available  in  relation  to
    this issue. I therefore  determine  the  issue  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before me.

 6. There is no evidence before me to  establish  that  the  appellant  was
    informed when making his application  that  he  needed  to  assign  his
    Pearson Test score to the respondent. There is nothing in the Rules  or
    on the application form to advise him that he needed to do so. There is
    no evidence that the respondent  checked  the  Pearson  website  before
    sending the appellant the email on 4  July  2013,  this  is  a  further
    indication that the appellant was not expected to assign his scores  at
    the time of the application.

 7. Whilst there is a case record that a caseworker emailed  the  appellant
    there is no copy of the email to provide evidence that it was  sent  to
    the right  address  and  I  cannot  therefore  be  satisfied  that  the
    appellant received the email in light of his  contention  that  he  did
    not.

 8. In these circumstances the respondent made the decision  of  13  August
    2013 without evidence which could have been available at  the  time  of
    the decision  had  the  appellant  known  to  make  it  available.  The
    respondent's decision is therefore not  in  accordance  with  the  law.
    Accordingly I allow the appeal to the extent that the  application  for
    leave to remain remains outstanding before the Secretary of State.



Conclusion:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on point of law.

I set the decision aside and remake it by allowing it  only  to  the  extent
that the application remains outstanding before the Secretary of State.



Signed      Date: 10 February 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

