
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31663/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 May 2017                              |On 8 June 2017                   |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          SYED MAHMUD TANVIR AHAMED
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr M Hossain of Counsel instructed by Direct Access


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as "the Applicant" is a citizen of
    Bangladesh born on 3 May 1978.  His immigration history is set  out  in
    the Reasons for Refusal Letter of  10  September  2015  issued  by  the
    Appellant (the SSHD).  In brief, he arrived on  27  January  2015  with
    leave to enter as a student.  Subsequent grants of further  leave  were
    made, and ultimately on 27 March 2015 he applied for  indefinite  leave
    to remain  based  on  ten  years'  continuous  lawful  residence.   The
    immigration history set out in the SSHD's Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
    did not disclose the Applicant had not  made  timely  applications  for
    further leave or at any point not had some form of leave.

 2. The basis for the SSHD's refusal was she considered the  Applicant  had
    submitted a TOEIC from the Educational Testing Service (ETS) which  had
    been fraudulently obtained and therefore his presence was not conducive
    to the public good and the application was refused by way of  reference
    to paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 3. On 23 September 2015 the Applicant appealed under  Section  82  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).
     By a decision promulgated on 21 October 2016 Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Swaniker found the Applicant had not  employed  deception  and
    that the TOEIC was genuine.  She went on to allow  the  appeal  against
    refusal of indefinite leave under paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  She  did  not  separately  address  any  claim  based  on   the
    Applicant's private and family life outside the Immigration Rules under
    Article 8 of the European Convention.

 4. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on three grounds. On 28 March 2017
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Robertson granted permission but  only
    on the first ground, namely that the only ground of appeal  would  have
    been by reference to Section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998  and  that
    the decision resulted in a  breach  of  the  Applicant's  rights  under
    Article 8.

Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal

 5. The SSHD renewed the application for permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal and by a decision  of  20  April  2017  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Canavan affirmed Judge Robertson's decision  to  refuse  permission  to
    appeal on grounds other than the first ground and in  relation  to  the
    first ground stated:-

         First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson granted permission to appeal in
         relation to the first ground of appeal,  which  asserted  that  the
         Judge had no jurisdiction because the Appellant  did  not  in  fact
         have a  right  of  appeal  because  his  previous  leave  had  been
         curtailed in an earlier decision (the exact date is  still  unclear
         from the confused chronology in the grounds).  No mention  of  this
         decision was made in the PF1 or the immigration history outlined in
         the decision letter.  There is no record of this issue being raised
         before the First-tier Tribunal.  Nothing  in  the  decision  letter
         indicated that the Appellant had no right of  appeal,  indeed,  the
         application was treated as an application to extend leave to remain
         and the Appellant was accordingly given a right of appeal.  In  the
         absence of any evidence to show that a valid  curtailment  decision
         was made and served on the Appellant before he made the application
         for Indefinite Leave to Remain on 27 March 2015 I have some  doubts
         about the merits of  the  first  ground  of  appeal,  nevertheless,
         permission has already been granted  in  relation  to  that  point.
         Whether the First-tier  Tribunal  did  in  fact  have  jurisdiction
         clearly is a material issue.

 6. The Applicant was present and  I  explained  to  him  the  purpose  and
    procedure of an "Error of Law" hearing.  Mr Norton for the SSHD  stated
    he had only just seen the permission decision of Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Canavan.  The SSHD was unable to show any evidence that a  decision  to
    curtail the Applicant's previous leave had ever been  made  or  served.
    It was clear from the reasons for  refusal  accompanying  the  decision
    leading to the present appeal that the SSHD's decision had been reached
    without  reference  to  any  curtailment.   In  the  circumstances  the
    Respondent accepted the  Tribunal  would  have  little  option  but  to
    consider the Applicant had applied for indefinite leave in time.

 7. I noted there was no challenge to the findings of Judge Swaniker on the
    TOEIC issue.  I also noted the Applicant's application leading  to  the
    decision under appeal had been made before 6 April 2015  and  that  the
    transitional provisions of  Article  9  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014
    (Commencement No. 3, Transitional and Saving Provisions) Order 2014  as
    amended by Article 8(2) of the Commencement No. 4 Order applied so that
    the appeal was against a decision under the Immigration Rules  and  not
    solely on human rights grounds.

Conclusion

 8. In the light of the SSHD's not showing the Applicant's leave  had  been
    curtailed, the sole ground for permission to appeal does  not  disclose
    any material error of law in the Judge's decision  and  accordingly  it
    shall stand.

Anonymity

 9. There was no request for an anonymity order or  direction  and,  having
    considered the appeal, I find none is warranted.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law  and
shall stand.  The appeal of the Applicant is therefore allowed.


Signed/Official                                                        Crest
Date 11. v. 2017

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
