
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/31885/2014
     IA/31890/2014
     IA/31896/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 June 2015                      |On 15 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     hk
                                     ak
                                     pj
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Pipe, instructed by D & A Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondents are citizens of India.  The  third  respondent  is  the
    child (born 2006)  of  the  first  and  second  respondents.   I  shall
    hereafter refer to  the  respondents  as  the  appellants  and  to  the
    appellant as the respondent (as they appeared respectively  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2.  By  decisions  dated  14  August  2013,  the  respondent  refused  the
    appellants' applications for leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  V  A  Lowe)
    which, in a decision promulgated on 3 November 2014 allowed the  appeal
    of the third appellant under the Immigration Rules and the  appeals  of
    the first and second appellants on  human  rights  grounds  (Article  8
    ECHR).  The Secretary of State now appeals,  with  permission,  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 3. The decision of the judge is extremely thorough and lengthy.   However,
    the point taken by the Secretary  of  State  on  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is relatively narrow and concerns the judge's  application  of
    HC 395 (as amended), paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).

         276ADE (1).  The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave
         to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the
         date of application, the applicant:

         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
             UK  for  at  least  7  years  (discounting   any   period   of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK.

 4. At the Upper Tribunal hearing, Mr Mills, for the  Secretary  of  State,
    did not seek to argue that the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was lacking in adequate reasons or that the reasons were perverse
    in the face of the evidence.  Rather, he attacked the approach  of  the
    judge to the proper construction of  "reasonableness"  under  paragraph
    276ADE.  He submitted that the judge had, in effect, conflated  Section
    55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act   2009   with
    "reasonableness".  He submitted that "reasonableness" of requiring  the
    child leaving the United Kingdom should be determined  according  to  a
    wider and more holistic analysis of all the circumstances in  the  case
    and not simply those appertaining to the best interests of  the  child.
    Mr Pipe, for the appellants, submitted that  there  had  been  no  such
    conflation.  He argued that the conclusion reached  by  the  judge  was
    plainly available to her on the evidence.

 5. I reserved my determination.

 6. I state at the  outset  that  the  judge's  decision  and  reasons  are
    exemplary in their detailed analysis of all the relevant evidence.  The
    judge has acknowledged  that  the  appeals  of  the  second  and  third
    appellants succeed under Article 8 ECHR because they follow on from the
    fact that the first appellant, in the judge's  analysis,  succeeded  in
    satisfying the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE.   Not  surprisingly,
    therefore, she has concentrated in her decision  on  the  circumstances
    surrounding the third appellant, an 8 year  old  child  from  whom  the
    judge correctly  observed  [42]  "the  parents  cannot  be  separated."
    Further, it was plainly right for the judge to consider Section  55  as
    part of her analysis.  I am satisfied that the judge  did  not  confuse
    and conflate Section 55 with the "reasonableness test" under  paragraph
    276ADE.  I say that because she has in at least two  instances  in  the
    course of the decision made it clear that the tests were  separate  and
    different.  At  [38],  the  judge  wrote,  "as  I  consider  the  third
    appellant fulfils paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of HC 395 I do  not  need  to
    consider more widely the best interests of the  third  appellant  as  a
    separate issue."  That sentence is slightly confusing (indeed, Mr Mills
    relied upon it in support of his own argument) but I consider  that  it
    indicates that the judge believed (rightly) that she did  not  need  to
    consider Section 55 and the best interests of the child having  already
    incorporated that analysis in her consideration  of  paragraph  276ADE.
    Secondly, at [30], the judge wrote, "the question is whether  it  would
    not be reasonable to  expect  the  third  appellant  to  leave  the  UK
    informed by her best interests and the requirements  of  the  statutory
    duty towards her in relation to the components set out in the  code  of
    practice in paragraph 24 above."  The code of practice referred  to  is
    Every Child Matters: Change for Children.  The  passage  which  I  have
    quoted indicates  that  the  judge  did  not  consider  Section  55  as
    synonymous with the test of  "reasonableness";  rather,  she  correctly
    considered that her analysis of paragraph 276ADE  should  be  "informed
    by" Section 55.  Moreover, it is plain that the  judge  had  regard  to
    what she found  was  the  "somewhat  unusual"  level  of  activity  and
    connections which the third appellant  had  outside  her  family  home.
    Such a finding was clearly available to the judge on the evidence.

 7. The judge also did not err in law by regarding  the  third  appellant's
    private life as an  important  factor  in  her  analysis  of  paragraph
    276ADE.  I also record that the judge's  even-handed  approach  to  the
    evidence is impressive.  Her analysis of the report of Ms  Seymour,  an
    independent social worker, was nuanced and careful.   The  judge  noted
    [36] that Ms Seymour "did not  base  her  overall  conclusions  on  the
    parents' views."  Likewise, the judge  did  not  base  her  conclusions
    solely upon Ms Seymour's report but, rather, on a proper assessment  of
    all the evidence.   Paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  clearly  provides  for  a
    child, who has spent at least seven years living in the United Kingdom,
    to remain in this country subject to the test of "reasonableness";  the
    Secretary of State's grounds are, in my opinion,  little  more  than  a
    disagreement with the  judge's  findings  and  appear  to  exclude  the
    possibility of any  child  in  the  third  appellant's  situation  from
    acquiring leave to remain.  I find  that  there  is  no  error  in  the
    judge's decision as regards the third appellant and that  her  decision
    to allow the appeals of the first and second appellants  on  Article  8
    ECHR grounds in consequence was also free of legal error.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.



Signed   Date 10 July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
