
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31196/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th September 2015                       |On 23rd September 2015        |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            VICTOR JAMES MARTINS
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R O Ojukotola, Counsel, instructed by SLA
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. The Appellant before  me  is  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department who was the Respondent at the First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    Respondent before me is Mr Victor James Martin, the  Appellant  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  For the sake of simplicity I shall refer  to  the
    parties as they were known in the Tribunal below.

 2. The Respondent appeals the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in which
    Judge Oakley allowed the Appellant's appeal outright on  the  basis  of
    findings of fact to the point that the Appellant is an extended  family
    member of his European national Sponsor as a result of the enjoyment of
    a durable relationship.

 3. The grounds complain that the judge exceeded their  authority  in  that
    context because there is a  discretion  relevant  to  the  issue  of  a
    residence card to somebody who  is  in  a  durable  relationship  which
    involves an exercise of discretion which is not within the jurisdiction
    of the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. There was no issue before me that the challenge has determinative merit
    and the parties were in agreement that I should set the decision of the
    Tribunal aside to the  extent  that  it  has  been  allowed  under  the
    Immigration Rules and remake the decision to the point that the  appeal
    is allowed to the limited extent that the matter  is  remitted  to  the
    Secretary of State for the consideration of the exercise of discretion.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the Tribunal is set aside to the extent  that  it  has  been
allowed under the Immigration Rules and I  remake  the  decision  so  as  to
allow the appeal to the limited extent that the matter is  remitted  to  the
Secretary of State for the consideration of the exercise of discretion.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

