
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/31425/2015
       IA/31430/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 October 2016                             |On 12 October 2016            |
|Extempore                                     |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          SACHI JIGNESHKUMAR PATEL
                        DIMPALBEN JIGNESHKUMAR PATEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss F Shaw, Counsel, instructed by Pasha Law
Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweeney promulgated on 30 March 2016. In that
    appeal Judge Sweeney allowed the appeals of Ms Patel and  her  daughter
    against the decisions of the Secretary of State to refuse them  further
    leave to remain,  the  decision  being  taken  pursuant  to  paragraphs
    322(1A) and 322(2) of the Immigration Rules in respect of the principal
    appellant, the  allegation  being  that  she  had  obtained  her  TOEIC
    certificate from ETS by deception in particular by the use of  a  proxy
    test taker. It is clear that that was the sole issue before the  First-
    tier Tribunal as has been confirmed by  Miss  Fijiwala  and  Miss  Shaw
    before me this morning.

 2. The judge found in particular that he was not satisfied by the  generic
    evidence produced by the Secretary of State, in this case  specifically
    the evidence  of  Mr  Millington  and  Miss  Collings,  preferring  the
    evidence of Dr Harrison.

 3. It is of note that Dr Harrison's evidence was not challenged before the
    Secretary of State.  The judge found at paragraph 49  of  his  decision
    that that

         "In light of  the  limited  evidence  of  Mr  Millington  and  Miss
         Collings and the evidence of Dr Harrison I am similarly  driven  to
         the conclusion that the respondent  has  failed  to  discharge  the
         burden upon of her of establishing that the appellant in this  case
         procured a TOEIC certificate by dishonesty."

 4. In this case the decision in SM & Qadir v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden  of  Proof)  [2016]  UKUT  229
    (IAC) was not available in its full version to the  Tribunal  had  been
    brought to the First-tier Tribunal's attention  by  way  of  the  press
    release issued by the President.

 5. The Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  this
    decision on the  grounds  primarily  that  the  judge  had  not  proper
    consideration to the specific evidence  identifying  the  appellant  as
    somebody  who  had  exercised  deception,  that  the  three  statements
    provided  and  the  spreadsheet  evidence   containing   the   specific
    information provided a clear explanation of how the fraud was  detected
    and that the judge had failed to provide adequate reasons for rejecting
    the respondent's evidence.

 6. Before me Miss  Fijiwala  submitted  in  particular  that  the  judge's
    conclusions at paragraph 49 were wrong given that it was  evident  from
    SM & Qadir, particularly at paragraph 68, that the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    that case had said that it was not  persuaded  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's  evidence  was  such  that  the  evidential  burden  had   been
    discharged. They said:

         "By admittedly  a  narrow  margin,  were  are  satisfied  that  the
         Secretary of State has discharged this burden. The effect  of  this
         is that there  is  a  burden  again,  an  evidential  one  and  the
         appellants are phrasing an innocent explanation."

 7. Whilst I accept that that was again followed in  the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in  Shahzad  and  Choudhury  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  615  at
    paragraphs [22] to [26], there is  an  important  distinction  in  this
    case. It was  of  course  open  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  have
    challenged the evidence of Dr Harrison before the First-tier  Tribunal.
    For whatever reason she did not do so. That is  not  the  position  she
    adopted before the Upper Tribunal in SM & Qadir.

 8. Accordingly, and bearing in mind that no finding of fact by  the  Upper
    Tribunal could in these circumstances be binding as  a  "precedent"  it
    was clearly open to the judge to prefer the evidence of Dr Harrison  to
    the evidence put forward by the Secretary of State.   I  consider  that
    given the failure to challenge that evidence that the judge's reasoning
    for preferring her evidence was sufficient and that accordingly it  was
    open to the  judge  to  find  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    established the burden as identified  in  SM  &  Qadir  at  [68].   The
    reasoning is I consider adequate  and  sufficient  and  it  is  on  the
    evidence put before that judge a sustainable conclusion.

 9. Further, the judge set out at [51]  to  [53]  further  reasons  why  he
    conceded that it had not  been  demonstrated  that  the  appellant  had
    cheated using a TOEIC test.

Notice of Decision

10. Accordingly, for these reasons I consider  that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error of law and I
    uphold it.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date:  11 October 2016
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul





