
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/31802/2014
                                                               IA/31813/2014
                                                               IA/31818/2014
                                                               IA/31823/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 December 2015                  |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               1) AO (Nigeria)
                               2) ot (Nigeria)
                               3) MO (Nigeria)
                               4) VO (Nigeria)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Solomon Tampuri, Solicitor, Tamsons Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Dineen sitting at Hatton Cross on 6 November
    2014) dismissing their appeals against the decision to remove  them  as
    persons subject to administrative  removal  under  Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, their human rights (Article 8)  claims
    having  been  refused.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity
    direction in favour of the appellants, and I consider it is appropriate
    that the  appellants  continue  to  be  accorded  anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellants are all nationals of  Nigeria.   The  first  and  second
    appellants are husband and wife respectively, and the third and  fourth
    appellants are their children.  The third appellant, M, was born in the
    UK on 18 February 2006 and the fourth appellant V was born in the UK on
    10 May 2008.

 3. Both their parents have adverse immigration histories.   Their  father,
    the first appellant, arrived in the United Kingdom on  24  March  2000,
    and claimed asylum.  His asylum claim was refused on 13 February  2004,
    and his appeal against that decision was dismissed on 19 May 2004.   On
    23 February 2005 consideration was given to whether their father  could
    qualify for leave to remain under the legacy exercise, and he was found
    to be ineligible.

 4. According to the immigration history set out in the decision  of  Judge
    Dineen, which is not challenged by way of appeal, the second  appellant
    said that she entered the United Kingdom (illegally) in 2001 and  2002.
    She is recorded as having made a claim for asylum on 29 May  2006,  but
    she later withdrew this claim.

 5. On 16 September 2013 the first appellant submitted  an  application  on
    behalf of himself and the remaining appellants  for  leave  to  remain.
    The application was refused without a right of  appeal  on  23  October
    2013.   After  further  correspondence,  the   respondent   agreed   to
    reconsider the application for further leave to remain, and on 22  July
    2014 she gave her reasons for refusing, after further consideration, to
    grant the family leave to remain, and for making directions  for  their
    removal.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 6. At the hearing before Judge Dineen, the appellants were represented  by
    Mr Rahman of Counsel who was instructed by Tamsons Legal Services.  The
    judge received oral evidence from the first and second appellants,  who
    were cross-examined.

 7. In his  subsequent  decision,  he  set  out  the  appellants'  case  at
    paragraphs [9] to [26].  Counsel accepted that none of  the  appellants
    could succeed in their own right under Appendix FM of  the  Rules.   He
    also accepted  that  none  of  the  appellants  other  than  the  third
    appellant M could potentially succeed under Rule 276ADE.  He  submitted
    that M's appeal should be allowed  under  Rule  276ADE,  and  that  the
    appeals of the other appellants should be allowed  in  consequence,  on
    the basis that they should remain with M in the UK.  In paragraph  [26]
    of his decision, Judge  Dineen  noted  that  Counsel  had  submitted  a
    manuscript skeleton argument, which  incorporated  the  submissions  to
    which he had referred previously, and which emphasised  the  length  of
    time during which the appellants had lived in  the  UK.   Reliance  was
    placed on the decision of the Upper Tribunal in EA [2011] UKUT 315  and
    Azimi-Moayed and Others [2013] UKUT 00197.

 8. As set out at paragraphs [27] to [30] of Judge Dineen's  decision,  the
    Presenting Officer said it would be reasonable for  M  to  relocate  to
    Nigeria, as his family had ties to the culture of that  country;  there
    was evidence of suitable educational facilities in Nigeria; it was  not
    credible the family had been supported by the church for a long  period
    as they had stated; and the first and second appellants, who had sought
    to keep their situation "under the radar", were not credible witnesses.



 9. The judge set out his findings at paragraph [31] onwards.  He found the
    first and second appellants to  be  generally  not  credible  witnesses
    because they had been knowingly in the UK illegally for  a  significant
    period and because, in the absence  of  supporting  evidence  from  any
    official of their church, he did not find it credible  the  church  had
    been supporting them since 2004.  He also did not accept it would  have
    been possible for them to live, as they stated, on  �60  per  week  and
    gifts made to them by church members.

10. He found, as was accepted, that the first and second appellants  failed
    under the partner and parent routes of Appendix FM, and also  that  the
    third and fourth appellants failed under the child  route  of  Appendix
    FM.  It was also clear, as was accepted, that all except M failed under
    the provisions of Rule 276ADE.  Whilst M  satisfied  the  provision  of
    that Rule in relation to his length of stay in  the  UK,  it  was  also
    necessary for him to satisfy the test that it would not  be  reasonable
    to expect him to leave the UK.  The judge continued:
         "37. While [M] satisfies the provision of that Rule in relation  to
             his length of stay in the UK, it is also necessary for him  to
             satisfy the test that it would not be reasonable to expect him
             to leave the UK.
         38.  I approach this issue on the basis that the test is whether it
             would be reasonable from M's standpoint for him to  leave  the
             UK.
         39.  The question has to be resolved as a balancing  exercise,  and
             it is necessary  to  take  into  account  Section  55  of  the
             Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  which  requires
             that  the  Secretary  of  State's  functions  in  relation  to
             immigration are  discharged  having  regard  to  the  need  to
             safeguard and promote the welfare of children who are  in  the
             United Kingdom.  I take that into account.
         40.  I take account as stated by the Upper Tribunal in paragraph 15
             of the decision in Azimi-Moayed, that it is not the case  that
             the best interests principle means it is automatically in  the
             interests of any child to be permitted to  remain  in  the  UK
             irrespective of other circumstances.
         41.  I approach the  balancing  exercise  on  the  basis  that  the
             criticisms of the conduct of the children's parents are to  be
             disregarded.
         42.  The starting point is that M's best interests would be  served
             by living with his parents.
         43.   I  then  consider  whether  those  best  interests  would  be
             outweighed by other considerations, if  his  parents  were  in
             Nigeria.
         44.  The  above  approach  is,  as  I  find,  consistent  with  the
             requirements of the decision in E-A referred to above.
         45.  I take into account the following matters:-
             (i)  M has spent his whole life in the UK.
             (ii) This has included his school life.
             (iii)    However, he is at present only at the  primary  stage
                  of his education.  There is sparse information  about  how
                  he is progressing at school.  While  the  first  appellant
                  states that he is doing very well,  there  is  nothing  of
                  substance provided from the school, or other sources  such
                  as,  for  example,  sports  clubs,  to  show   exceptional
                  performance.
             (iv) It is generally thought that the seven years from the age
                  of 4 are vital in the development  of  a  child's  private
                  life, as expressed in the appeal of Azimi-Moayed, referred
                  to above.  Michael is two years short of that period.
             (v)  I am satisfied  that  M  is  still  young  enough  to  be
                  flexible in his ability to adapt to changes in his  family
                  circumstances.  Many children  have  to  move  with  their
                  family to different places around  the  world,  and  I  am
                  satisfied that there is no reason to  suggest  that  M  is
                  less able than any  other  child  to  adapt  to  doing  so
                  together with his family.
             (vi) I am not satisfied that the schools in Nigeria would only
                  operate through the medium of  the  Yoruba  language.   No
                  evidence as to the limitations of the Nigerian educational
                  system was adduced, and I note that the observation of the
                  Upper Tribunal at paragraph 11 in the appeal of  E-A  that
                  there are English speaking schools in  Nigeria  which  the
                  children in that case would attend.
             (vii)    In any event, I am satisfied that,  with  his  family
                  background and his understanding of  Yoruba,  M  could  if
                  necessary learn to read, speak and write in that language.
             (viii)   I am not satisfied that M  has  developed  a  private
                  life in the culture and traditions of the UK  which  would
                  make it unreasonable for him to go  to  Nigeria  with  his
                  family.  In particular, considerations  such  as  like  or
                  dislike of any particular foods are, as  I  find,  not  of
                  significance.
             (ix) I take into account that, by the experience of living  in
                  the UK, M has acquired the useful facility of the  English
                  language, and has had a  good  educational  start  at  his
                  primary school.  These things  would  stand  him  in  good
                  stead in Nigeria.
             (x)  I also take into account that many children  of  M's  age
                  living in Nigeria do so satisfactorily.
             (xi) The first and second appellant have the advantages  of  a
                  substantial period of residence in the UK which  would  be
                  advantageous in equipping them for  making  a  living  and
                  supporting their family in Nigeria.
         46.  In all the above circumstances, I find that  M's  claim  under
             paragraph  276ADE  does  not  succeed,  because  it  would  be
             reasonable to expect him to leave the UK.
         47.  Therefore no broader Article 8 issues arise in relation to the
             family.
         48.  I make an  anonymity  direction  in  order  to  avoid  what  I
             consider to be the remote possibility of any person in Nigeria
             having any adverse interest in any of the appellants."

The Initial Refusal of Permission to Appeal

11. The appellants applied for permission to  appeal,  on  the  ground  the
    judge had failed to give adequate reasons why the appellants' case  did
    not raise broader Article  8  issues  and  had  failed  to  follow  the
    jurisprudence in the judgment of Razgar and by so doing  had  erred  in
    law.

12. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Chambers
    on 29 May 2015.  The judge had correctly  given  reasons  deciding  the
    appeal failed under the Immigration Rules in paragraphs [31]  to  [46].
    The judge had reached a conclusion expressed in  paragraph  [47]  after
    considering the circumstances of  each  of  the  appellants  and  their
    combined arrangements as a family unit including the best  interest  of
    the child members:
         "In such circumstances,  absent  of  finding  there  was  something
         exceptional necessitating such an exercise, it was not incumbent on
         the judge as the grounds suggest to  carry  another  assessment  of
         private life arrangements under Strasbourg jurisprudence."

The Eventual Grant of Permission

13. On 3 September 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Allen  granted  permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:
         "It was found that the judge did not give adequate consideration to
         the Article 8 rights of the family members  other  than  the  third
         appellant whose potential claim under  the  Immigration  Rules  was
         considered in detail.  Arguably their appeals merited more detailed
         consideration than the very brief statement at paragraph 47 of  the
         determination that  in  effect  their  appeals  could  not  succeed
         because the third appellant's appeal did not succeed."

The Rule 24 Response

14. On 18 September 2015 Tony Melvin of the Specialist Appeals Team settled
    a Rule 24 response on behalf of the Secretary of  State,  opposing  the
    appeal.  He submitted the appeal before Judge Dineen  was  put  on  the
    basis that none  of  the  appellants  bar  M  could  come  within  Rule
    276ADE(1)(vi) and as such the other family members  were  parasitic  on
    his appeal.  While it was accepted the judge had not considered all the
    individual family members with an in depth Article 8 assessment, for an
    Article 8  consideration  to  take  place  it  was  necessary  to  show
    compelling circumstances of which there appeared to be none: see  Singh
    at paragraph [60] and Nagre at paragraph [30].

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

15. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out,  Mr  Tampuri  developed  the  arguments  raised  in  the   renewed
    application for permission to appeal, and Mr Tarlow adhered to the Rule
    24 response which had been settled by his colleague.

Discussion

16. In conceding that the parents did not qualify for leave  to  remain  on
    private life grounds under Rule  276ADE,  Counsel  was  conceding  that
    there would not be very significant obstacles to their integration into
    the country to which they would have to go if required to leave the UK.



17. Although the first appellant's evidence was that  he  feared  his  life
    would be at risk on return to Nigeria, as the judge noted at  paragraph
    [19] of his decision, this was not a matter upon which Counsel  invited
    the judge to place any weight.

18. The second appellant's evidence was that she had come to the  UK  under
    distressing circumstances, having been a victim  of  trafficking.   The
    judge noted this evidence at paragraph [20].  But  again,  Counsel  did
    not invite the judge to place any weight on this evidence as presenting
    a significant obstacle to the second appellant's ability to reintegrate
    into Nigeria  after  a  lengthy  absence  from  the  country.   In  his
    manuscript skeleton argument, Counsel said that  the  second  appellant
    had her mother in Nigeria, who lived with her own  sister,  (presumably
    the second appellant's aunt).  Counsel added that the mother would  not
    be able to provide the family with support should they have to  return.
    But he did not submit that, as  a  result  of  this  asserted  lack  of
    support from the mother, the first and second appellant  would  not  be
    able  to  maintain  and  accommodate  themselves  and  their   children
    adequately in Nigeria.

19. In paragraph 45(xi) the judge made a finding of fact which has not been
    challenged by way of appeal.   This  was  that  the  first  and  second
    appellants had had the advantage of a substantial period  of  residence
    in the UK which would be advantageous in equipping them  for  making  a
    living and supporting their family in Nigeria.

20. Given this particular finding of fact, there was  nothing  more  to  be
    said in respect of the first and second  appellants'  Article  8  claim
    outside the Rules.  Their respective lengths of residence in the United
    Kingdom did not avail them in circumstances where:
      a) they did not qualify on  long  residence  grounds  under  any  sub-
         paragraph of Rule 276ADE;
      b) they had never had lawful leave to enter or remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom; and
      c) they were not financially independent.

21. The fact that they spoke English, and had relatives in the UK, and  had
    close ties with a church whose congregation consisted of  some  80%  or
    90% of Nigerian people did  not  disclose  a  viable  Article  8  claim
    outside the Rules.  The threshold for the engagement  of  private  life
    rights is relatively low, and so it is undoubtedly true that  questions
    1 and 2 of the Razgar test fell to be answered in favour of  the  first
    and second appellants with regard to the private life  which  they  had
    established  unlawfully  in  the  United  Kingdom.   However,  both  by
    reference  to  domestic  and  Strasbourg  jurisprudence,  and  also  by
    reference to Section 117B of the 2002 Act,  there  could  only  be  one
    answer to the question of whether their removal was proportionate, once
    it had been determined that it was reasonable to expect child M  to  go
    with his parents and younger sibling to Nigeria.

22. In short,  as  submitted  in  the  Rule  24  response,  there  were  no
    compelling circumstances which could possibly render the removal of the
    family a disproportionate outcome.

23. As for child V, all the reasons as to why it was reasonable for child M
    to return to Nigeria applied with at least equal force to her,  as  was
    obvious and did not need to be spelled out.

24. In conclusion, there was no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  succinct
    statement at paragraph [47] that there were no broader Article 8 issues
    arising in relation to other members of the  family  unit.   It  was  a
    classic piggy backing claim, and the fate  of  the  first,  second  and
    fourth appellants hung entirely on the outcome of the third appellant's
    appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

