
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31630/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th March 2019                            |On 2nd May 2019               |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                  jane [n]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Uganda born on 14th March 1979.   On  3rd
    December 2012 the Appellant was issued with a  residence  card  as  the
    unmarried partner of Mr [CD], an EEA national exercising treaty  rights
    in the United Kingdom.  On 9th September 2014 the Appellant applied for
    leave  to  remain  on  the  grounds  of  domestic  violence  and   this
    application was refused with no right of appeal on 14th November  2014.
    On 14th  September  2015  the  Appellant  was  served  with  notice  of
    revocation of her EEA residence card on the basis that as the Appellant
    had confirmed she no longer was the unmarried partner of Mr [D] she did
    not meet the requirements of Regulation 8(5) of the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Cameron sitting at Taylor House on 1st December 2017.  In
    a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  14th  December   2017   the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  5th  January
    2018.  Those grounds contended firstly that there had been a failure to
    consider the right of permanent residence and that an  error  had  been
    made placing the burden of proof on the Appellant  and  secondly,  that
    there had been a  failure  to  consider  domestic  violence  under  the
    Charter  of  Fundamental  Freedoms  and  a  failure  to  carry  out   a
    proportionality assessment.

 4. On 8th May 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert granted permission to
    appeal.

 5. That appeal came initially before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Hall
    sitting at Field House on 6th July 2018.  In  a  decision  and  reasons
    dated 15th July 2018 Judge Hall found that the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was  set  aside  and  he
    substituted a fresh decision allowing the appeal.

 6. On 6th August 2018 pursuant to Rule 44 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 the Secretary of State wrote to the Tribunal.  The
    Secretary of State noted that Judge Hall  had  allowed  the  appeal  by
    reference to the fact that the Appellant had been held to have acquired
    a permanent right of residence under the EEA Regulations and  Directive
    but that unfortunately  the  submission  accepted  by  Judge  Hall  was
    legally misconceived in a manner recently confirmed  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Macastena v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]
    EWCA Civ 1558 in that the decision misunderstood the domestic framework
    giving effect to the facilitation  of  entry  and  residence  of  other
    family members under Article 3.2 of the Directive.   The  Secretary  of
    State pointed out that unlike the position of family members defined in
    Article 2.2 of the Directive transposed by Regulation 7 extended family
    members (Regulation 8) did not enjoy a right of residence  as  soon  as
    the bare criteria in the Regulation were met  and  that  what  in  fact
    happens is that following extensive examination of their  circumstances
    they are issued with documentation and  are  held  to  be  residing  as
    family members for so long as they continue to meet the requirements of
    the relevant part of Regulation 8 and  have  a  valid  and  uncancelled
    document.

 7. The Secretary of State noted that whilst  there  had  been  a  previous
    finding back in 2012 by Immigration Judge Pullig that the Appellant had
    been in a durable relationship for five years before his  determination
    but this did no more than hold that the requirements of Regulation 8(5)
    had been met for that period.  It was submitted  by  the  Secretary  of
    State that the finding did not, and could not, establish that there had
    been five years' residence as a  "family  member",  as  such  residence
    under Regulation 7(3) was contingent  upon  holding  a  valid  document
    throughout.

 8. Those submissions were considered by Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson on 7th
    September 2018.  Judge Dawson noted that it appeared that the Court  of
    Appeal decision in Macastena had not been drawn to the attention of the
    judge and that in his view had it been it could  have  had  a  material
    effect upon his decision.  In  such  circumstances  he  set  aside  the
    decision of Judge Hall and directed that the appeal  by  the  Appellant
    remained pending to be listed in due course.

 9. At my findings in the error of law decision  at  paragraphs  17  to  19
    inclusive I found that  whilst  noting  the  submissions  made  by  the
    Secretary of State the correct approach was not for  the  Appellant  to
    make a fresh application and that the most practical method of  dealing
    with the appeal was  to  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge solely so far as it relates to the  judge's  failure  to
    consider the issue of domestic violence and the extent to which it  was
    bound  up  with  the  judge's  discretion  on  the  EU   principle   of
    proportionality.  It is that issue alone that comes back before me  for
    hearing.

10. The Appellant appears in this  matter  by  her  instructed  Counsel  Mr
    Palmer.  Mr Palmer is very  familiar  with  this  matter.   Indeed,  he
    appeared before me at the last hearing.  On this occasion the Secretary
    of State appears by his Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Whitwell.

Documents

11. I am provided with the following documents that  were  not  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

      i) An Appellant's bundle of  subjective  evidence  for  the  rehearing
         extending to 25 pages.

     ii)  A  supplemental  bundle  (marked  Appellant's  third  supplemental
         bundle) consisting of 8 pages.

    iii) An Appellant's principal bundle consisting of 136 pages made up  of
         a skeleton argument, a  chronology  and  a  substantive  bundle  of
         authorities.

12. Mr Whitwell provides me with his recent Home Office guidance on victims
    of domestic violence and abuse dated February 2018  and  extracts  from
    the Home Office Guidance on Free Movement  Rights:  retained  right  of
    residence  relating  to  domestic  violence  cases  published  on  14th
    February 2019.

Evidence

13. The Appellant confirmed her witness statements dated 8th September 2014
    and 27th September 2016 as  being  her  evidence-in-chief.   Mr  Palmer
    poses one additional question to her enquiring as to how long  she  has
    been attending Crisis and the Appellant advises she has been  attending
    since January 2016.  She states she has an appointment every two  weeks
    and that she sometimes attends for  additional  therapy  or  to  attend
    activities.

14. In cross-examination Mr Whitwell enquiries as to how the  Appellant  is
    aware that she is a victim  of  domestic  violence  and  the  Appellant
    responds by stating as a result she found herself homeless and she then
    had to go through a friend to find somewhere to live.  When he enquired
    as to whether  there  are  any  police  reports  of  the  violence  the
    Appellant merely states that her husband was intimidating her.

15. Mr Whitwell turns to the Appellant's first witness  statement  and  the
    Appellant confirms that she has tolerated abuse from her partner  since
    2006 but comments that she may not initially have taken it seriously.

16. I am referred to the letter from Look Ahead Care and Support Charitable
    Housing Association dated 31st October 2013 and the Appellant  confirms
    that this was the first organisation that she turned to.  It is put  to
    her by Mr Whitwell that the Appellant has explained three incidents  of
    physical abuse and as to whether that represents all that  took  place.
    The Appellant responds that that is an inaccurate assessment  and  that
    the  abuse  had  been  ongoing  since  2006  and  that  she  was,  when
    interviewed, crying and unable to give a detailed account.   He  refers
    to the rape in 2007 and that she had not mentioned it  because  it  was
    very difficult for her to talk  about  it.   She  emphasises  that  her
    account is not  exaggerated  and  I  note  that  she  became  extremely
    distressed during the questioning.

Submission/Discussion

17. Mr Whitwell divides  his  submissions  into  two  areas.   Firstly,  by
    addressing the facts of domestic violence in this case and secondly  by
    looking at the law.  On the factual scenario Mr Whitwell  accepts  that
    there is evidence from a number of sources and that the  Appellant  has
    given her testimony consistently.  However, he  contends  there  is  no
    evidence from the time that the abuse  allegedly  took  place  that  is
    produced and that all the evidence comes  at  a  later  date  from  the
    Appellant herself.  He submits that the case turns on my assessment  of
    the Appellant's evidence.  He asked me to consider the letter from Look
    Ahead submitting there is a difference expressed  therein  as  to  when
    evidence of the abuse first appeared and also that the letter from Look
    Ahead implies a lower level of severity  of  abuse.   He  asked  me  to
    consider a Home Office document on retained rights of  residence  dated
    14th February 2009 and in particular the section on decision-making and
    the revoking of an existing registration  certificate  or  registration
    card emphasising that letters provided need to be given weight although
    he accepts that I have discretion and that I am entitled  to  apply  my
    own weight to the evidence that has been provided.  He  refers  to  the
    medical evidence and submits that it does  not  mean  necessarily  that
    that Appellant's conditions were attributable to domestic violence  but
    they could have been caused by homelessness.  He asked me to find  that
    factually domestic violence has not been made out.

18. Secondly, he turns to the law and points to submitting that there is no
    provision in the Regulations as  the  Appellant  was  neither  a  civil
    partner nor married, he submits that any  differing  treatment  between
    married and unmarried partners is  not  in  direct  breach  of  the  EU
    principle of equal treatment.  He submits that the correct approach  is
    for the Appellant  to  make  a  fresh  application  for  relief  as  an
    unmarried partner of a victim of domestic violence and  that  the  2016
    Regulations only provide for a retained right of  residence  to  former
    spouses and civil partners and that consequently there is no basis  for
    a durable partner to  retain  a  right  of  residence  for  reasons  of
    domestic violence.  He submits  that  the  Appellant  is  not  for  the
    purpose of the Regulations a family member.

19. In response Mr Palmer submits firstly looking at  the  facts  that  the
    Appellant is a victim of domestic violence and invites me to  say  that
    she is on the  balance  of  probabilities.   He  points  out  that  the
    evidence from Look Ahead is not flawed nor has discrepancies  and  that
    their evidence is  detailed  and  that  the  Appellant's  testimony  is
    accepted as being credible.   He  points  out  that  in  the  documents
    provided for the error of law  hearing  there  was  evidence  that  was
    provided in the bundle that professional  organisations  have  assessed
    the Appellant and that she has been found to be a  credible  victim  of
    domestic violence.  On the facts he asked me to make such a finding.

20. On the law he accepts that  the  Appellant  cannot  succeed  under  the
    Regulations and consequently  it  is  necessary  to  look  at  EEA  law
    generally  and  to  address  the  principles  of  equal  treatment  and
    proportionality.  He submits it is possible to  have  leave  to  remain
    under domestic violence rules as an unmarried partner.  He refers me to
    the  documentation  that  was  made  available  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  He submits that it is appropriate to conclude that it  is  a
    rational decision based on a  proper  interpretation  of  EEA  law  and
    proportionate to allow the appeal and he refers me to the  findings  of
    First-tier Tribunal  Judges  Simpson  and  Fountain  in  an  unreported
    decision from 2012.  He acknowledges that such a  decision  is  neither
    authoritative nor can be binding upon me.

21. He also makes reference to R (Lumsdon and Others) v The Legal  Services
    Board [2015] UKSC 41 and submits it would be disproportionate to revoke
    the Appellant's residence card in these circumstances.  He asked me  to
    allow the appeal.

22. In brief response Mr Whitwell reminds me that domestic violence has not
    been considered at any point and that the best  approach  would  be  to
    remit the matter back to the Secretary of State to reconsider.

Findings

23. The first issue before me is to determine whether or not the  Appellant
    is or is not a victim of domestic violence.  I heard the oral testimony
    of the Appellant and I have considered the documentation that has  been
    provided including correspondence from Look Ahead dating back to  2013.
    I am satisfied having  read  all  the  documents  and  heard  the  oral
    testimony of the Appellant that she is a  credible  witness,  that  her
    evidence is consistent and that she is a victim of domestic violence.

24. The question then arises as to whether or not the Appellant can succeed
    in this action as a matter of law.  I have found  previously  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to consider the issue of  domestic
    violence and the extent to which it was bound up within his  discretion
    on the EU principle of proportionality.  It  is  that  issue  and  that
    alone that I have reheard.  I concluded previously based  on  paragraph
    14 of Judge Cameron's decision that it was before him  albeit  that  it
    has not been in any way addressed.  It does however appear to have been
    at the forefront of the original application.  On  9th  September  2014
    the Appellant had applied for leave to remain on the ground of domestic
    violence and this was refused with no right of appeal on 14th  November
    2014.  Consequent to that  the  Secretary  of  State  reconsidered  the
    Appellant's application for a residence card (previously issued on  3rd
    December 2012) and reasons for revocation of the  residence  card  were
    sent out on 10th September 2015.

25. There is an acceptance by Mr Palmer that the Appellant  cannot  succeed
    under the Regulations.  As is set out clearly in the 2019 free movement
    rights guidance to the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
    2016, the 2016  Regulations  only  provide  for  a  retained  right  of
    residence to former spouses and civil partners and there  is  no  basis
    for a durable partner to retain a right of  residence  for  reasons  of
    domestic violence.  When the relationship between a family  member  and
    their EEA national Sponsor has ended due to domestic violence or  other
    circumstances, then an application can be made to  retain  a  right  of
    residence under Regulation 10(5)(d)(iv) of the 2016 Regulations.

26. Mr Palmer makes two submissions to the approach he considers  I  should
    take in the event that I find the Appellant is  a  victim  of  domestic
    violence.  Firstly, he submits that I can revoke the original  decision
    as being unlawful as the only matter to be taken into account  was  the
    ceasing of the Appellant's relationship  and  therefore  it  should  be
    considered proportionate or alternatively under EU law that she  has  a
    right of residence.  It is his submission that I could either remit the
    matter to the Secretary of  State  for  reconsideration  or  allow  the
    appeal outright.

27. It is Mr Whitwell's  contention  that  the  judge  had  not  considered
    domestic violence at any stage and consequently the correct approach is
    to remit the matter back to the Secretary of State.

28. I agree with the contention made by Mr Whitwell.  The  Regulations  are
    clear and effectively are not challenged.  There has been no finding on
    domestic violence.  I have concluded that the Appellant is a victim  of
    domestic violence.  The Appellant cannot succeed under the  Regulations
    and consequently there are two courses  of  action  open.   Either  the
    Appellant has to submit a fresh application or alternatively the matter
    needs to be considered by the Secretary of State.  Bearing in  mind  my
    finding on domestic violence on the facts the  preferable  approach  is
    the latter.  I consequently remit the matter back to the  Secretary  of
    State for reconsideration.

Notice of Decision

On finding that the Appellant is a victim of domestic violence on the  facts
the appeal is remitted back to the Secretary of State for reconsideration.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 29th April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application has been made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 29th April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

