
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/31857/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Columbus House, Newport   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 19 October 2015                  |On: 23 October 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MARGARET UZERE
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr N Diwnych, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Robinson, Counsel instructed by Calices
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge R Powell in which he allowed the appeal of
    Mrs Uzere, a citizen of  Nigeria,  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse to vary leave to remain. I shall refer to Mrs  Uzere
    as the Applicant, although she was the  Appellant  in  the  proceedings
    below.

 2. The application under appeal was made on 6 June 2014 and was refused by
    reference to paragraph 276 ADE and Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules
    (HC395) and Articles 3 and 8 of the Human Rights Convention on 10  July
    2014.  The Applicant exercised her right of appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  This is the appeal which came  before  Judge  Powell  on  10
    April 2015  and  was  allowed.  The  Secretary  of  State  applied  for
    permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  application  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Reid  on  6  July  2015  in  the
    following terms

         "The  grounds  argue  inter  alia:  the  judge  made   a   material
         misdirection in law by allowing the appeal  under  the  Immigration
         Rules having made findings that the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
         rules.

         It is arguable that the judge's decision allowing the appeal  under
         the Immigration Rules is perverse having found at [14-16] that  the
         Appellant did not meet the requirements of the Rules."

 3. At the hearing before me Mr Diwnych appeared to represent the Secretary
    of State  and  Ms  Robinson  represented  the  Applicant.  Ms  Robinson
    submitted a written skeleton argument.

Background

 4.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the Applicant was born in Nigeria on 3 March 1936.
    She came to the United Kingdom as a visitor on  7  February  2009  with
    leave valid until 25 May 2009. An in time application  to  extend  that
    leave was refused on 23 June 2009. She is widowed and has  been  living
    with her daughter  since  she  came  to  this  country.  The  Applicant
    overstayed her leave to remain before making an application  to  remain
    on human rights grounds. It is the refusal of  that  application  which
    was the subject of the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. At the appeal hearing on  10  April  2015  it  was  accepted  that  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules were not met and indeed there was
    no suggestion to the contrary. Submissions were directed solely to  the
    issue of whether the Respondent's decision was in breach of  Article  8
    ECHR. The Judge found that the decision was in accordance with the  law
    and the Immigration Rules (paragraphs 15 and 16) and went  on  to  deal
    with and allow the appeal by virtue of Article  8  (paragraphs  67  and
    68). The summary in the immediately following paragraph  however  reads
    "The appeal is allowed under the immigration rules".

Submissions

 6. On behalf the Secretary of State Mr Diwnych  said  that  there  was  no
    application to amend the grounds of appeal. He accepted that  the  body
    of the decision and reasons was a consideration under  Article  8  ECHR
    and that it was clearly the intention of the Judge to allow the  appeal
    on that basis.

 7. I did not ask Ms Robinson to address me. I said that the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal would be dismissed it being abundantly  clear  that  the
    effective concluding paragraphs of the decision were paragraphs 67  and
    68.

Error of law

 8. In my judgement the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not
    disclose a material error of law. The facts  are  simple  and  are  not
    disputed and are set out clearly in the decision  and  reasons  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. There is no challenge in the grounds of appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal to the Judge's  assessment  of  the  facts,  to  his
    consideration of those facts or to his  clear  decision  to  allow  the
    appeal by reference to Article 8 ECHR. The ground rely  solely  on  the
    fact that having said that the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
    were not met the Judge went on at the conclusion of  the  decision  and
    reasons to state that the appeal  was  allowed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 9. It could not be more plain in my finding that this concluding  sentence
    "The appeal is allowed under the  immigration  rules"  was  entered  in
    error. The immediately preceding paragraphs following on from  a  fully
    reasoned decision quite clearly show that it was not only the intention
    of the Judge to allow the appeal under Article 8 ECHR but  indeed  that
    this is what he did (at paragraph 68). There is no  material  error  of
    law, there is a slip or typographical error which has  no  effect  upon
    the Judge's unchallenged decision to allow the appeal under  Article  8
    ECHR. The appeal of the Secretary of State is therefore dismissed.

Summary

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law. I dismiss the Secretary of State's  appeal.  The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 68 of the decision and
    reasons to allow this appeal by virtue of Article 8 ECHR stands.


Signed:     Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
