
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31865/2014
                                                               IA/31875/2014
                                                               IA/31880/2014
                                                               IA/31891/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 February 2015                  |On 12 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE THIRLWALL DBE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON


                                   Between

                                    1.  H
                                    2.  W
                                    3.  A
                                    4.  B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Hussain
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are Nigerian citizens.  The first appellant, H,  40,  is
    married to the second appellant  who  is  32.   The  third  and  fourth
    appellants are their sons A, born 4/2/09 and B born on 16/11/2011.  The
    family live together in Swindon,  along  with  the  second  appellant's
    brother, O (dob 18/03/79).  This is their appeal against  the  decision
    of a judge of the  First  Tier  Tribunal  promulgated  on  18/11/  2014
    dismissing their appeal against the decision of the Respondent  not  to
    grant them leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 2. It is the appellants' case that the judge erred in

          i.  failing  to  acknowledge  that  the  first  appellant  had  a
             legitimate expectation to receive indefinite leave  to  remain
             and

         ii. failing to have regard to the duty  in  section  117A  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

    Permission to appeal was granted on both grounds  by  a  judge  of  the
    First Tier Tribunal on 12/1/15.

Background

 3. We take the chronology from the decision of the FTT judge:

                1998. H  graduated  as  a  Bachelor  of  Engineering  at  a
                      University in Nigeria

         25 09 2005        H arrived in the UK with a  Student  Visa  to  31
                      January 2007, subsequently extended on five occasions
                      to 13 April 2014

         22 01 2008    W arrived in the UK as the dependent of H

         04 02 2009    A was born in the UK

         16 11 2011    B was born in the UK

         11 01 2012    H was awarded an MBA in Information Technology at the
                      University of Wales

The application

 4. The family applied to remain in the United Kingdom under Article  8  of
    the  European  Convention  of  Human  Rights.   Their  then  solicitors
    submitted  that  they  had  established  family  life  here  and   were
    integrated into the community.  Both H and W had good employment.   The
    family was financially independent.   The  older  child  was  attending
    primary school.

 5. It was not suggested at that stage (or at any time since then) that the
    appellants could succeed under the Immigration Rules.

 6. However, reliance was placed upon the fact that  the  older  child  was
    "highly myopic".



The refusal

 7. In  her  letter  of  24th  July  2014  the  Respondent  considered  the
    applications under the Immigration  Rules  and  concluded,  inevitably,
    that the requirements of the Rules were not met.   She then  considered
    whether the applications  revealed  "exceptional  circumstances"  which
    would engage  Article  8.   She  concluded  that  they  did  not.   The
    appellants lodged a notice of appeal.  Again, it was acknowledged  that
    the appellants could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules
    but said that "there are exceptional circumstances in this  case  which
    should be taken into consideration  when  assessing  Article  8".   The
    particular circumstances relied on were  the  fact  that  A  has  "high
    myopia" and B has speech and language problems which are being  treated
    in the United Kingdom.  Ground 4 read "the Home Office... did not go on
    to consider Article 8 of the ECHR or section 55 of the 2009  Act  which
    is an error of law.  The appellant submits that when going through  the
    Razgar test, he can maintain his dependence without recourse to  public
    funds and he is not a drain on benefits.  The appellant  will  continue
    to pay for his dependants if he receives further leave to remain".

 8. The first and second appellants were not represented  at  the  First  -
    Tier Tribunal hearing.  They gave evidence.

 9. Although it was not suggested that the requirements of the  Immigration
    Rules were met the judge, correctly, considered the position under  the
    Rules.  He concluded, correctly, that there was no evidence to  suggest
    that these cases came within the Rules.  He went on to  say  (paragraph
    27) "having found that the requirements of the Rules  are  not  met,  I
    must ask if there are arguably good grounds, that is to say exceptional
    circumstances in these cases  not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
    Rules".  He considered the medical condition of the 2 children  (myopia
    and "glue ear") and  concluded  that  there  was  nothing  out  of  the
    ordinary about the condition of the children  and  "consequently  there
    are  no  exceptional  circumstances  which  apply  to   these   cases".
    Nonetheless he went on to consider Article 8.   He  accepted  that  the
    appellants had family life in the United  Kingdom.   He  accepted  that
    removal to Nigeria would interfere with it.  He took into account  that
    the first appellant came to the United Kingdom with temporary leave for
    the express purpose of study.  That purpose had been fulfilled  and  he
    has gained a valuable qualification which he  could  use  in  his  home
    country.   The  judge  then  said  "he  has  never  had  a   legitimate
    expectation that he and the family can remain here indefinitely.  Leave
    had at all times been temporary and conditional".   He concluded having
    made certain other findings that Article 8 was not engaged and  he  was
    therefore bound to dismiss the appeal.

The appeal

Legitimate expectation

10. The grounds referred at length to a number of cases which deal with the
    doctrine of legitimate expectation.  Most recently, in  an  Immigration
    context, in Mehmood v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]
    UKUT  00469  (IAC)  McCloskey  J,  President  of  the  Upper   Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) conducted a magisterial review of  the
    relevant authorities, beginning with R v North and  East  Devon  Health
    Authority, ex parte Coughlan [2001] QB 213.   He  concludes  (paragraph
    18) that "the first question in every case of this genre is whether the
    public authority concerned made an unambiguous representation,  promise
    or assurance devoid of any relevant qualification."   We  agree.    The
    first appellant  cannot  begin  to  establish  such  a  representation,
    promise or assurance here.     He  could  not  have  had  a  legitimate
    expectation that he  would  be  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain.
    Indeed, until the phrase appeared in the  FTT  decision  it  was  never
    suggested that he had a legitimate expectation.  There was good  reason
    for that.  Pararaph 4 of the grounds reads "the first appellant arrived
    in the UK as a student.  At that time the Home Office policy  was  that
    one who "clocked" up to ten years lawful leave  would  be  entitled  to
    indefinite leave to remain".  We  accept  that.   We  accept  that  the
    appellant hoped that he would be able to stay in the UK for  ten  years
    and then would be allowed to stay thereafter.  We would be prepared  to
    accept that he did not expect the Home  Office  policy  to  change  and
    planned his life accordingly but  none  of  that  comes  anywhere  near
    answering the first question in the affirmative.  The fact is that  the
    appellant was in the UK on a student visa throughout.   There is simply
    no basis for the  assertion  that  "when  he  left  Nigeria  he  had  a
    legitimate expectation to receive ILR after 10 years".  This ground  is
    unarguable.  We turn to Ground 2.

Failure to Consider section 117A

11. Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 inserted a new Part 5A into  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   Section  117A  provides
    that Part 5A  "applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
    determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Act breaches  a
    person's right to respect for private and family life under Article 8".
     Part 5A came into force in July 2014, some 4 months before the hearing
    before the FTT.   The judge failed to refer to section 117A  or  indeed
    Part 5A at all.

12. So far as material Part 5A provides as follows

         "PART 5A Article 8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations

         117A Application of this Part

         (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
             Rights Act 1998.

         (2) In considering the public interest question, the court or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
             117B, and

             ...

         (3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the
         question of whether an interference with a person's right to
         respect for private and family life is justified under Article
         8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases

         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.

         (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4) Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.

         ...

    117C is not relevant.  There is no need to refer to the  interpretation
    provisions.

13. On behalf of the appellants Ms Hussain submitted that  Section  117A(2)
    required the FTT, when considering the public  interest  question,  (ie
    whether an interference with a person's right to  respect  for  private
    and family life is justified under Article 8(2), to have regard to  the
    relevant considerations in  117B.   We  agree.     She  put  particular
    emphasis on the public interest matters at 117B (2) and  (3),  set  out
    above.  There is no need for us to repeat them.  It is  the  case  that
    the appellants speak English and are both  in  secure  employment.   It
    follows that they are not  a  burden  on  taxpayers.   But  Ms  Hussain
    submitted, in accordance with paragraph 8 of the grounds, that in those
    circumstances the public interest considerations in this case were  all
    one way "..[T]hose who speak English and  are  financially  independent
    arguably have a stronger case under part 5A than they would  have  done
    before.  Further, in any case where there  is  no  public  interest  in
    removal of the applicant should therefore always succeed because, in  a
    proportionality balancing exercise, one side of the scales is stated by
    Act of Parliament to be empty (sic)."  This is  not  entirely  easy  to
    follow.   117B sets out the Article 8  public  interest  considerations
    applicable in all cases.   The first of these  at  (1)  is  the  public
    interest in the maintenance of effective immigration controls.  That is
    in the balance from the outset in all cases.  Whilst we can accept that
    a person who speaks English and is  financially  independent  is  in  a
    better position than someone who does neither, we  cannot  accept  that
    the effect of subparagraphs (2) and (3) is somehow to give to a  person
    who cannot succeed within the  rules  an  automatic  route  to  success
    outside the rules.

14. The submission also overlooks the provisions of subsection 117B (5)  ie
    that little weight should be given to a private life established  by  a
    person at a time when the person's immigration  status  is  precarious.
    This is different from the  position  under  subsection  (4)  which  is
    concerned with the weight to be given to private life or a relationship
    formed with a qualifying partner "that is established by a person at  a
    time when the person in the United Kingdom unlawfully".   Whilst  as  a
    matter of ordinary language the status of a person who  is  in  the  UK
    unlawfully may be said to be precarious, the word precarious  does  not
    necessarily connote unlawfulness.   On the contrary it often does  not.
     We are quite satisfied that the appellants who have relied  throughout
    on temporary visas, have always had a  precarious  immigration  status.
    It is inescapable that the private life of all four appellants has been
    developed at a time when their immigration status is  precarious.    We
    are reinforced in our view by the decision in AM (anonymity  Direction)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department (CMG Ockleton, VP,  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Holmes) [2015 UKUT] 0260 (IAC) who considered  the
    same question very recently "In our judgment all those  who  have  been
    granted by the respondent a defined period of leave to enter the UK, or
    to remain in the UK ...hold during  the  currency  of  that  leave,  an
    immigration  status  that  is  lawful,  albeit  "precarious".   And  at
    paragraph 32 "To put the matter  shortly,  it  appears  to  us  that  a
    person's immigration status is "precarious" if their continued presence
    in the UK will be dependent upon their obtaining  a  further  grant  of
    leave.  It is precisely because such a person has no  indefinite  right
    to be in the country that the  relationships  they  form  ought  to  be
    considered in the light of the potential  need  to  leave  the  country
    should the grant of leave not be forthcoming."

15. It is against that background that we consider the FTT judge's approach
    to Article 8.  We recorded above that at  paragraph  27,  having  found
    that the requirements of the  rules  were  not  met,  the  judge  asked
    himself whether there were "arguably  good  grounds,  that  is  to  say
    exceptional circumstances in these cases  not  sufficiently  recognised
    under the Rules".  In so far as  he  was  referring  to  a  gateway  or
    threshold test of arguability he was relying,  we  think,  on  part  of
    paragraph 29 of R(on the application of) Nagre v SSHD [2013] EWHC  720.
    However, in MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ. 985 the Court of Appeal found
    that "there was not much utility" in a preliminary or  threshold  stage
    (of an arguable case) before an Article 8  claim  could  be  considered
    outside the rules.   That said, it  is  not  apparent  that  the  judge
    applied a threshold test in any event.   He did consider whether  there
    were exceptional  circumstances.   No  complaint  is  made  about  that
    approach of itself.   Since  the  hearing  the  Court  of  Appeal  have
    considered the  question  of  exceptional  circumstances  again  in  SS
    (Congo) and others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 .  At paragraph 33 the  judgment
    of the Court reads "... it is accurate to say that the general position
    outside the sorts of special contexts referred to above [which  do  not
    exist  here]  is  that  compelling  circumstances  would  need  to   be
    identified to support a claim for grant of Leave to Remain outside  the
    new Rules in Appendix FM.  In our view that is a formulation  which  is
    not as strict as a test of exceptionality or  a  requirement  of  "very
    compelling reasons" (as referred to in MF (Nigeria) in the  context  of
    the Rules applicable to foreign criminals), but which gives appropriate
    weight to the focussed consideration  of  public  interest  factors  as
    finds expression in the Secretary of State's  formulation  of  the  new
    Rules in Appendix FM.  It also reflects the  formulation  in  Nagre  at
    paragraph 29, which has been tested and has survived scrutiny  in  this
    court, see eg Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ.558 at [44], per Beatson LJ".
     We assume that is a reference to the second half of  paragraph  29  in
    Nagre  namely  the  consideration  of  whether  "there  are  compelling
    circumstances not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the  new  rules  to
    require the grant of such leave".

16. We do not think the fact that the judge was  looking  for  "exceptional
    circumstances" rather than considering whether there  were  "compelling
    circumstances (not sufficiently recognised under the rules)" could have
    made any difference to his conclusions on the facts of this case.   The
    judge accepted, without hesitation that the appellants  enjoyed  family
    life in the United Kingdom.   He accepted that A  suffers  from  severe
    myopia and B has glue ear but he concluded, correctly in  our  judgment
    and certainly not arguably wrongly,  that  those  conditions  were  not
    sufficient, as has been submitted to  him,  to  constitute  exceptional
    (and we would add) or compelling circumstances.   The  facts  taken  at
    their highest did  not,  in  our  judgment,  even  arguably  constitute
    compelling circumstances (not sufficiently recognised under the rules).



17.  In any event, having  come  to  the  conclusion  that  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances the judge went on to  consider  the  position
    under  Article  8.   He  concluded  that  the  interference  with   the
    appellants' family life was not of such gravity to  engage  Article  8,
    given that family life would continue in Nigeria where they would  also
    have the benefit of contact with their extended  family.   He  did  not
    deal explicitly with their right to respect for their private life  but
    it is implicit from paragraph 30 that he  considered  that  employment,
    education and healthcare would all be available in Nigeria and  so,  it
    follows, that there was no (or only minimal) infringement of the  right
    to respect for private life protected by  Article  8.   Had  the  judge
    found that Article 8 was engaged he would have been bound to  find  the
    infringement proportionate to the  legitimate  aim  of  maintaining  an
    effective system of immigration control.

18.  Whilst it was a plain error of law not to consider Section 117 we  are
    satisfied that on the  facts  of  this  case  it  would  have  made  no
    difference.    We have reviewed all of the evidence the judge  saw  and
    heard.  There is no doubt that the family  enjoy  family  life  in  the
    United Kingdom. They are to be removed to Nigeria as a family.   Whilst
    that will involve disruption to them it will not  affect  their  family
    life. W's brother lives with the family.  He is an adult and is  now  a
    British citizen.  He does not wish to  leave  the  UK.    He  has  some
    mental health difficulties but those difficulties do not  lead  to  the
    balance being weighed more heavily  against  removal.     As  to  their
    private life both parents have settled, good employment, as  the  judge
    acknowledged.  The evidence shows a circle of friends.  They will  make
    friends in Nigeria.  The children are settled at school and  are  happy
    there but they can go to school in Nigeria.   They  have  some  medical
    needs which can be met in Nigeria.

Section 55 of the Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009

19. Independently of the requirements of part 5A of the 2002  Act  the  FTT
    judge was required by section 55  of  the  2009  Act  to  consider  the
    circumstances of the children of  the  family.   Although  he  did  not
    specifically  refer  to  the  provision  it  is  plain  that  he   gave
    appropriate consideration to the children's circumstances, as  had  the
    Secretary of State before him.  The absence of a reference  to  section
    55(1) is not fatal to a decision.  What matters is the substance of the
    consideration of the wellbeing of the child.   It was no doubt for that
    reason that no complaint was made in the grounds of appeal  or  at  the
    hearing before us about the absence of any reference to the  provision.
    It is not necessary to repeat the findings  we  have  already  made  in
    respect of the children's education, social, health  and  other  needs.
    In the circumstances of this case it is plain that the  best  interests
    of these two young children  are  served  by  their  being  with  their
    parents who care for them and promote their welfare in  every  possible
    way.

20. Notwithstanding the errors of law in this case we cannot see  that  any
    other outcome was possible than that the appeals to the FTT would fail.

21. Accordingly the decision of  the  First-Tier  judge  to  dismiss  these
    appeals is upheld.

22. The direction previously given granting anonymity continues  unless  or
    until a tribunal or court directs otherwise.



Signed:  Date:  9 June 2015

The Honourable Mrs Justice Thirlwall DBE

