
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31471/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 19th June 2015                     |                   On 3rd July 2015   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                           mr Ameenuddin Mohammed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judges Spicer and Tiffen, promulgated on 12th January 2015, following a
    hearing at Taylor House on 15th December 2014.  In  the  determination,
    the judges  dismissed  the  appeal  of  Mr  Ameenuddin  Mohammed.   The
    Appellant subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, and was born on  25th  May
    1986.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary  of
    State dated 21st July 2014 refusing him a variation of leave to  remain
    in the UK because the college where he wished to study,  namely,  Vista
    Business College, was not listed on the Tier 4  business  register  and
    nor could the Appellant satisfy the Respondent that he had a valid CAS.



The Judge's Findings

 3. The Tribunal held that the Appellant had submitted a Tier  4  (General)
    Student application on 5th October 2013 and  provided  details  of  his
    Sponsor as Vista Business College  and  provided  a  CAS  number.   The
    Respondent, however, wrote to the Appellant on 12th May 2014  informing
    him of the revocation of Vista Business College's licence.  The  letter
    duly informed the Appellant that he had a further 60 days in  which  to
    make a  fresh  application.   The  Tribunal  held  that  the  Appellant
    supplied a fresh CAS and made an application to vary  his  application.
    However, the fresh CAS was a conditional CAS.  It was not a valid  CAS.
    As for Article 8 there was no evidence that the Appellant has a  family
    life in the UK.  He is a single man in his  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    application form.  There is no evidence he has a partner  or  children.
    He would have had no expectation to remain in the UK.  The  appeal  was
    dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 4. The grounds of application state that there is a procedural issue here.
     The Appellant's failure to attend the hearing on  15th  December  2014
    was due to the Appellant's legal representative having been informed by
    the AIT in the morning of 15th December 2014 that the hearing  of  that
    date had been "delisted".  It was being suggested  that  the  Appellant
    had been deprived of a fair hearing.  There had been an  administrative
    error in the procedure relating to the listing of the hearing.

 5. On 25th February 2015,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted.   It  was
    observed that a decision made on 12th November 2014 at Arnhem House  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hall dismissed the appeal without  a  hearing
    under Rule 19(4)(a) of the 2014 Rules on the basis that no  Grounds  of
    Appeal had been lodged.  Furthermore, the appeal was dismissed  because
    a notice issued by the Tribunal on 11th December 2014 to the  Appellant
    and his legal representatives that there is no jurisdiction  under  the
    Procedure Rules to reconsider the Tribunal's decision of 12th  November
    2014, was issued.

 6. This notice also stated that the Tribunal had two appeal files for  the
    Appellant with the same appeal number and the other appeal file  is  at
    Taylor House with the hearing date of 15th December 2014.   The  Arnhem
    appeal file would now be sent to Taylor House to be  linked  with  that
    other  file.   However,  the  Appellant's  legal  representatives   had
    submitted a copy of their  15th  December  2014  letter  faxed  to  the
    Tribunal stating that they had been informed by a Miss Jo  of  the  AIT
    that 15th December 2014 hearing  had  been  delisted.   The  judge  who
    promulgated the 12th January 2015 decision made  no  reference  to  the
    12th November 2014 decision  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hall.
    There was accordingly an error of law.

 7. On 11th March 2015 a Rule 24 response was entered  by  the  Respondent.
    First,  it  is  said  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  directed  itself
    appropriately.  The  failure  to  attend  the  hearing  undermined  the
    credibility of the Appellant and made no  material  difference  to  the
    factual findings of why the appeal failed.

 8. Second, the panel made clear findings on the "valid"  as  well  as  the
    "non-valid" CAS issue.  This means that the Appellant  could  not  have
    succeeded in any event because he had a non-valid CAS.  The  withdrawal
    of the licence from Vista College meant that the  Appellant  was  given
    six days to find another college and he  only  provided  a  conditional
    CAS.

 9. Third, in relation to Article 8 the panel held (at paragraph 26)  that,
    "although Article 8 is raised, there is no evidence that the  Appellant
    has a family life in the United Kingdom".  He was single.   He  had  no
    partner.  He had no children.  The appeal was bound to fail.

10. In reply, Mr Kannangara submitted  that  on  13th  December  2014,  the
    Appellant received a letter which was dated 11th December 2014, stating
    that the decision could not be reconsidered.  Two appeals  were  listed
    with the same number.  One appeal was  being  heard  on  15th  December
    2014.   The  Appellant  received  this  information  on  Saturday  13th
    December.  On 15th December 2014, which was the date  of  the  hearing,
    the Appellant contacted his legal representative  with  the  letter  of
    11th  December  2014.   The  legal  representative  on  that  same  day
    contacted the AIT who  confirmed  to  him  that  the  hearing  on  15th
    December 2014 was delisted.   Plainly,  submitted  Mr  Kannangara,  the
    Appellant was entitled to attend his own hearing.

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law such that I should  set  aside
    the decision (see Section 12(1) of  TCEA  2007).   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  This  is  a  case  where  as  early  as  September  2014  the
    Appellant's solicitors had sent him Grounds of Appeal.  For some reason
    they had not been placed before the Tribunal.  The  Tribunal  proceeded
    on the basis that no Grounds of Appeal had  been  submitted,  that  the
    Appellant was not in attendance, and that the appeal was bound to fail.
     Rule 26 of the  Procedure  Rules  makes  it  quite  clear  that,  "the
    Tribunal must give each party entitled to attend a  hearing  reasonable
    notice of the time and place of the hearing (including any adjourned or
    postponed hearing) and any  changes  to  the  time  and  place  of  the
    hearing".  The Appellant has been denied the right to a  fair  hearing.
    He has not had the opportunity to put his case.

12. Accordingly, under Practice Statement 7.2 I conclude that the effect of
    the error has been to deprive the party before the First-tier  Tribunal
    of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's case to be put.
     This being so, this matter is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal
    to be heard by a judge other than Judges Spicer and Tiffen in a de novo
    substantive hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original Tribunal.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  will  be
remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by  judges  other  than
Judges Spicer and Tiffen in a de novo  substantive  hearing  under  Practice
Statement 7.2.  No previous findings will be preserved.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 1st July 2015




