
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/31780/2015
                                                               IA/31785/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 January 2018                |On 23 January 2018                   |
|                                  |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                            RAMILA BASNET NIROULA
                              PREMDEEP NIROULA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Lourdes counsel instructed by the Appellants
For the Respondent: Mr McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The first Appellant (A1) was born on 28 July 1983 and is  a  national  of
   Nepal .The second Appellant (A2) is the husband of A1 and his appeal  was
   dependent on that of his wife.
3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the [Respondent] against the decision of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Coll  promulgated  on  8  March  2017  which  allowed  the
   Appellants appeals against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  15
   September 2015 to refuse leave to remain as  a  Tier  4  student  to  the
   limited extent that it was not in accordance with the law and he remitted
   it to the Respondent to make a fresh decision allowing A1 the opportunity
   to obtain a fresh CAS.
5. The refusal letter was underpinned by the assertion that A1  had  used  a
   proxy in a language test.
The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Coll ("the Judge") allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
   decision to the limited extent set out above finding that A1 had not used
   a proxy in the impugned language test.
7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing: that
   a) [The] Judge was in error at paragraph 18 in relation to the burden  of
      proof in suggesting that it was a matter for the Respondent to produce
      expert evidence to show that her past  and  subsequent  language  test
      results were inconsistent.
   b) The Judge failed to properly engage with the evidence of Dr French.
   c) The Judge failed  to  engage  with  the  issues  relating  to  why  an
      applicant might use a proxy
8.  On 12 September 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley  gave  permission
   to appeal on the grounds set out in the application and  additionally  on
   the basis that the decision was ultra vires as  there  was  no  power  to
   allow the appeal under the Rules.

Discussion

9.  I  invited  both  Mr  McVitie  and  Mr  Lourdes  to  remind  me  of  the
   commencement date and any relevant transitional provisions in relation to
   the additional basis on which permission was granted by Judge Ransley.  I
   retired in order to enable them to make the necessary enquiries.

10. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr  McVitie  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that :

   a) He argued that the Judge did not have the power to remit the  case  to
      the Respondent.

   b) He argued that the approach of the Judge was flawed in relation to the
      burden and standard of proof.

   c) It was not clear from his decision that he appreciated that there  was
      a 3 stage process and he appears to have  placed  the  burden  on  the
      Respondent at all times.

11. On behalf of the Appellants Mr Lourdes conceded that  the  decision  was
   unsustainable.

The Law
12. The issues arising out of the ETS cases  have  been  considered  by  the
   Upper Tribunal in SM  and  Qadir  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC) and
   Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  Mohammed  Shehzad  and  MD
   Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615. In these cases  the  Upper  Tribunal  held
   that the initial evidential burden of furnishing proof of  deception  was
   on the Secretary of State. Where the Secretary of  State  provided  prima
   facie evidence of deception, the burden shifted onto  the  individual  to
   provide a plausible innocent explanation, and if the  individual  did  so
   the burden shifted back to the Secretary of State. It was satisfied  that
   the Secretary of State had discharged the evidential burden that  lay  on
   her with the production of the so called generic evidence  Since  hearing
   this case the Court of Appeal has heard the  Respondents  appeal  against
   Qadir in SM and Qadir v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]
   EWCA Civ 1167. Which endorsed the approach taken by the  Upper  Tribunal.
   The Court of Appeal at paragraph 18 went  on  to  summarise  those  facts
   which were relevant to the issues that had  to  be  determined  in  these
   cases



Finding on Material Error

13. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.

14. In relation to the additional ground on which permission was  granted  I
   am now satisfied having considered the relevant provisions that this  was
   a refusal decision to which the 'old appeal rights' applied and therefore
   there was no error of law in respect of that part of  the  decision.  The
   changes to the immigration appeals system in  the  Immigration  Act  2014
   were brought into force on a  phased  basis.  The  Immigration  Act  2014
   (Commencement No. 3,  Transitional  and  Saving  Provisions)  Order  2014
   applied to persons who made an application on or after  20  October  2014
   for leave to remain as a Tier 4 Migrant under the  points  based  system.
   Where a case does not come within the scope  of  the  Commencement  Order
   continue under the old appeals system. In this case the  application  was
   made on 5 February 2014 and therefore the old appeals system applies.

15. In relation to the other grounds argued I am satisfied that  Mr  Lourdes
   was right to concede that the decision was unsustainable given  the  lack
   of clarity as the burden and standard of proof. While the Judge refers to
   Qadir there is nowhere a clear recognition of the three stage process  in
   relation to the burden of proof and a  recognition  that  the  so  called
   generic evidence satisfies the initial burden on the Secretary of  State.
   In accepting that the  Appellant  had  previously  studied  in  Nepal  in
   English the Judge at paragraph 18 erroneously placed the burden of  proof
   on the Respondent to establish through  an  expert  language  report  her
   implied contention that A1s  previous  qualifications  were  incompatible
   with the TOIC scores that had been invalidated.

16. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to address  and  determine  these
   issues constitutes a clear error of law. This  error  I  consider  to  be
   material since had the Tribunal conducted this exercise the outcome could
   have been different. That in my view is the correct test to apply.

17. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that  the
   Judge's determination cannot stand and must be set aside in its entirety.
   All matters to be redetermined afresh.

18. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
   of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted to the First  Tier
   Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. In this case I have determined that the case should  be  remitted  as  I
   have found a fundamental flaw in the Judges approach.

20. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting
   at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed before me.


Signed                                                              Date
21.1.2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
