
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/31799/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11 August 2015                    |On 18 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     VC
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Sellwood (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an anonymity order.  Unless the Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
no report of these proceedings or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
directly or indirectly identify  the  original  appellant.   This  direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any failure to  comply  with  this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

      1. The respondent is from Kenya and is aged 62.  She appealed  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal against a decision dated 31 July 2014 to remove
         her to Kenya.

      2. I have anonymised this decision as it refers to  sensitive  aspects
         of the appellant's private life.

Procedural history

      3. In a decision promulgated on 17 April 2015 the First-tier  Tribunal
         allowed the respondent's appeal on the basis that  there  would  be
         very significant obstacles to her integration in Kenya.

SSHD's grounds of appeal

      4. Mr Nath accepted that although formulated in the written grounds as
         three grounds of appeal, the grounds of appeal are twofold.  First,
         the Judge erred in attaching weight to a  letter  dated  12  August
         2009 when that letter could have been  manufactured.   Second,  the
         Judge did not appreciate the high test required  in  order  for  an
         applicant to meet the  "very  significant  obstacles"  required  in
         276ADE.

      5. In a decision dated 11 June 2015  Judge  McDade  granted  the  SSHD
         permission to appeal on the basis that the  Judge  failed  to  give
         adequate  reasons  for  concluding  that  the   "very   significant
         obstacles" test had been met.

      6. The matter now comes before me to  determine  whether  or  not  the
         decision contains a material error of law.

Hearing

      7. Mr Nath relied upon the two grounds of appeal and asked me to  find
         that the Judge was wrong to fail to recognise the strictness of the
         relevant test.

      8. I indicated to Mr Sellwood that I did not need  to  hear  from  him
         because I intended to dismiss the SSHD's appeal.   I  now  give  my
         reasons for doing so.

Error of law discussion

      9. In my judgment the grounds of appeal formulated by the SSHD  do  no
         more than disagree with the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
         The  Judge  was  entitled  to  accept  the  circumstances  of   the
         appellant's children in  Kenya  and  her  likely  circumstances  if
         removed there for the  reasons  provided.   Whilst  these  findings
         might be described as generous they do not contain an error of law.

     10. The Judge clearly directed  himself  to  the  relevant  wording  of
         276ADE.  The Judge was well aware that for  the  purposes  of  that
         rule "the question is not whether  the  appellant's  removal  would
         constitute a disproportionate  interference  with  her  private  or
         family life, but whether there would be very significant  obstacles
         to her integration into Kenya" [52].  The Judge was well  aware  of
         the relevant test and that it should be  distinguished  from  other
         considerations.  He gave the  phrase  its  ordinary  meaning.   Its
         ordinary  meaning  clearly  signifies  that  a  high  threshold  is
         required and must be met.  The Judge decided that in this case  the
         appellant's circumstances met that  high  threshold.   This  was  a
         finding of fact for him to make.  It is a generous factual  finding
         but it is not vitiated by any error of law.

Decision

     11. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve the making of an error on a point of law and I do  not  set
         aside the decision.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
13 August 2015

