
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31931/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th January 2016                  |On 25th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                           Nirmohan Singh Kaanijo
                          (no ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Basharat, instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, who is a citizen of Afghanistan of Sikh origin,  appeals
    with permission  against  the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal R J N B Morris to dismiss his appeal against  refusal  by  the
    Secretary of State of his application for leave to remain on the  basis
    of his private and family life in this country.  His brief  history  is
    that he arrived in this country in 2003 when he  claimed  asylum.   His
    application was refused and  an  appeal  dismissed  in  2004.   Further
    submissions were also refused.  He has since married his  wife  Parmeet
    Kaur Arora, who also originates from Afghanistan but is now  a  British
    citizen.  The couple's son Japjit was born on 7th August 2014.  He  too
    is a British citizen.

 2. It was accepted by the Secretary of State that the  couple  were  in  a
    subsisting and genuine relationship but it was  considered  that  there
    were no insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant's  family  life  with
    the Sponsor continuing outside the United Kingdom and that there  would
    not be any very significant obstacles to his reintegration into life in
    Afghanistan.  As at the date of the application  and  the  decision  to
    remove the Appellant to Afghanistan the couple's  child  had  not  been
    born.

 3. In her decision, which was promulgated on 15th June  2015  following  a
    hearing on 19th May 2015, Judge Morris considered the Appellant's  case
    under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, under paragraph 276ADE  and
    also under Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.  She reached the view that
    there were no insurmountable obstacles to the family as a  whole  going
    to Afghanistan or in the alternative to the Appellant's  wife  and  son
    remaining  in  this  country  whilst  he  went  overseas,  possibly  to
    Pakistan, to seek entry clearance.

 4. In the grounds of application,  which  now  stand  as  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal, it was contended that the judge had erred in  failing  to  have
    regard to the comments of the Upper Tribunal in the  reported  decision
    of DSG & Others (Afghan Sikhs: departure from  CG)  Afghanistan  [2013]
    UKUT 00148 (IAC) in which it had been found  that  there  had  been  no
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  then
    under review in which it was said that the generality of  Afghan  Sikhs
    and Hindus were  at  risk.   Mention  was  made  that  further  country
    guidance was at that time  awaited  and  the  Sikh  community  suffered
    harassment and discrimination.  It was submitted that it was  not  open
    to the judge to find on the balance of probabilities that there were no
    insurmountable obstacles to the family relocating to  Afghanistan.   It
    was also said that the judge  erred  in  finding  that  there  were  no
    significant obstacles to  the  Appellant  reintegrating  into  life  in
    Afghanistan and had erred in considering the welfare  of  the  couple's
    child and the assessment of his best interests.  Examples were given of
    how it was said that Sikhs, in particular  women  and  children,  faced
    discrimination and harassment.

 5. Permission was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Colyer  on
    12th October 2015.  He found the grounds arguable.  In a response under
    Upper Tribunal Procedure Rule 24 it was submitted that the decision was
    sustainable and the First-tier Tribunal had properly taken into account
    the relevant circumstances of the Appellant and relevant case law.   It
    was said that the conclusion reached in respect  of  the  child's  best
    interests had been open to the Tribunal.

 6. At the hearing before me Miss Basharat relied upon the  grounds.   Miss
    Everett for her part referred to the Rule 24 response.  She  said  that
    the judge had considered the assessment of  conditions  in  Afghanistan
    set out in DSG.  She had also looked at the  then  current  Operational
    Guidance Note.  The Appellant was not a refugee  and  had  not  himself
    been persecuted in the past.  The Sponsor had originated in Afghanistan
    and was familiar with the  country  and  the  Appellant  had  relatives
    there.  The test of  insurmountable  obstacles  was  a  stringent  one.
    Although the child was a British citizen that in itself  she  said  was
    not enough.  The test was whether it was reasonable to expect the child
    to go to Afghanistan.  The judge was aware  of  those  criteria.   Both
    parents were familiar with the culture  in  Afghanistan  and  the  best
    interests of the child were to be with the parents.  Because there were
    no insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant  and  his  wife  going  to
    Afghanistan they could not come within the Immigration Rules.   On  the
    basis that the facts might merit Article 8 consideration the judge  had
    proceeded to consider matters on that basis.  She said  the  judge  was
    entitled to consider whether it  was  disproportionate  to  expect  the
    Appellant  to  go  to  another  country  to  seek  entry  clearance  in
    accordance with the Rules.  I mentioned  that at paragraph 41(1) of the
    decision the judge had referred to Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, notably sub-sections 117B(1), (4)  and
    (5) but she had not referred to 117B(6).  Having regard to  the  recent
    guidance given in Treebhawon & Others  (Section  117B(6))  [2015]  UKUT
    00674 (IAC) sub-section 117B(6), if met, would override the earlier sub-
    sections.  Miss Everett said it was  harder  to  argue  on  that  basis
    although that decision of the Upper Tribunal was likely to  be  subject
    to appeal.

 7. In response Miss Basharat said that it would be unreasonable to  expect
    the family to go back to Afghanistan  having  regard  to  DSG  and  the
    element of discrimination against Sikhs and Hindus.  The Appellant  was
    likely to have to adjust  his  dress  in  order  to  live  there.   She
    accepted that the couple had become married at a time  that  they  must
    have known that the Appellant's status was precarious but  the  arrival
    of the child was a new factor. She said it was unreasonable  to  expect
    the child to go to Afghanistan in the light of the  likely  harassment,
    discrimination and lack of education and healthcare.

 8. I have to say at the outset that the decision by Judge Morris is a very
    careful and detailed document.  The core question she had to deal  with
    was whether there were insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant's wife
    following him to Afghanistan and whether it was  reasonable  to  expect
    his son to go there.   These  issues  arise  under  EX.1  and  EX.2  of
    Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules  and,  so  far  as  the  child  is
    concerned, under Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act which comes into  play
    in consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules.  Tied  in  with  these
    questions is the issue which arises in respect of the  Appellant  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) as to whether if returned there would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the Appellant's reintegration into the society
    in Afghanistan.  In considering the interests of the  child,  both  the
    Secretary of State and the Tribunal were required  to  have  regard  to
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  which
    sets out the duty to safeguard and promote the welfare of  children  in
    the United Kingdom.  That has been interpreted as regarding  a  child's
    best interests  as  a  primary  consideration  in  the  making  of  any
    decision.

 9. The judge had various elements of background material before her.   She
    stated (at paragraph 15) that she had paid regard to the  Secretary  of
    State's Operational Guidance Note of June 2013,  reissued  in  February
    2015, and to the case of DSG.  It is important to note  that  both  DSG
    and  the  country  guidance  case  of  SL  &  Others  (Afghanistan)  CG
    (Returning Sikhs and Hindus) [2005] UKIAT 00137 addressed the matter of
    persecution and asylum and the judge noted that neither  the  Appellant
    nor his wife had been recognised as refugees.  The judge did refer  (in
    the first paragraph of numbered paragraph 23 and also  at  subparagraph
    (iii)) that Sikhs are in a  minority  in  Afghanistan  and  have  faced
    discrimination and harassment,  a  matter  not  in  issue  between  the
    parties.  On the basis of that evidence she found it had not been shown
    that there would be insurmountable obstacles to the  wife  joining  the
    Appellant in Afghanistan although she accepted  (at  paragraph  26(ii))
    that:

         "Undoubtedly there would be a change in the Sponsor's and  Japjit's
         quality of life and they might also experience some  hardship  were
         they to relocate to Afghanistan.  This would include  a  change  in
         the type of accommodation they would  live  in  and  the  Sponsor's
         level of income.  These factors are specifically addressed  in  the
         IDIs and it is concluded that they would not usually amount  to  an
         insurmountable obstacle."

10. The IDIs are not of course legal precedent which a judge is required to
    follow but on the basis of the background information before her I find
    no legal error in the judge's view that the Sponsor would not  face  an
    insurmountable obstacle in going with  the  Appellant  to  Afghanistan,
    difficult though that might be.

11. So far as the child is concerned however the test was not whether there
    were insurmountable obstacles but whether it was reasonable  to  expect
    the child to go to Afghanistan.  The judge accepted at paragraph 26(ii)
    that with his mother he might experience some hardship.   Although  she
    did not expressly quote it in the Operational Guidance Note  which  was
    before the judge it is noted (at paragraph 3.15.10):

         "Whilst there is no evidence that Sikhs or Hindus are at real  risk
         of persecution at  the  hands  of  the  Afghan  authorities  solely
         because  of  their  ethnicity,  nor  are  there  indicators  of   a
         government able to provide effective protection to  the  Sikh/Hindu
         community.  Sikhs and Hindus can be subject to societal  harassment
         and discrimination.  ..."

    Whilst  the  judge  found  that  such  problems  would  not  amount  to
    insurmountable obstacles for  the  wife,  the  context  of  considering
    matters for the child are different having regard to Section 55 of  the
    2009 Act.

12. The judge expressly considered the child's best interests of  paragraph
    27 in which she stated:

         "In coming to my conclusions I have borne in  mind  that  the  best
         interests of Japjit, the Appellant's and the  Sponsor's  young  son
         are a primary  consideration  which  should  be  considered  first.
         However the Appellant's  and  the  Sponsor's  circumstances  are  a
         material  consideration  in  assessing  Japjit's  best   interests,
         because any decision on his parents' case will have  an  impact  on
         him.  Since I have  concluded  that  there  are  no  insurmountable
         obstacles facing the Appellant and the Sponsor (should she so wish)
         to relocate to Afghanistan, I find that it would be reasonable  for
         Japjit to relocate with them on the basis that it is usually  in  a
         child's best interests to remain with his parents.  I revert to the
         question of Japjit's best interests below in my discussion  on  the
         question of proportionality under the 1950 Convention."

13. The judge referred again to Japjit's best  interests  at  paragraph  40
    when she  stated  "although  Japjit's  best  interests  are  a  primary
    consideration the primacy of his interests fall to be considered in the
    context of his particular family circumstances as well as the  need  to
    maintain immigration control".

14. The judge was  clearly  aware  of  the  conundrum  as  to  whether  one
    considers the child's best interests in isolation or in the context  of
    what is to happen to his parents.  This dilemma was considered  by  the
    Supreme Court in Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74  and  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  Lord
    Justice Lewison stated at paragraph 58 of EV (Philippines):

         "In my judgment therefore the assessment of the best  interests  of
         the children must be made on the basis of the facts as they are  in
         the real world.  If one parent has no right to remain but the other
         parent does that is the background against which the assessment  is
         conducted.  If neither parent has the right to remain then that  is
         the background against which the assessment is conducted.  Thus the
         ultimate question will be 'is it reasonable to expect the child  to
         follow the parent with  no  right  to  remain  to  the  country  of
         origin?"

15. In both Zoumbas and EV (Philippines) the children in question were  not
    British citizens and nor were their parents.   In  both  cases  it  was
    acknowledged that British citizenship was a significant factor  as  was
    established by the Supreme Court  judgment  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD
    [2011] UKSC 4.  Lord Hope stated at paragraph 41 of that judgment:

         "... The fact of British  citizenship  does  not  trump  everything
         else.  But it will hardly ever be less than a very significant  and
         weighty factor against moving children  who  have  that  status  to
         another country with a parent who has  no  right  to  remain  here,
         especially if the effect of doing this is that they will inevitably
         lose  those  benefits  and  advantages  for  the  rest   of   their
         childhood."

16. Judge Morris accepted again (at paragraph 43 of her decision) that "the
    parties might face some significant difficulties  in  continuing  their
    family life in Afghanistan".  In reaching her conclusion with regard to
    the child she was required to factor in the very significant element of
    his  British  citizenship  and  also  the  background  evidence   which
    indicated  the  risk  of  facing  harassment  and   discrimination   in
    Afghanistan.  She accepted (at paragraph  45(ii))  that  he  would  not
    enjoy the same level of healthcare as in this country yet she found (at
    the beginning of that paragraph) that "Japjit's welfare  would  not  be
    undermined if the Sponsor were to decide  to  relocate  to  Afghanistan
    with the Appellant".  She had to decide whether it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the child to  go  to  Afghanistan  (with  one  or  both  of  his
    parents).  Given that the best interests of a child  were  involved  it
    was legitimate for the judge to consider matters under Article  8  ECHR
    outside the Immigration Rules.  The judge expressly referred to Section
    117B of the 2002 Act in her consideration  of  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules.  At paragraph 41(ii) and (iii) the judge referred to elements of
    Section 117 namely sub-sections (3), (4) and (5).  She did not  however
    refer expressly to sub-section (6), although she had earlier  set  this
    out when reciting the whole of that Section.  Sub-section (6) reads  as
    follows:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom."

17. It is clear from the decision in Treebhawon  that  sub-section  117B(6)
    prevails over the public interests identified earlier in  the  Section.
    The sub-section includes no requirement for an applicant to return to a
    home country to seek entry clearance.  All that  is  necessary  is  the
    parental relationship and a finding that it would be  unreasonable  for
    the child to relocate to the applicant's home country.

18. With some reluctance, in the light of the quality of the  determination
    as a whole, I have come to the view that the judge did err  in  law  in
    assessing the child's best interests and whether it would be reasonable
    to expect him to go to Afghanistan without expressly factoring  in  the
    risk of discrimination and harassment for Sikhs in Afghanistan and  the
    very significant benefits of his British citizenship.  She  also  erred
    (and I accept that Treebhawon had not been promulgated  when  she  made
    her decision) in failing to realise that subparagraph  (6)  of  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act could  override  the  earlier  sub-sections.   For
    these reasons I set aside her decision.

19. I did canvass with the representatives what  should  follow  if,  after
    detailed consideration, I set the decision aside and both were  of  the
    view that the appeal should be reheard in the  First-tier  Tribunal  as
    there would need to be an up-to-date finding of facts.  Although on the
    evidence before her I found that the judge was justified  in  her  view
    that the Appellant's wife could be expected to go to  Afghanistan  with
    him, I do not preserve that finding as I am aware that there has been a
    further country guidance case concerning Sikhs in Afghanistan which may
    be of relevance to a further assessment.

Notice of Decisions

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law and I set aside that decision.  In  the  light
of Statement 7(2)(b) of the Tribunals Judiciary Practice Statements I  remit
this case to be heard in the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  12(2)(b)(i)
of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, in  accordance  with  the
directions set out below.

There was no request for an anonymity order and none is made.

Signed   Date 22 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French


Directions for Rehearing (Sections 12(3)(a) and 12(3)(b) of  the  Tribunals,
Courts and Enforcement Act 2007

 1) The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Morris  is  set  aside
    with no findings preserved and the appeal is to be heard afresh.

 2) The appropriate hearing centre is Hatton Cross.  The time  estimate  is
    three hours.  No interpreter is requested.

 3) Each party shall serve upon the other and upon the  Tribunal  at  least
    seven days before the hearing, copies  of  any  witness  statements  or
    other documents sought to be relied upon.

Signed   Date 22 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

