

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: IA/31393/2014
                                                               IA/31397/2014
                                                               IA/31400/2014
                                                               IA/31402/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at:  Field House                        |Decision Promulgated        |
|On: 11th February 2015                        |On 3rd March 2015           |
|                                              |                            |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Sheetal Kishor Thakur
                           Kishor Ramchand Thakur
                             Nisha Kishor Thakur
                                 Rian Thakur
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Nasim, Counsel (Direct Access)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondents were, at the date  of  the  appeal  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, all nationals of  India.  They  are  respectively  a  mother,
    father their two minor children. On the 27th October  2014  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge MPW Harris) allowed their linked  appeals  against
    the Respondent's decisions to  remove  them  from  the  United  Kingdom
    pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The  Secretary
    of State now has permission to appeal against that decision[1].


 2. The Respondents had applied for indefinite leave to remain in the UK on
    the grounds of their  long  residence/Article  8  private  lives.   The
    applications particularly relied on the fact that the eldest  child  of
    the family had been in the UK for over 7 years. Nisha was born  in  the
    United Kingdom on the 30th June 2004.


 3. These applications had been made prior to the introduction of the  'new
    rules' in July  2012.   It  was  for  this  reason  that  the  family's
    representatives, the Secretary of State  and the Judge all proceeded on
    the basis  that  these  were  simply  Razgar  Article  8  appeals.  The
    determination makes reference to Edgehill [2014] EWCA  Civ  402.   That
    framework notwithstanding,  the  parties  agree  that  the  new  rules,
    insofar as they could be applied to Nisha, had some relevance  in  that
    they were an indication of where the Secretary of State considered  the
    balance should be struck. If Nisha could show, for instance,  that  she
    qualified under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  for  leave  to  remain,  the
    Secretary of State would face some difficulty in showing  the  decision
    to remove her to be proportionate.

 4. Judge Harris started with the position of Nisha. He found that she  had
    an established private life in the UK, having spent at that point  over
    ten years of her life in the UK.  Although the decision to  remove  her
    would not interfere with her family life (her parents and brother being
    removed with her)  the  interference  with  her  private  life  was  of
    sufficient gravity to engage Article 8. There being  no  dispute  about
    the legality or purpose of the decision, the question  was  whether  it
    was proportionate. Judge Harris properly  had  regard  to  the  'public
    interest' considerations set out in s117B[2]. He  recognised  that  her
    parents could continue to care for her should she be removed to  India,
    but noted the established caselaw on  the  weight  to  be  attached  to
    lengthy residence of children who have established social, cultural and
    educational ties to the UK: see for instance Azimi-Moeyed  [2013]  UKUT
    197 (IAC).   He gave consideration to those factors, noting inter  alia
    that the right to education is not itself protected under Article 8 and
    that he attached rather more weight  to  the  relationships  Nisha  had
    developed in the UK:

         "that the appellant was born in the UK and has lived here for  over
         10 years is a significant factor for me to take into  account.  The
         focus of her life is no longer simply on  her  parents;  the  third
         appellant has established her own ties in the  wider  community.  I
         consider there is a  substantial  amount  of  documentary  evidence
         before be in support of the private life ties within this  country,
         relied upon by the third appellant and which she has  made  outside
         of her family life...


         ...I am satisfied that the third appellant has developed such  ties
         to this country that it is in her best interest to remain in the UK
         and it is not reasonable for her to relocate to India"
 5. Nisha's appeal was therefore allowed.  In respect of  her  parents  the
    matter was determined  with  reference  to  s117B(6):  if  it  was  not
    reasonable to remove Nisha then the public interest considerations  did
    not weigh against  her  parents.  They  therefore  succeeded  in  their
    appeals. It followed  that  the  youngest  child,  dependent  upon  his
    parents and close to his sister, also succeeded.


 6. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal are dated the 17th  November
    2014. The are lengthy and detailed but the central complaint is  to  be
    found in paragraph 1(a):

         "It is plain from reading the determination as a  whole  that  this
         appeal has essentially been allowed on the  basis  of  the  private
         life of the 3rd appellant in that she has been present  in  the  UK
         for just over 10 years"

 7. Just under a month later, on the 16th December 2014, the  Secretary  of
    State  issued Nisha with a British passport. Mr Nasim points to Nisha's
    naturalisation as a British citizen as further  evidence,  if  it  were
    needed, of the extent of her ties to this country.  He submits that the
    First-tier Tribunal cannot be said to have erred  in  its  emphasis  of
    those ties.




    No Error of Law


 8. At the date of the appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Nisha  has
    spent so long in this country she qualified  for  British  citizenship.
    That this is so is evidenced by the fact  that  two  months  after  the
    hearing she in fact had her passport.   If parliament has decided  that
    a child with that length of residence should qualify for naturalisation
    it follows that there is a recognition that her ties to the UK at  that
    point are so substantial that  any  interference  with  them  would  be
    disproportionate.


 9. The author of the grounds complains  that  no  regard  was  had  to  EV
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  That  was  a  completely  different
    factual situation. The child in EV had no hope  of  success  under  the
    Rules.  The First-tier Tribunal were here satisfied that Nisha had been
    here for longer than seven years, and that it was unreasonable for  her
    to be removed. She therefore prima facie qualified under  276ADE(1)(iv)
    for indefinite leave to remain.  The issues raised in the  grounds  may
    all be good points to make in respect of a child who does  not  qualify
    under the rules (or indeed nationality  law)  but  this  child  did  so
    qualify.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was  neither  "overly
    generous" or "plainly unlawful".

10. The grounds take  no  issue  with  the  approach  taken  to  the  adult
    Appellants or the youngest child, but for the sake  of  completeness  I
    find that the First-tier Tribunal was quite  correct  to  have  applied
    s177B(6).


11. The grounds are entirely misconceived and there is no error of  law  in
    this determination.


 Decisions

12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.





 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
         11th February 2015
-----------------------
[1] Permission granted by Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
McClure on the 23rd December 2014
[2] Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended by the
Immigration Act 2014)

