
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/31368/2014
     IA/31372/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 2 June 2015                         |                On 16 June 2015      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            1) mr Muhammad Nabeel
                   2) MRS CLAUDIA FILIPA HENRIQUES SOARES
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                       Respondents/Claimants

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Holmes, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondents:   Mr Iqbal, Counsel instructed by N R Legal Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from a decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Rastogi sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  17
    February 2015) whereby the First-tier Tribunal allowed  the  claimants'
    appeals against the refusal to issue them  with  residence/registration
    cards as confirmation of their right  of  residence  in  the  UK  under
    community law. The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity
    direction, and I do not consider that the claimants should be  accorded
    anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The first claimant is a national of Pakistan, whose date of birth is 15
    November 1985.  The second claimant is a national  of  Portugal,  whose
    date of birth is 3 January 1992.  The  first  claimant  applied  to  be
    issued with a residence card on the grounds he had a right of residence
    as the spouse of an EEA national who was exercising her  treaty  rights
    in the United Kingdom.  The second claimant applied at  the  same  time
    for a registration certificate as confirmation of her right  to  reside
    in the United Kingdom as an EEA national exercising treaty rights here.

 3. The Secretary of State refused their applications on 23 July 2014.  She
    refused the first claimant's application for two  reasons.   The  first
    reason was that she concluded the marriage between  the  claimants  was
    one of convenience, based on home visits made to  the  claimed  marital
    home during which the investigating officer was told by the  claimants'
    landlords that the second claimant was residing in Birmingham  (whereas
    the claimed marital home was in Woking).  The Secretary  of  State  was
    also not satisfied that the submitted evidence showed that  the  second
    claimant was exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom because her
    job was said to be in Woking, whereas the landlord said she was  living
    in Birmingham.  The second claimant's application  for  a  registration
    card was also refused for this reason.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The claimants asked for their appeals to be determined on  the  papers.
    As well as the contents of the Home Office bundle, the judge  said  she
    had taken into account additional pay slips provided with  the  grounds
    of appeal, and the bundle of documents provided by  the  claimants  for
    the appeal, which included witness statements  from  the  claimants,  a
    declaration from their  landlords  plus  exhibits,  additional  utility
    bills, voter registration details, bank statements  and  an  employer's
    letter.

 5. In her subsequent decision, the judge set  out  the  evidence  at  some
    length at paragraphs [14] to [25].  Her  findings  began  at  paragraph
    [26].  Relying on Papajorjgi (EEA spouse  -  marriage  of  convenience)
    Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC), the judge found that the  Secretary  of
    State had  discharged  the  evidential  burden  of  showing  reasonable
    grounds for believing that the marriage was one  of  convenience.   She
    had done so through the reports of the Immigration Officers in the Home
    Office bundle describing two visits which they had made to the  claimed
    matrimonial home at an address in North Road, Woking.

 6. The judge then went on to  address  the  evidence  from  the  landlords
    tendered by way of appeal.  For the reasons which she gave in paragraph
    [27], she concluded in paragraph [28] that she was unable to attach any
    weight to the declarations made by Mr Qureshi  and  Mrs  Arif  for  the
    purposes of addressing the Secretary of State's  reasonable  suspicion.
    She indicated that  their  evidence  did  not  assist  in  any  way  in
    rebutting the suspicion; but that the inconsistent information they had
    provided  supported  the  suspicion  that  the  marriage  between   the
    claimants was one of convenience.

 7. At paragraph [29] she directed herself that she needed to  examine  the
    other evidence upon which the claimants relied to decide  whether  they
    were able to satisfy her that this was not a marriage  of  convenience.
    She held that the second claimant had provided  a  full  compliment  of
    wage slips, corroborated by payments into a bank account, a contract of
    employment and employer's letter so as  to  verify  her  employment  at
    Woking Superstore.  This satisfied her that the second claimant was  so
    employed, and had been so employed since April 2013.   Given  that  the
    address of Woking Superstore was in Woking, it was more likely than not
    that the second claimant was residing in or around Woking, and had been
    so throughout the relevant period.  So, she held, this evidence did not
    support the suspicion  of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the  second
    claimant resided in Birmingham.

 8.  At  paragraph  [30]  she  made  observations  about  the  two  tenancy
    agreements relied on.  There was no explanation  as  to  why  a  second
    agreement was entered into before the expiry of  the  first  agreement.
    She noted that both agreements had expired prior to the date upon which
    she was considering the appeals.  Nonetheless, given the findings  that
    she had made in paragraph [29], she found the totality of the  evidence
    was sufficient to satisfy her that the claimants lived at  the  claimed
    marital home in North Road, Woking.  For that reason, she concluded  at
    paragraph [31] that it was probable that the marriage was  not  one  of
    convenience.

 9. At paragraph [32] she held  that,  applying  her  earlier  findings  at
    paragraph [29], the second claimant was exercising her treaty rights as
    a worker. She went on to allow both appeals under the Immigration (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

10. A member of the Specialist Appeals  Team  settled  an  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

11. Ground 1 was that the judge had failed to resolve a  material  conflict
    of fact.  Given that the judge essentially concluded  that  Mr  Qureshi
    and Mrs Arif did  not  tell  the  truth  about  the  situation  of  the
    claimants, the judge failed to address her  mind  to  the  reasons  for
    that, particularly given that the judge accepted that the  inconsistent
    information  provide  by  them  supported  the  Secretary  of   State's
    suspicions.  The judge failed to resolve a conflict in the evidence  as
    to the claimants' whereabouts at the time  of  the  visits,  which  was
    clearly material and capable of supporting  the  Secretary  of  State's
    suspicions.  The judge had moved on to other evidence in paragraph [29]
    without any reconciliation of the evidential conflict.  The  conclusion
    that it was more likely than not that the second claimant was  residing
    in or around Woking was a conclusion that appeared readily open to  the
    judge. But the judge wrongly focused on the  question  of  whether  the
    second claimant resided in Birmingham or not, when the issue  was  that
    the landlords of the address she claimed to  live  at  in  Woking  gave
    inconsistent and untruthful answers about her situation,  and  that  of
    her husband.  Furthermore, the finding that she was  more  likely  than
    not residing in or around Woking did not resolve the major conflict  in
    the evidence, and arguably introduced further uncertainty.

12. Ground 2 was that the judge had failed to provide  adequate  reasoning.
    The judge failed to explain how the documentary evidence referred to at
    paragraph [30] (bank statements, utility bills  and  other  documents),
    which was evidence which could be  "managed",  displaced  the  problems
    elsewhere in the account.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

13. On 16 April 2015 Judge Colyer granted the Secretary of State permission
    to appeal on all grounds raised.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

14. As I ruled at the hearing, I am persuaded  that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is vitiated by a material error of law such that it
    should be set aside and remade.

15. The essential flaw in the  judge's  line  of  reasoning  was  that  she
    addressed two overlapping areas of evidence  separately,  and  did  not
    bring to bear the implications of her findings on  the  first  area  of
    evidence (the evidence of what the Immigration Officers  found  on  the
    home visits, and what they were told by the landlords) when considering
    the probative value of the second  area  of  evidence,  which  was  the
    documentary evidence supportive  of  the  second  claimant  working  at
    premises close to the claimed matrimonial home at all material times.

16. It was not the Secretary of  State's  case  that  the  second  claimant
    resided in Birmingham, rather than Woking.  This is what the  landlords
    had said.

17. As noted at paragraph [16] of the decision, on a visit to  the  claimed
    matrimonial home on 18 June  2014  the  landlords  told  IO  Cope  that
    neither claimant was currently  residing  at  the  address.   This  was
    because the second claimant had been staying in Birmingham for the last
    three to four months, as she was pregnant with her first child, and the
    first claimant was visiting her.

18. As noted at paragraph [17] of the judge's decision, on a  second  visit
    to the claimed matrimonial home  on  9  July  2014,  Mrs  Arif  gave  a
    different explanation as to why the claimants were not to be  found  at
    their claimed matrimonial home.  Mrs Arif  told  IO  Hussein  that  the
    first claimant had been staying with friends in  Woking  for  the  past
    month, and that he worked at a grocery shop in Woking.  When  he  asked
    Mr Qureshi about the second  claimant,  he  covered  his  head  with  a
    blanket.  Mrs Arif said the second  claimant  had  gone  to  stay  with
    friends in Birmingham two months earlier.  She claimed that the  couple
    lived in a room upstairs in the  house,  but  the  room  was  currently
    occupied by her son.  Although Mrs Arif said she  would  telephone  the
    first claimant and ask him to return to the home from the grocery  shop
    where he worked, the first claimant failed to return.

19. As is acknowledged  in  the  permission  application,  the  documentary
    evidence  relating  to  the  second  claimant's  employment  at  Woking
    Superstore throughout the relevant period had prima  facie  credibility
    when viewed in isolation.  But it did not  in  itself  prove  that  the
    second claimant was residing at the claimed matrimonial home, let alone
    that she was residing there with the first claimant.  On  the  occasion
    of the second enforcement visit referred to in paragraph  [17]  of  the
    decision, Mrs Arif had said that the first claimant was  residing  with
    friends somewhere else in Woking.  Moreover, if it were true  that  the
    second claimant was  working  at  all  material  times  at  the  Woking
    Superstore while living at the claimed marital home nearby,  the  judge
    needed to ask herself why both landlords had said on  both  enforcement
    visits that the reason she was not to be found at the  claimed  marital
    home was that she was living in Birmingham.

The Remaking of the Decision

20. After giving my error of law ruling, I indicated that  the  appropriate
    course was for the decision to be  remade  on  the  evidence  that  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  After taking  instructions,  Mr  Iqbal
    submitted that the claimants should be given the  opportunity  to  give
    oral evidence in support of their appeal at a remitted hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I informed him that I was not going to accede  to
    that request.  The claimants had elected to have their appeals  decided
    on the papers, rather than having an oral  hearing  so  their  evidence
    could be tested in cross-examination and/or at which  they  would  have
    had the opportunity to answer any questions posed by the judge  by  way
    of clarification of their case.  Since that was the election which  the
    claimants had made, there was no procedural unfairness in the  decision
    being remade on the papers.

Discussion and Findings

21. There was no cross-appeal  against  the  finding  that  the  evidential
    burden had shifted to the claimants to prove that  their  marriage  was
    not one of convenience.

22. Although there is documentary evidence consistent  with  the  claimants
    residing at the claimed marital home in Woking, including an  abundance
    of documents supportive of the second claimant working nearby at Woking
    Superstore, I find that the claimants have not done enough to rebut the
    cogent evidence against them  contained  in  the  reports  of  the  two
    enforcement visits.

23. It is simply not credible that if the claimants were genuinely residing
    in the marital home at the time of the visits, and the second  claimant
    was genuinely working at Woking Superstore at the same time,  that  the
    Immigration  Officers  would  not  have  been  shown  evidence  of  the
    claimants residing at the premises in the same room; and it  is  simply
    not credible that  on  both  occasions  the  landlords  would,  on  the
    claimants'  case,  have  told  bare-faced  lies  about   their   actual
    whereabouts.

24. Due to the discrepancy between the information given  to,  and  gleaned
    by,  the  Immigration  Officers  at  the  enforcement  visits  and  the
    information contained in the employment documents, I am also unable  to
    find that the second claimant has discharged the burden of proving that
    she has been exercising treaty rights as a worker at Woking Superstore.



25. Accordingly,  I  dismiss  both  appeals  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.  I note that there  is  an  alternative  claim  under
    Article 8 ECHR, but, following Lamichhane [2012] EWCA Civ 260, I do not
    propose to entertain this claim.  The claimants are not facing  removal
    and they were not served with  a  Section  120  notice.  Alternatively,
    questions one and two of the Razgar test should be answered  in  favour
    of the Secretary of State, as the interference consequential  upon  the
    refusal is nugatory in that it is open to the claimants to  make  fresh
    applications under the Regulations,  if  so  advised.  In  the  further
    alternative, the decisions were plainly  proportionate,  having  regard
    inter alia to Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

Conclusion

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimants' appeals
    contained an error of law, and accordingly the decision  is  set  aside
    and the  following  decision  is  substituted:  these  appeals  of  the
    claimants are dismissed under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
















