







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/31095/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 20 September 2017             |On :  17 October 2017                    |
|                                  |                                         |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                                     N A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones, instructed by Connaughts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. On 13 July 2017 I found that the decision of the  First-tier  tribunal
      involved the making of a material error of law for reasons set out  in
      my decision. I set aside the decision directing that it would  be  re-
      made at a continuance hearing in the Upper Tribunal. I gave directions
      to the appellant's solicitors.

   2. When the appeal came  before  me  on  20  September  2017  no  further
      evidence had been produced.

   3. The appellant commenced his evidence.  During the course of his  cross
      examination Mr  Melvin  asked  the  appellant  a  series  of  relevant
      questions.   The  appellant  struggled  to  recall  matters  that  had
      occurred between 2011 and 2015. The appellant  referred  to  documents
      which had not been produced.

   4. No  chronology  was  prepared  with  the  result  that  the  appellant
      struggled for over an hour to recall  matters  which  related  to  the
      period 2011 to 2015.  It was understandable that he had difficulty. He
      also referred to documents in support of his case which had  not  been
      produced.

   5. Mr Melvin and Ms Jones both eventually agreed that there had not  been
      a proper preparation of the case.   The  solicitors  had  produced  no
      evidence or statement in an attempt to deal with the  history  of  the
      association with the two colleges and the ETS.

   6. The representatives then agreed  that  in  the  circumstances  it  was
      appropriate for the appeal to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
      for hearing.  The case could be dealt  with  at  a  CMR.   Appropriate
      directions could be issued to the appellant's solicitors to  file  and
      produce all the necessary evidence.

   7. I am satisfied that the extent  of  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
      necessary in order for the decision to be re-made, is  extensive.   In
      the circumstances I find that it is just and fair to remit the case.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law which was set aside.


      The appeal is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for a fresh decision
      to be made.


      Anonymity direction continued.






      Signed                                       Date 15 October 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer





