
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/31106/2015
                                                               IA/31107/2015
                                                               IA/31112/2015
                                                               IA/31115/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 November 2017                           |On 11 December 2017           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     NPP
                                     BP
                                     VD
                                     TP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellants:     Ms N Bustani, instructed by Wilson Barca LLP
For the Respondent:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the  appellants.
This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any  failure  to
comply  with  this  direction  could  give  rise  to   contempt   of   court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of India. The first appellant, born on [  ]
    1977, and second appellant, born on [ ] 1982, are a married couple  who
    entered the UK unlawfully using false  passports  on  14  August  2004.
    Since arriving in the UK they have had two sons: the  third  appellant,
    who was born on [ ] 2006; and the fourth appellant  was  born  on  [  ]
    2011. The third and fourth appellants have lived their whole  lives  in
    the UK.

 2. The appellants' application for leave to remain in the UK on the  basis
    of their private and family life was refused  by  the  respondent.  The
    appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where their  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Boyes. In a decision promulgated on 13 February 2017 the
    judge dismissed the appeal. The appellants are  now  appealing  against
    that decision.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The judge firstly  considered  whether  the  appellants  were  able  to
    succeed under paragraph 276 ADE (1) of the Immigration Rules.

 4. The judge found that the first and second appellants  did  not  satisfy
    the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi) on the  basis  that  there
    would not be "very significant obstacles"  to  their  integration  into
    India.

 5. The  judge  undertook  a  detailed  evaluation  of  whether  the  third
    appellant satisfied the requirements of paragraph  276  ADE(1)(iv).  It
    was accepted that the third  appellant  met  the  seven  year  duration
    requirement and the judge identified that  the  issue  before  him  was
    whether it would be unreasonable to expect the third appellant to leave
    the UK. The judge's approach was to firstly evaluate the best interests
    of the third appellant. At paragraph 40 judge concluded:


         Putting aside all other considerations and considering  [the  third
         appellant's] best interests in  isolation,  it  seems  to  me  that
         maintaining the status quo  would  be  in  his  best  interests.  I
         therefore find that it would be in his best interests to remain  in
         the UK with his parents rather than returning to India.


 6. The judge then proceeded to consider whether it would  be  unreasonable
    to expect the third appellant to leave the UK. In evaluating whether it
    would be unreasonable for the third appellant  to  leave  the  UK,  the
    judge considered the following:


          a) the educational opportunities in India (paragraph 41 - 42)
          b) the third appellant's health and  medical  history  (paragraph
             43)
          c) that he would be relocating with his parents (paragraph 45)
          d) his age, length of residence  in  the  UK,  and  that  he  has
             friends outside of the immediate family (paragraph 46 and 48)
          e) the capacity of his parents to assist him  in  integrating  in
             India and find accommodation and work (paragraph 47)
          f) the presence of family in India (paragraph 47)
          g) the conduct of the first and second appellants in entering the
             UK  illegally  using  deception  and  intentionally  breaching
             immigration control (paragraphs 50 - 52)
          h) the delay on the part of the respondent (paragraph 53)


 7. At paragraph 54 the judge stated:


         Taking into account all of  the  above  factors,  and  even  giving
         significant weight to the fact that the third appellant has resided
         in the UK for over seven years, I do not consider that it would  be
         unreasonable to expect him to leave the UK. He therefore  does  not
         meet the requirements of 276 ADE(1)(iv).


 8. The judge then considered Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules.
    He systematically assessed the factors set out in section 117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. He  found  that  sections
    117B (2) and (3) did not count against the first and second  appellants
    but that 117B(5) did because their private lives in the UK were  formed
    whilst in the UK unlawfully. Section 117B (6) was found not  to  assist
    the appellants because it would not be unreasonable to expect the third
    appellant to leave the UK.

 9. The judge considered  the  best  interests  of  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants, finding in the case of the third appellant that it would be
    in his best interests to remain in the UK with his parents and  in  the
    case of the fourth appellant that  it  would  be  to  remain  with  his
    parents in either India or the UK. The judge concluded  that  it  would
    not be disproportionate to remove the appellants from the UK.

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

10. The grounds of appeal  argue  that  the  judge  failed  to  mention  or
    consider the fact that  the  third  appellant  has  spent  significant,
    formative years in the UK, has undertaken studies in the UK,  and  that
    it would not be in his best interests to uproot him from the society he
    has known. It is argued that the judge failed to recognise that serious
    reasons will be needed to show someone who spent the major part of  his
    childhood in the UK should be required to leave. It is also  maintained
    in the grounds that the judge failed to engage with issues relevant  to
    the third appellant's best interests.

11. The grounds also argue that the decision is "effectively  contrary  to"
    MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 because the judge has not  identified
    any powerful reasons why leave should not be granted.

12. Before me, Ms Bustani argued that  the  crux  of  this  matter  is  the
    reasonableness of expecting the third appellant to leave  the  UK.  She
    argued that there is insufficient analysis  of  the  third  appellant's
    private life beyond his family unit. She  argued  that  the  judge  had
    correctly found that  the  third  appellant's  best  interests  lay  in
    maintaining  the  status  quo  but  had  erred  in  his  evaluation  of
    reasonableness. The  key  error,  she  argued,  was  in  treating  this
    appellant as if he had spent the first seven years of his life  in  the
    UK, whereas in fact he had spent nine years in the UK. She argued  that
    the judge had erred when stating that the third  appellant's  life  was
    not embedded in the UK, given his age.

13. Ms Isherwood  argued  that  the  grounds  amount  to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the judge's  findings.  She  argued  that  the  judge
    correctly identified the law, and had  proper  regard  to  all  of  the
    material evidence including the third appellant's age and time spent in
    the UK.

Consideration

14. The judge correctly identified  that  the  central  issue  for  him  to
    resolve was whether it would be reasonable for the third  appellant  to
    leave the UK under 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules  and  Section
    117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

15. The judge's approach was to firstly address what would be in the  third
    appellant's best interests. Having found that it would be in  his  best
    interests to remain the in the UK with  his  parents,  the  judge  then
    proceeded to address the question of whether, notwithstanding  that  it
    would be in his best interests  to  remain  in  the  UK,  it  would  be
    reasonable for the third appellant to leave the UK.

16. The judge took into account a wide range of factors when assessing  the
    reasonableness of the third appellant leaving the UK. This included his
    age, length of time in the UK, life outside the family in the  UK,  the
    situation he would face in India, and the conduct of  his  parents  (in
    particular the use of deception to illegally enter the UK).

17. The grounds of appeal claim  that  the  judge  failed  to  "mention  or
    consider" the fact that the third appellant  has  spent  his  formative
    years in the UK. This is simply untrue. These factors  were  explicitly
    considered by the  judge  in  his  evaluation  of  "reasonableness"  at
    paragraphs 45 - 46 of the decision.

18. The grounds also assert that the judge failed to properly evaluate  the
    third appellant's best interests. This is entirely misconceived as  the
    judge at paragraphs 36  -  40  of  the  Decision  undertook  a  careful
    evaluation of the third appellant's best interests. This assessment  of
    the best interest was carried out independently of all other factors.

19. The grounds also contend that the judge did not  recognise  the  weight
    that needs to be given to the fact that the third appellant  had  spent
    the major part of his childhood  in  the  UK.  This,  too,  is  without
    foundation as the judge at paragraph 54 made specific reference to  the
    seven year rule and its significance.

20. The argument that the judge failed to follow MA (Pakistan) it  is  also
    without merit. In that  case  the  Court  of  Appeal  made  clear  that
    although the conduct of a person's  parents  is  not  relevant  to  the
    question of their best interests, it is  a  factor  to  be  taken  into
    consideration in the assessment of whether removal  is  reasonable.  In
    this case, the unchallenged finding of the judge was that the first and
    second  appellants  had  not  only  entered  the  UK  unlawfully  using
    deception,  but  that  they  had  intentionally  sought  to  give   the
    impression that they had entered the UK as visitors when this  was  not
    the case. The judge found at paragraph 52 that "the  first  and  second
    appellant's planned and intentional disregard of immigration control is
    an important consideration when assessing reasonableness".

21. It may be that other judges would have struck the balance  differently,
    but the question is whether this judge reached a conclusion  which  was
    open to him. Given that he was required to have  regard  to  the  wider
    pubic interest in effective immigration control, I am satisfied that he
    did.

Decision

A.   The appeal is dismissed.

B.   The judge has not made a material error of law and the decision of  the
First-tier Tribunal stands.
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Signed                                  |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |  |   |Dated:  10 December 2017     |

