
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/31752/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|                                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|                                     |On 3rd  November 2015                 |


                                   Before

                       Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MUJA HAJREDIN
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. For convenience I refer to the parties as they were before the First-
       tier Tribunal.

    2. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Beach  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal
       against the respondent's decision to refuse to issue a residence card
       as  an  extended  family  member,  being  a  person  in   a   durable
       relationship with an EEA national, with reference to regulation 8  of
       the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006. The First-
       tier judge concluded that the appellant was in a durable relationship
       with an EEA national who is exercising Treaty Rights.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary  of  State  on  the
       basis that the First-tier judge allowed the appeal outright,  whereas
       pursuant to regulation 17(4) the most that she could have done was to
       allow the appeal for the matter to be considered by the respondent in
       the exercise of her discretion under regulation 17(4) as  to  whether
       or  not  to  issue  a  residence  card  in  the  light  of  all   the
       circumstances.

    4. By letter dated 5 October 2015, the appellant's representatives wrote
       to the Tribunal stating that  both  parties  "wish  to  withdraw  the
       appeal by consent", although email correspondence referred to was not
       attached as suggested in the letter.

    5. In response to that letter, at my direction a letter was sent to both
       parties on 13 October 2015 as follows:

           "In the light of the letter from Malik & Malik solicitors to the
           Upper Tribunal dated 5 October 2015 stating  that  both  parties
           "wish to withdraw the  appeal  by  consent",  but  omitting  the
           referred to email correspondence, the parties are  to  write  to
           the Tribunal indicating what agreement is proposed in  terms  of
           how the forthcoming appeal should be disposed  of.  The  parties
           may wish to consider inviting the  Tribunal  to  deal  with  the
           matter by a consent order pursuant to rule 39  of  the  Tribunal
           Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

           Alternatively, the appellant  may  consider  it  appropriate  to
           concede that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law as set out  in
           the respondent's grounds and agreeing that the decision  be  set
           aside, for the decision to  be  re-made  giving  effect  to  the
           respondent's grounds.

           The parties must indicate to  the  Tribunal  how  they  wish  to
           proceed no later than 14 days from the date of sending  of  this
           letter, failing which the  Tribunal  may  determine  the  appeal
           without a hearing in the manner it considers appropriate  having
           regard to the information provided thus far."

    6. It is disappointing to  note  that  neither  party  appears  to  have
       responded to  that  letter  and  to  the  direction  to  the  parties
       contained  within  it.  In  the  circumstances,  I  have  decided  to
       determine this appeal without a hearing, pursuant to rule 34  of  the
       Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 which is a  course  of
       action plainly foreshadowed in the letter sent to the parties.

    7. The Secretary of State's grounds rely  on  the  decision  in  Ihemedu
       (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011]  UKUT  00340(IAC).  Materially,  that
       decision states that regulation 17(4) makes the issue of a  residence
       card to an extended family member a matter of discretion.  Where  the
       Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion, the most an
       Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow the appeal  as  being
       not in accordance with the law  leaving  the  matter  of  whether  to
       exercise this discretion in the appellant's favour  or  not,  to  the
       Secretary of State.

    8. As already indicated,  First-tier  Judge  Beach  allowed  the  appeal
       outright. It may be that neither party referred her to  the  decision
       in Ihemedu. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that on this occasion and in
       this respect this experienced judge did err in law  in  allowing  the
       appeal outright. Accordingly, I set aside her  decision  and  re-make
       the decision, allowing the appeal but only to the limited extent that
       the respondent's decision is not in accordance with the law,  leaving
       outstanding before the Secretary of State a decision under regulation
       17(4) as to whether in all the circumstances  it  is  appropriate  to
       issue a residence card to the appellant.

  Decision

    9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law. The First-tier Tribunal's  decision  is  set
       aside. I re-make the decision, allowing the appeal but  only  to  the
       limited extent that the respondent's decision is  not  in  accordance
       with the law, such that it remains for  the  respondent  to  consider
       whether or not to issue to the appellant  a  residence  card  in  the
       light of the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek


      3/11/15

