
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/31382/2014
     IA/31383/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th July 2016                             |On 12th August 2016           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                mrs clarise eugenie lindsay (first appellant)
              mr anthony ricardo constantine (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mrs A Heller, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of Jamaica.  They were born respectively on
    3rd January 1970 and 7th November 1987.  On 9th  June  2014  the  first
    Appellant applied for a permanent residence card as confirmation  of  a
    right to reside in the UK on the basis that she was the  former  spouse
    of an EEA national who was  exercising  free  movement  rights  in  the
    United Kingdom at the  time  of  her  divorce.   The  second  Appellant
    applied on the basis of his being a family member.  Their  applications
    were refused by the Secretary of State by Notice of Refusals dated 23rd
    July 2014.

 2. The Appellants appealed and the appeals came before Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Bowler sitting at Hatton Cross on  1st  July  2015.   The
    Appellants appeals were dismissed under the EEA Regulations  and  their
    appeals were however allowed on human rights grounds.  It was  recorded
    within the decision that the second Appellant is the son of  the  first
    Appellant.

 3. On 24th July 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal  to
    the  Upper  Tribunal.   On  30th  October  2015  Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge McCarthy granted permission to appeal.   Judge  McCarthy
    noted that the Grounds of Appeal in summary alleged that the judge  had
    no power to consider the private and family life rights under Article 8
    and that even if he had he had  reached  a  conclusion  which  was  not
    permissible on the facts because he had failed to give adequate  regard
    to the statutory public interest considerations and his  findings  were
    therefore inadequately reasoned.  Judge McCarthy noted that although it
    was not cited in the Grounds of Appeal and although  not  available  to
    the parties or the judge  at  the  date  of  hearing  the  decision  in
    Amirteymour and Others (EEA appeals;  human  rights)  [2015]  UKUT  466
    (IAC) added weight to the Secretary of State's argument albeit that  it
    was acknowledged that it may not be determinative  of  the  outcome  in
    this case because at paragraphs 32 and 33 of the First-tier  Tribunal's
    Judge's decision it is clear that the Presenting Officer did not object
    to the judge considering Article 8  and  presented  arguments  on  that
    specific issue despite in paragraph 31 it being  noted  that  the  Home
    Office had not considered Article 8 issues.

 4. A request for an adjournment of the restored hearing before  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Storey  on  18th  January
    2016 pending permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal in Amirteymour
    and Others.

 5. It is on that basis that the appeal comes back before me.  I note  that
    this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  and  for  the  purpose  of
    continuity throughout the appeal process  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    referred to herein as the Respondent and Mrs Lindsay and Mr Constantine
    as the Appellants.  The Appellants appeared by their instructed Counsel
    Mrs Heller.  Mrs Heller is familiar with this  matter  having  appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of State appears by  her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Tufan.

Submissions/Discussion/Law

 6. It is accepted by Mrs Heller that no Section 120 Notice has been served
    in this matter and the fact that the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    indicated that he would not raise objection to Article 8  being  raised
    at the appeal is of no consequence.  She further acknowledges that  the
    law is now to be found within the Court of Appeal decision of  TY  (Sri
    Lanka) [2015] EWCA Civ 1233.  That authority reached a similar decision
    on the issues  to  the  decision  reached  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Amirteymour.  The Court of Appeal concluded that it was  impossible  to
    say that the Secretary of State's decision to withhold a residence card
    would or would not cause  the  UK  to  be  in  breach  of  the  Refugee
    Convention or the ECHR and that the UK would only be in breach of those
    Conventions if in the future an  Appellant  made  an  asylum  or  human
    rights  claim  which  the  Secretary  of  State  and/or  the   Tribunal
    incorrectly rejected.  Consequently Mrs Heller in following TY  accepts
    that Article 8 cannot be engaged.

Findings

 7. Consequently the correct approach is to find that the judge  materially
    erred in law in addressing Article 8.  He had no jurisdiction to do so.
     Such an approach constituted a material error of law.  I therefore set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so far it relates to  the
    finding  under  Article  8  and  remake  the  decision  dismissing  the
    Appellants' appeal under Article 8 on the grounds  that  there  was  no
    jurisdiction for the judge to hear the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
in that the judge had no jurisdiction to hear the  appeal  on  human  rights
grounds.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is consequently set  aside
so far as it relates to its finding on human rights grounds  and  is  remade
dismissing the appeal on the basis that there was no  jurisdiction  for  the
appeal to be heard by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
