
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31308/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th April 2014                              |On 14th May 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                              Rungruang Boonrin
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Robson
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 11th December 2013.



Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Thailand and  the  spouse  of  a  British
    citizen.  She arrived in the UK with entry  clearance  valid  from  1st
    June 2010 to 1st September 2012,  and  applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain on 29th August 2012.

 3. She was  refused  on  the  sole  ground  that  she  did  not  meet  the
    requirement that she produce an English language  test  certificate  in
    speaking and listening from an English language test provider  approved
    by the Secretary of State.

 4. The application form was lodged  in  August  2012.  The  Appellant  had
    submitted her original passport with the form and, on 4th  April  2013,
    requested the return  of  the  passport  in  order  to  enable  her  to
    undertake the test.  There was no  response  to  that  letter  and  the
    Sponsor wrote again on 21st July.  The Respondent replied that

         "Your passport was retained as  it  is  normal  procedure  when  an
         application for further leave to remain is refused".

    The Sponsor then contacted the Immigration Services at  Humberside  and
    was told that the only reason a passport could be returned  was  if  it
    was with a view to the applicant leaving the UK.

    The  refusal  was  not  until  11  months  after  the  application  was
    submitted, in July 2013.

 5. The judge wrote that there was no credible reason why the passport  had
    not previously been returned and without  the  passport  the  Appellant
    could not have undertaken the test.   However  he  concluded  that  the
    application  had  to  fail  under  the  Rules  and  it  would  not   be
    disproportionate for the Appellant to be returned.

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal, which was granted  by  Judge
    Page who stated that the judge had wrongly considered the  evidence  as
    at the date of decision rather than as at the date of hearing  and  had
    not given any weight to the fact that the Respondent had prevented  the
    Appellant from sitting  the  English  test.   The  facts  of  the  case
    required an  assessment  as  to  whether  there  were  any  exceptional
    circumstances as set out in the case of Gulshan (Article 8 - new  Rules
    - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640.

The Hearing

 7. Mr Diwnycz helpfully provided the Respondent's policy  in  relation  to
    requests for the return of documents.  It states that  the  purpose  of
    Section 17 of the 2004 Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants,
    etc.) Act 2004 is to retain documents that may facilitate removal while
    a person is still liable to be removed from the UK, but does not  allow
    for the retention of documents without limit of time.

 8. Any request for documents from applicants for a specific  purpose  e.g.
    for opening a bank account or applying for a driving licence should  be
    declined.  However photocopies of the documents with the officer's name
    printed and signed at the end of  each  page  should  be  sent  to  the
    claimant together with specified forms  listing  the  documents,  their
    issue numbers and the number of  pages  photocopied.   It  should  also
    contain the following text

         "These documents are presently being held by the UK Border  Agency,
         each of the photocopied document pages have been signed to  confirm
         that they are held.  If you wish to confirm  that  these  documents
         are held by the UK Border Agency please phone the number listed  at
         the top of this page and giving the Home Office reference number".

 9. Mr Diwnycz said that in this case the UKBA did  not  follow  their  own
    policy in respect of providing proof of documentation  and  accordingly
    had prevented the Appellant from taking the English language  test  and
    meeting the requirements of the Rules.  Accordingly  he  accepted  that
    she had not acted in accordance with the law.

10. The Appellant said that she was happy with that outcome.

11. The judge erred in law in failing to consider whether the decision  was
    a lawful one for the reasons set out in the grant of permission, namely
    that he did not consider the relevance of the Respondent's  actions  in
    reaching his decision on Article 8.  His decision is set aside.

Decision

12. The original judge erred in law and his decision is set aside.   It  is
    remade as follows.  The Respondent's decision is not in accordance with
    the law and accordingly the Appellant awaits a lawful decision from the
    Secretary of State.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


