
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31071/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 26 September 2017                       |On 13 November 2017            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MD kamal uddin
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Syed-Ali of Immigration Aid (Dunstable Road,
Luton)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Feeney promulgated on 17 January 2017.


2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the appellant  and  Mr  Uddin  is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of
    consistency with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall
    hereafter refer to the Secretary of State  as  the  Respondent  and  Mr
    Uddin as the Appellant.


3.   The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 22 September 2009  pursuant
    to entry clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant,  with  leave
    valid until 31 December 2010.   On  24  January  2011  he  was  granted
    further leave to remain as a Tier 4 Migrant until 28 June 2014.  On  29
    March 2012 his leave was curtailed, to take  effect  on  28  May  2012.
    However, on 9 August 2012 he was granted further leave to remain  until
    30 March 2014, again  as  a  Tier  4  Migrant.   A  second  curtailment
    decision was taken on 25 January 2013 with effect from 26  March  2013.
    On 18 March 2013 the Appellant made an application for further leave to
    remain which in due course was granted on 23 May 2013 until 5  November
    2014 - yet again as a Tier 4 Migrant.  On 16 October 2014 the Appellant
    applied for  further  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  Migrant.   His
    application was refused for reasons set out in a 'reasons for  refusal'
    letter ('RFRL') dated 2 September 2015; in  consequence  the  Appellant
    was refused leave to remain and a removal decision was made pursuant to
    section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


4.   The refusal of the Appellant's application was made with  reference  to
    paragraph 322(2) and 245ZX(a) of the Immigration  Rules  on  the  basis
    that the Respondent considered that the Appellant had used deception in
    the context of his application of 18 March 2013 by reason of submitting
    a TOEIC certificate issued by ETS dated 17 April 2012  which  had  been
    obtained through the use of a proxy tester.  The application  was  also
    refused with reference to paragraph 245ZX(c) and (d) on the basis  that
    the Appellant had failed to submit a Certificate of Approval  of  Study
    ('CAS') with his application, and in such circumstances failed to score
    the requisite points in respect of a CAS and thereby also in respect of
    maintenance.


5.   The Appellant lodged an appeal to the IAC.  In his  Grounds  of  Appeal
    he acknowledged the two bases of  the  Respondent's  refusal:  see  for
    example paragraph 2 of the Grounds.  So far as the issue in respect  of
    the CAS was concerned, the Appellant did not deny that he had submitted
    an application without  a  supporting  CAS,  but  sought  to  offer  an
    explanation for this shortcoming in his application.  In respect of the
    allegation that he had used deception  in  an  earlier  application  by
    relying upon  an  invalid  TOEIC  certificate  obtained  through  proxy
    testing, he essentially denied that he had submitted  such  a  document
    and asserted that he had obtained  his  TOEIC  legitimately.   Although
    Article 8 of the ECHR was referred to in  passing  in  the  Grounds  by
    reference to public interest (see ground 5 at paragraphs 23  et  seq.),
    nothing of substance was advanced in respect of private life either  in
    the Grounds of Appeal or subsequently in the evidence before the First-
    tier Tribunal.


6.   In support of his appeal the Appellant  filed  a  bundle  of  documents
    including a witness statement signed by him on 1 December 2016.  In his
    witness  statement  he  again  acknowledged  the  two  bases   of   the
    Respondent's decision.  In respect of the CAS he explains at  paragraph
    7 that he "had to  submit  the  application  without  a  CAS",  and  at
    paragraph 8 he states "As  I  had  expected,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused my application".  At paragraph 12 of his witness statement  the
    Appellant also says this about the CAS:

         "I would like to plead the Honourable Immigration Judge that I have
         genuine intentions to study which I was unable to pursue simply  as
         a result of not having CAS in time.  It was highly frustrating when
         my application was refused due to the fact that the SSHD questioned
         the genuineness of the manner in which  I  had  obtained  my  TOEIC
         certificate".

    (The Appellant also expresses his shock at the  basis  of  the  refusal
    with regard to proxy testing at paragraph 8 of his witness statement.)


7.   On their face  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  and  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement appear to concede that  the  Appellant  recognised  that  his
    application was going to be refused because he  had  failed  to  comply
    with the requirements of the Rules - which include the  requirement  to
    provide a CAS.  However, his particular consternation and surprise  was
    not in this regard, but in respect of the allegation of  dishonesty  in
    making use of the TOEIC certificate in the circumstances alleged by the
    Secretary of State.


8.   Unfortunately - for reasons that are unclear - it is apparent that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge completely failed to  address  the  issue  in
    respect  of  the  CAS.   It  seems  to  me  that  had   he   done   so,
    notwithstanding the conclusion he reached favourable to  the  Appellant
    in respect of the proxy testing issue, he would have been duty bound to
    conclude that the Appellant did not satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and would thereby have been duty bound to refuse the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules.  The fact that the Judge  seems  to
    have missed this point entirely is in my judgement a manifest  material
    error of law.


9.   Notwithstanding the foregoing this matter was not actually  pleaded  by
    the Respondent in  the  grounds  in  support  of  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  Rather, the Respondent sought to  challenge  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's assessment in respect of the allegation  of
    dishonesty in making use of an invalid TOEIC certificate.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge addresses these matters from paragraph  17  of  the
    Decision.  Prior to paragraph 17 the Decision essentially rehearses the
    history, documents, substance of the refusal letter, substance  of  the
    Appellant's case, events at the hearing and sets out the relevant legal
    framework by citation from the case of SM  and  Qadir  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016]
    UKUT 229 (IAC).  At paragraphs 17-19 the Judge makes reference to  what
    is sometimes referred to  as  the  'generic  evidence'  from  Mr  Peter
    Millington and  Ms  Rebecca  Collings,  and  passes  some  observations
    critical of the substance of that evidence, and otherwise suggests that
    in some parts the evidence lacks  clarity  -  for  example,  the  Judge
    refers  to  Mr  Millington  referring  to  cases  that   are   "clearly
    distinguished by ETS in its spreadsheets", but observes that it is  not
    clear to him, that is to say to the Judge, how one can  tell  from  the
    spreadsheets whether a case has been marked in such a way as to  denote
    an 'administration irregularity'.  (I  pause  to  note  that  it  might
    reasonably be thought that the comment  that  such  cases  are  clearly
    distinguished in  the  spreadsheets  is  evidence  enough  that  it  is
    possible to tell from the  spreadsheets  which  cases  have  been  thus
    denoted. The Judge's comment appears to negate the meaning of the words
    'clearly distinguished'.).


10.  Be that as it may, the Judge then goes at paragraphs  20-23  to  record
    aspects of the Appellant's narrative account and case; at paragraph  24
    he refers to the Appellant's evidence as to how he chose his particular
    test centre and the travel arrangements made.  The Judge says  in  this
    context "The core aspects of his account are credible",  before  adding
    "The documentary evidence provided by the Appellant, in particular  the
    certificates, are unchallenged".  (The reference to  "certificates"  is
    in respect  of  other  educational  certificates  which  the  Appellant
    suggested indicated a competence in the English language.)


11.  Paragraph 25 of the First-tier Tribunal's Decision is in these terms:-

     "I remind myself of the burden and standard of proof and  the  guidance
         in SM and Qadir.  Notwithstanding the concerns, I  have  identified
         in the evidence provided by the Respondent regarding the assessment
         of the tests themselves, in terms of SM and Qadir I  find  this  is
         sufficient to the extent that the  Respondent  has  discharged  the
         evidential burden.  However, in this particular case I find she has
         failed to discharge the legal burden.  In reaching this decision  I
         take into account that the Appellant would have had no need to  use
         a proxy tester.  Prior to his arrival in the United Kingdom he  had
         been educated in Bangladesh to University level  where  he  studied
         English Literature which was a course that was taught  in  English.
         The Appellant has lived in the United Kingdom since 2009 and during
         that time has undertaken various courses  which  have  had  English
         language components.  I note he has successfully completed an MA at
         Anglia Ruskin University, a course which was conducted in  English.
          I find that at the time the Appellant took his  test  there  would
         have been no need for him to have  engaged  a  proxy  tester.   The
         Appellant has a great deal [of]  experience  with  the  immigration
         process  and  understands  well  the  risks  associated  with  non-
         compliance.  He has found himself in a difficult  position  on  two
         separate occasions when he has had to deal with the curtailment  of
         his leave and I  find  he  well  understands  the  implications  of
         adhering to the  Rules.   I  note  the  Appellant  has  provided  a
         consistent account about the location of his test and his travel to
         the test centre, he was asked a limited number of questions  by  Ms
         Ayodele but the replies  he  did  give  were  consistent  with  the
         evidence he provided in his witness statement and his  certificates
         were unchallenged.  Looking at the evidence overall,  I  find  that
         the Secretary of State has not discharged the legal burden in  this
         case and I find in the Appellant's favour."



12.  The Judge then allowed the appeal  without  further  reference  to  the
    issue in respect of the CAS.


13.  In challenging the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal, the  Respondent
    makes criticism of the Judge's analysis at paragraph 25 in particular.


14.   It  may  be  seen  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  essentially
    identified three bases for concluding that the Secretary of  State  had
    failed to discharge  the  legal  burden  and  for  accepting  that  the
    Appellant was essentially honest  in  his  presentation  of  his  TOEIC
    certificate.  In brief those three matters are: the Appellant  did  not
    need to use a proxy tester for the reasons set out; the Appellant was a
    person who understood well the risks of not complying with  the  Rules;
    the Appellant was able to give an account of how he  had  attended  the
    testing centre.


15.  In respect  of  the  first  of  those  matters  the  Respondent  places
    particular reliance upon passages in  the  case  of  MA  (ETS  -  TOEIC
    testing) [2016] UKUT 00450(IAC), in particular at  paragraph  57  where
    the following is said:-

         "Second, we acknowledge the suggestion that the  Appellant  had  no
         reason to engage in the  deception  which  we  have  found  proven.
         However, this has not deflected us in any  way  from  reaching  our
         main findings and conclusions.  In the abstract, of  course,  there
         is a range of reasons why persons proficient in English may  engage
         in TOEIC fraud.  These include, inexhaustively, lack of confidence,
         fear of failure, lack of time and commitment and contempt  for  the
         immigration system.  These reasons  could  conceivably  overlap  in
         individual cases and there is  scope  for  other  explanations  for
         deceitful conduct in this sphere.  We are not required to make  the
         further finding of why the Appellant engaged in  deception  and  to
         this we add that this issue was not explored  during  the  hearing.
         We resist any temptation to speculate about this discrete matter."


16.  The Respondent argues  in  effect  that  the  apparent  proficiency  in
    English of any particular individual is  not  a  reliable  -  far  less
    determinative - indicator of whether or not he decided to make use of a
    proxy tester. Accordingly, it is submitted, little or no weight  should
    be placed on such a circumstance, and that the Judge fell into error in
    this regard. In light of MA, and for  the  reasons  given  therein,  it
    seems to me that that is a point well made.


17.  Moreover, on the facts of this particular case  the  TOEIC  certificate
    relied upon by the Appellant that was said to be  dishonestly  obtained
    was dated from April 2012. The MA  from  Anglia  Ruskin  University  to
    which the Judge accorded weight in evaluating language  competence  and
    the supposedly consequent propensity to cheat or not, was not  obtained
    until 2015.  To that extent the Judge's reliance upon  the  Appellant's
    proficiency by reference to  the  award  of  the  MA  was  misconceived
    because it was not a helpful or reliable indicator of  the  Appellant's
    language abilities three years previously.


18.  The Respondent also argues that the ability of the  Appellant  to  give
    an account of  how  he  got  to  and  from  his  test  centre  and  the
    circumstances at the test centre, is in no way a reliable indicator  of
    whether or not a proxy tester was used.  In this regard  it  is  to  be
    recalled - both from the evidence of the witnesses relied upon  by  the
    Secretary of State and from the Panorama programme that  triggered  the
    investigation into these matters - that at some testing centres it  was
    the practice for the applicant to attend, but then to step aside, as it
    were, whilst the proxy tester took his or her  place  at  the  desk  or
    terminal to complete the tests.  It follows that the  use  of  a  proxy
    tester would not mean that an individual did not know where the testing
    centre was, or how to get there, or what it was  like  on  arrival  and
    during the testing process. Again I accept that the Judge was in  error
    in according any favourable weight to the Appellant's account  in  this
    regard.


19.  The general point that the Appellant knew  that  he  needed  to  comply
    with the Immigration Rules appears to me to  be  essentially  a  'make-
    weight' point. In and of itself - and perhaps even in combination  with
    other factors - it does not seem to me to be  in  any  way  capable  of
    being a reliable indicator of the likely innocence or otherwise of  the
    Appellant in the alleged wrongdoing.


20.  In all the circumstances, and for the reasons given above, I find  that
    there is substance in Respondent's challenge to  the  adequacy  of  the
    reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, sufficient to  persuade  me
    that the Judge materially erred in law.


21.  In my judgement there is a yet further substantial  difficulty  in  the
    way in which this case has been considered.


22.   Mr  Tarlow  has  helpfully  directed  my  attention  to  the  relevant
    jurisprudence,  and  in  particular  the  requirement  that  once   the
    evidential burden has been discharged by the Secretary of  State  -  as
    indeed was acknowledged to be the case by the Judge herein pursuant  to
    SM and Qadir -  the  Appellant  then  has  the  burden  of  raising  an
    'innocent explanation'.  What is required is an innocent explanation of
    the prima facie indication of deception. In substance that  places  the
    focus not on contesting the fact of the falsity of the document, but on
    any explanation of how an  applicant  came  to  rely  upon  an  invalid
    document without knowing it was invalid -  i.e.  'innocently',  without
    the necessary intent required for dishonesty. The approach of the Judge
    in this case is not to focus upon that  question,  but  rather  to  re-
    evaluate the question of whether or not the certificate was invalid.


23.  Mr Syed-Ali told me that there is indeed a divergence  of  approach  to
    this in the First-tier Tribunal, with some Judges adopting the approach
    that I have indicated - which is that the explanation must  go  to  the
    circumstances in which an invalid document  came  to  be  submitted  in
    support of an application - and other Judges  in  substance  revisiting
    the question of whether or not the document is invalid, notwithstanding
    the Respondent's discharge of the  evidential  burden.   I  prefer  the
    former approach as being a proper  reflection  of  the  legal  guidance
    offered by the leading cases. Accordingly I conclude  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge has approached this case in  error.  I  acknowledge
    the divergence of approach, and necessarily therefore that  this  is  a
    contentious issue. However, ultimately, irrespective of this  approach,
    on the facts of this particular case for the  reasons  given  above  in
    respect of the Judge's reasoning, I am satisfied that in any event  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated for error of law.


24.  In all of the circumstances I find that the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge must be set aside and requires to be remade.


25.  In remaking the  decision  it  seems  to  me,  as  discussed  with  the
    representatives, that it is not necessary to remit this appeal  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Appellant   cannot   succeed   under   the
    Immigration Rules for the reasons I have already indicated  in  respect
    of the CAS.  Indeed, this was to all intents and purposes substantially
    accepted and acknowledged in his witness statement.  Whilst Mr Syed-Ali
    during the  course  of  argument  suggested  that  were  the  Appellant
    successful in establishing that the decision in respect  of  the  proxy
    testing was in error, the Respondent might then accord  him  a  60  day
    period of grace in which to seek to regularise his status whereupon  he
    might better be able to obtain a CAS without having to rely  upon  past
    TOEIC certification,  I do not accept that that is a matter that founds
    a basis to allow the appeal under the Rules, or  by  reference  to  any
    principles of procedural fairness or otherwise.


26.  In such circumstances it becomes unnecessary to  reach  any  conclusion
    in respect of the allegation of proxy  testing.  Were  it  necessary  I
    would be minded to conclude that  the  Appellant  has  not  offered  an
    innocent explanation but  has  rather  disputed  the  accuracy  of  the
    Respondent's evidence and findings as to his test being  invalid  -  he
    has in effect denied the invalidity of his test, but has not sought  to
    offer any explanation  as  to  how  it  is  that  he  might  have  come
    innocently to submit an invalid test certificate.   To  that  extent  I
    would have been minded to find that the Secretary of State had met both
    the evidential and the legal burden, and that  accordingly  the  appeal
    should also fail on that basis.


27.  Mr Syed-Ali has not sought to pursue an Article 8 ground of  challenge,
    and indeed there is no  evidential  material  before  the  Tribunal  in
    respect of the Appellant's private life in the UK beyond those  matters
    that relate to his studies.


Notice of Decision

28.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.


29.  I remake the decision in the appeal.  The appeal is dismissed.


30.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.




Signed:                                 Date: 9 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed:                                 Date: 9 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
(qua a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal)

