
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31825/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 June 2019                      |On 13 August 2019                    |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                 MICHAEL [O]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. L. Youssefian of counsel, instructed by Fadiga &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant, who is now 25 years old, is a national  of  Nigeria.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom in March 2003 and  was  enrolled  at  [H]
    Primary School on 29 April 2003. He transferred to the [SHRC] Secondary
    School in  September  2005.  He  applied  for  leave  to  remain  under
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules on 15 January 2014 and  prior
    to that date he did not have any leave to remain. He was refused  leave
    to remain on 24 July 2014 on the basis that he had failed to  meet  the
    suitability requirements. He appealed and his appeal was allowed  under
    the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of  the  ECHR  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Amin in a decision, which was promulgated  on  25  March
    2015. The Respondent appealed  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pooler
    granted him permission to appeal on 28 May 2015.

2.   The appeal  came  before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lewis  on  15
    September 2015, but he adjourned the hearing  so  that  the  Respondent
    could apply for permission to rely on a further ground of appeal. Upper
    Tribunal Judge Southern granted permission on this further ground on  5
    May 2016. In a decision, promulgated on 19 August 2016, Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Kamara and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Harris  found  that  there
    had been an error of law in First-tier  Tribunal  Amin's  decision  and
    remitted the appeal so that it could be heard de novo in the First-tier
    Tribunal.

3.   Furthermore, in a decision, promulgated on  4  April  2017,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grant dismissed the Appellant's appeal on  human  rights
    grounds. First-tier Tribunal Andrew refused the Appellant permission to
    appeal against this decision on 11 October  2017,  but  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Freeman granted him permission to appeal on 10 November 2017.  In
    a decision, promulgated on 10 May 2018, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Jackson
    found that there had been an error of law in First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Grant's decision and set aside the decision. However, she then went  on
    to dismiss the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

4.   However, on 26 November 2018 Upper Tribunal  Judge  Jackson  set  aside
    the substantive decision that had been promulgated on 10 May  2018,  on
    the basis that the decision in KO (Nigeria) &  others  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 would have had a  material
    effect on her decision. She then directed that the case be listed for a
    de novo hearing before another Upper Tribunal Judge.

5.   This hearing was set down to be heard by me on 31 January 2019,  but  I
    vacated that hearing on 29 January 2019 in order to have the benefit of
    the decisions in two cases set down before the President on 13  and  15
    February 2019 and I listed the case for a CMR on 31 January 2019.

6.   In response to my earlier directions, the Appellant's solicitors  filed
    and served a consolidated bundle for the hearing listed for 20 May 2019
    on 15 May 2019.  This included a further statement  by  the  Appellant,
    dated 13 May 2019 and further statements by his father and mother, also
    dated 13 May 2019. In addition, the Bundle contained a Police  National
    Computer printout. At that hearing, the Appellant disclosed that he had
    not been in contact with his son since December 2018. As a consequence,
    the hearing was adjourned part-heard  in  order  for  him  to  make  an
    application for a child arrangements order in a Family Court,  if  this
    proved to be necessary.

RESUMED HEARING

7.   At the hearing before me on 28 June 2019,  counsel  for  the  Appellant
    explained that it had not been necessary  for  the  Appellant  to  seek
    representation from the Bar Council Pro Bono Unit and apply for a child
    arrangements order from the Family Court as he has been able to  resume
    direct contact with his son. He had been assisted in doing this by  his
    ex-partner's mother. There was a statement from her in the  Appellant's
    Supplementary Bundle and she also attended court on 28 June 2019.   She
    was called as a witness and adopted her witness statement. Mr.  Bramble
    did not  seek  to  challenge  the  content  of  her  statement  or  the
    Appellant's witness statement, dated 19  June  2019,  relating  to  his
    contact with his son. In addition, he did not challenge the validity of
    the photographs said to be of the Appellant and  his  son,  which  were
    dated 26 May 2019, 7 June 2019, 14 June  2019  and  18  June  2019  and
    showed them together at  various  locations,  including  McDonald's  in
    Camberwell  Green.  Both  representatives  then  made   detailed   oral
    submissions; counsel for the Appellant relying in part on  his  written
    skeleton argument.

SUBSTANTIVE DECISION

8.   It is not disputed that the Appellant  has  a  British  child,  who  is
    living in the United Kingdom, or that the Appellant himself  had  lived
    in the United Kingdom since the age of 8. It was the  Appellant's  case
    that the decision to refuse him leave amounted to a breach of both  his
    family and his private life rights under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

9.   In relation to his family life, the Appellant relied  on  the  parental
    relationship he has with his British son, T. In relation to his private
    life rights, the Appellant relied on the fact that  he  has  been  here
    since the age of eight, was educated here and that his parents continue
    to live here.

10.  In  considering  his  submissions  I  have  reminded  myself  that,  in
    paragraph 17 of R (on the application of Razgar) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2004] 2 AC 368, Lord Bingham found that:

         "In considering whether a challenge to  the  Secretary  of  State's
         decision to remove a person must clearly fail, the reviewing  court
         must, as it seems to me, consider how an appeal would be likely  to
         fare  before  an  adjudicator,  as  the  tribunal  responsible  for
         deciding the appeal if there were an appeal. This  means  that  the
         reviewing court must ask itself  essentially  the  questions  which
         would have to be answered  by  an  adjudicator.  In  a  case  where
         removal is resisted in reliance on article 8, these  questions  are
         likely to be:

         (1)  Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
         authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for
         his private or (as the case may be) family life?

         (2)  If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
         gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?

         (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
         in the  interests  of  national  security,  public  safety  or  the
         economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder
         or crime, for the protection  of  health  or  morals,  or  for  the
         protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
         public end sought to be achieved?

11.   In  relation  to  the  first  two  questions,  which  relate  to   the
    Appellant's ability to meet the requirements of  Article  8(1)  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights, T, who  was  born  on  30  October
    2010, is now eight years old and lives with his mother in London.   The
    Appellant lived with T and his mother from December 2012 until February
    2013. After that date, the Appellant  picked  T  up  from  school  each
    Wednesday in order to spend time with him. He also had contact with him
    most weekends. When the Appellant was living and studying  in  Coventry
    between January 2015 and June 2016, the  Appellant  travelled  back  to
    London to see T, as  partly  evidenced  by  the  rail  tickets  in  the
    Appellant's Consolidated Bundle.

12.  The Appellant then continued to have regular contact  with  T;  picking
    him up from school  on  Wednesdays  and  seeing  him  at  the  weekend.
    However, in December 2018, T's mother and her new partner,  started  to
    refuse to permit any further  contact  between  T  and  the  Appellant.
    However, after the hearing on 20 May 2019, the Appellant, contacted T's
    maternal grandmother, A. T., and she arranged for T to  be  brought  to
    her own house and for the Appellant to meet him there on 26  May  2019.
    The Appellant also picked T up from school on 7 June 2019 and took  him
    out for a pizza and  took  him  to  Macdonalds  on  14  June  2019.  In
    addition, he met with him on 18 June 2019.

13.  T's mother did not attend the hearing and has  not  provided  a  recent
    witness statement but there were two witness statements made by her  in
    the Appellant's Consolidated Bundle; one dated 23 October 2014 and  one
    dated 9 March 2017. They confirmed that she was happy  for  T  to  have
    contact with the Appellant, that T misses him when he is not around and
    that the Appellant plays an active role in T's life; playing  with  him
    and buying him clothes and toys. She also confirmed that at  that  time
    he picked T up from school every Wednesday and took him out and that he
    also provided them with financial support.

14.  In paragraph 3 of her witness  statement,  dated  18  June  2019,  A.T.
    stated that the Appellant had "a brilliant relationship  with  his  son
    [T] and that he has had contact with [T] throughout most of his  life".
    In paragraph 4 of her statement, she also said:

         "... [the Appellant] came to see me in May 2018. He  asked  for  my
         help so that he could see [T] as he had not been to see him  for  a
         few months. As I recognise the importance of  [T]  having  a  close
         relationship with his father, I was  happy  to  help.  I  therefore
         arranged for [T] to come to my place so that [the Appellant]  could
         take him out for dinner. [T] is very fond of his Dad and loves  him
         very much. So he was very happy to be able to go out with  his  Dad
         and both of them enjoyed spending time together".

15.  In paragraph 5, she added "since then, [the  Appellant]  has  continued
    to pick [T] up either straight from school or from my house in order to
    spend time with him and to take him out".

16   I have also taken into account of the fact that, in paragraph 28 of  AG
    (Eritrea) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA  Civ
    801, Sedley LJ noted that:

         "...while an interference with private or family life must be  real
         if it is to engage art. 8(1),  the  threshold  of  engagement  (the
         "minimum level") is not a specially high one".

17.  As a consequence, I find that the Appellant does enjoy  a  family  life
    with T and that if the Appellant is removed to Nigeria, there will be a
    breach of their right to enjoy a family life together which will be  of
    sufficient gravity as to engage the operation of Article  8(1)  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights. This is because T's mother is also
    British and has a partner and another child who are  also  living  with
    her in London and T has lived with her  all  of  his  life.  Therefore,
    there is no reasonable prospect of  T  accompanying  the  Appellant  to
    Nigeria.

18.  In addition, the length of time during which the  Appellant  has  lived
    in the United Kingdom, his attendance at school and  college  here  and
    his academic achievements meet the minimum level of engagement referred
    to by Sedley LJ in relation to his establishment of a private life here
    for the purposes of Article 8(1).

19.  In  relation  to  the  third  issue  defined  in  Razgar,  it  was  the
    Respondent's case that at the time of his initial application, and when
    it was still possible to appeal under the Immigration Rules themselves,
    the Appellant had failed to meet the suitability requirements contained
    in  paragraphs  S-LTR.1.5.  and  S-LTR.1.6  of  Appendix  FM   to   the
    Immigration Rules for the purposes of  his  application  for  leave  to
    remain under paragraph 276ADE(v) of the Immigration Rules.

20.  S-LTR.1.5. states:

         "The presence of the applicant in the UK is not  conducive  to  the
         public good because in the view of the Secretary  of  State,  their
         offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent offender
         who shows a particular disregard for the law".

21.  In Chege ("is a persistent  offender")  [2016]  UKUT  00187  (IAC)  the
    Upper Tribunal found that:

         "The question of whether the appellant "is a  persistent  offender"
         is a question of mixed fact and law and falls to be  determined  by
         the Tribunal as at the date of the hearing before it".

22.  The Upper Tribunal in Chege also found that:

         "A "persistent offender" is someone who keeps on breaking the  law.
         That does not mean, however, that he has to keep on offending until
         the date of  the  relevant  decision  or  that  the  continuity  of
         offending cannot be  broken.  A  "persistent  offender"  is  not  a
         permanent status that can never be lost once it is acquired, but an
         individual can be regarded  as  a  "persistent  offender"  for  the
         purpose of the Rules and the 2002 Act even though he may  not  have
         offended  for  some  time.   The  question  whether  he  fits   the
         description will depend on the overall picture and pattern  of  his
         offending over his entire offending history up to that  date.  Each
         case will turn on its own facts".

23.  I have also taken into account  the  fact  that,  in  paragraph  51  of
    Chege, the Upper Tribunal noted that:

         "... Parliament did not use the phrase "repeat offender" or "serial
         offender".  It  used   the   phrase   "persistent   offender"   and
         persistence, by its very nature, requires some continuation of  the
         behaviour concerned, although it need not  be  continuous  or  even
         regular".

24.  In paragraph 52, the  Upper  Tribunal  also  gave,  as  an  example  of
    someone who was not a "persistent offender", "an individual who in  his
    youth had committed a series of offences between the ages of 14 and  17
    which led to a string of minor convictions, but in adulthood had led  a
    blameless existence for 20 years".

25.  The Appellant accepted that between 30  January  2008  and  24  October
    2012, he was convicted of eight  separate  offences  and  that  he  was
    sentenced to nine months in a young offender institution for  the  last
    offence. He also accepted that for part of the time covered by the last
    charge, he had been an adult.

26.  At the time of the initial  refusal  of  leave  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, these offences had been  committed  relatively  recently.  As  a
    consequence, and in the light of the decision in Chege, the application
    of S-LTR.1.5. was a reasonable and lawful response which  was  open  to
    the Respondent at that time. Therefore, at the date of the decision the
    Appellant did not qualify for leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE of
    the Immigration Rules.  In any event, the Appellant is only relying  on
    his rights under the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  in  this
    appeal.

27.  In relation  to  the  fourth  issue,  it  is  generally  accepted  that
    immigration controls are necessary in a democratic society in order  to
    prevent disorder and  crime  and  to  protect  the  country's  economic
    interests and the Appellant did not submit  that  he  was  entitled  to
    leave under the Immigration Rules at the time of his appeal.

28.  Therefore, the remaining issue to be resolved was whether removing  the
    Appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  would  be  proportionate.   When
    considering this, I  have  taken  into  account  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which applies whenever an
    Appellant is relying on Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human
    Rights. It states that:

         "(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English -

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers. And

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to -

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfuly.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom".

29.  The Supreme Court has now recognised that sub-section 117B(6)  provides
    a discrete provision which gives particular  weight  to  the  situation
    which arises when a parent is not subject to a deportation order, has a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child
    and it would not be reasonable for  that  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

30.  In the current case, T is a qualifying child by reason of  his  British
    citizenship. For the reasons given above the Appellant  has  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with him and this was not disputed
    by Mr. Bramble. This was a concession which  was  consistent  with  the
    evidence now provided by the Appellant.

31.  I have also  taken  into  account  the  fact  that  in  SR  (subsisting
    parental relationship,  s117B(6)  [2018]  UKUT  334  (IAC),  the  Upper
    Tribunal found that:

         "If a parent ('P') is unable to demonstrate he/she has been  taking
         an active role in a child's  upbringing  for  the  purposes  of  E-
         LTRPT.2.4 of  the  Immigration  Rules,  P  may  still  be  able  to
         demonstrate a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a
         qualifying child  for  the  purposes  of  section  117B(6)  of  the
         Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act').   The
         determination of both matters turns on the particular facts of  the
         case".

32.  In the current case, the evidence  indicates  that  the  Appellant  has
    been taking an active role in T's upbringing  by  collecting  him  from
    school, taking him out and maintaining a strong role as his father.  He
    has also had regular, on-going and direct unsupervised contact  with  T
    throughout his life, apart from a few months earlier this  year  and  a
    few months when he was in detention. In addition, there  was  a  letter
    from Southwark Children's Services, dated  18  December  2014,  in  the
    Consolidated  Bundle  in  which  it  described  the  bond  between  the
    Appellant and T as a "genuine relationship between a father and a son".

33.  The Appellant is not married to T's mother and she is  responsible  for
    major decisions in T's life but in paragraph 98 of Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department v AB (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 661,  the  Court
    of  Appeal  acknowledged  the  highly  fact-sensitive  nature  of   the
    existence of a parental relationship and in paragraph 109 it went on to
    find that it was not necessary to exercise "parental responsibility" in
    a  practical  sense  to  demonstrate  that  there  was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental  relationship.  Therefore,  in  the  light  of  the
    totality of the evidence and the case law referred  to  above,  I  find
    that the Appellant does have a genuine parental relationship with T.

34.  Furthermore, T has always lived with his mother and  there  is  nothing
    to suggest that he will not continue to do so. There is  no  indication
    that she is not capable of caring for him and  the  Appellant  has  not
    applied to be his primary carer. In addition, T's mother lives  with  a
    partner in London and they have had a child together. Therefore, it  is
    not reasonably likely that T would be in a position to join his  father
    in Nigeria and any such move  would  lead  to  a  separation  from  his
    primary carer and his sibling.

35.  In JG (s117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK)  Turkey  [2019]  UKUT  00072
    (IAC) the Upper Tribunal also clarified that:

         "Section 117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002 requires a court or tribunal to hypothesise that the child  in
         question would leave the United Kingdom, even if this is not likely
         to be the case, and ask whether it would be reason able  to  expect
         the child to do so".

36.  Subsequently, in paragraph 72 of The Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department v AB (Jamaica) and AO (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA  Civ  661,  Lord
    Justice Singh said that he respectfully agreed with the  interpretation
    given by the Upper Tribunal to section 117B(6) in JG.

37.  In his oral submissions, Mr. Bramble accepted  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect T to leave the United Kingdom and I find  that  in
    the light of the evidence before me and having  applied  a  balance  of
    probabilities, that this is the case.

38.  However, Mr. Bramble also submitted  that,  following  KO  (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] 1 WLR 5273, the Upper
    Tribunal must take into account that "in the real world" the  Appellant
    was liable to removal as an illegal entrant and that he  had  not  been
    able to meet the suitability requirements of Appendix FM when he  first
    applied for leave to remain.

39.  In my view, the Supreme  Court's  decision  in  KO  was  somewhat  more
    nuanced. Lord Justice Carnwath found:

         "16. It is natural to  begin  with  the  first  in  time,  that  is
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv). This paragraph is directed solely  to  the
         position of the child. Unlike its predecessor DP5/96 it contains no
         requirement to consider the criminality or misconduct of  a  parent
         as a balancing factor. It is impossible in my view to  read  it  as
         importing such a requirement by implication.

         17.  As has been seen, section 117B(6) incorporated  the  substance
         of the rule without material change, but this time in  the  context
         of the right of the parent to remain. I would  infer  that  it  was
         intended to have the same effect. The question  again  is  what  is
         "reasonable" for the child. As Elias LJ said in MA (Pakistan) Upper
         Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705,
         [2016] 1 WLR 5093, para 36, there is nothing in the  subsection  to
         import a reference to the conduct of the parent. Section 117B  sets
         out a number of factors relating to those seeking leave to enter or
         remain, but criminality is not one of them. Subsection  117B(6)  is
         on its face free-standing, the only qualification  being  that  the
         person relying on it is not liable  to  deportation.  The  list  of
         relevant factors set out in the IDI guidance (para 10 above)  seems
         to me wholly appropriate and  sound  in  law,  in  the  context  of
         section 117B(6) as of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).

         18.  On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it  seems
         to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to  consider  where  the
         parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected  to  be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
         To that extent the record of  the  parents  may  become  indirectly
         material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a  right  to  remain
         here and having to leave. It is only if, even on  that  hypothesis,
         it would not  be  reasonable  for  the  child  to  leave  that  the
         provision may give the parents a right to  remain.  The  point  was
         well-expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245:

             "22. In my opinion before one  embarks  on  an  assessment  of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK
             one has to address the  question,  'Why  would  the  child  be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a case such as  this
             there can only be one answer: 'because  the  parents  have  no
             right to remain in the UK'. To approach the  question  in  any
             other way strips away the context in which the  assessment  of
             reasonableness is being made ..."

         19.  He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar point in
         considering the "best interests" of  children  in  the  context  of
         section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  in
         EV (Philippines) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2014] EWCA Civ 874,

             "58. In my judgment, therefore, the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis  that  the
             facts are as they are in the real world. If one parent has  no
             right to remain, but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against  which  the  assessment  is  conducted.  If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
             ultimate question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?"

         To the extent that Elias LJ may  have  suggested  otherwise  in  MA
         (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully disagree. There is nothing
         in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is to be considered
         otherwise than in  the  real  world  in  which  the  children  find
         themselves".

40.  As can be seen from the paragraphs above, in EV  (Philippines)  neither
    of the children's parents had leave to remain and both were going to be
    removed from the United  Kingdom.   In  SA  (Bangladesh)  the  test  of
    reasonableness was applied in the context of there not being  a  parent
    with leave to remain here.

41.  In addition, in paragraph 51 of KO Lord Justice  Carnwath  found,  when
    considering the case of NS, that:

         "The parents' conduct was relevant in that it meant that  they  had
         to leave the country. As I have explained (para 18 above),  it  was
         in that context that  it  had  to  be  considered  whether  it  was
         reasonable  for  the  children  to  leave  with  them.  Their  best
         interests would have been for the whole family to remain here.  But
         in  a  context  where  the  parents  had  to  leave,  the   natural
         expectation would be that the children  would  go  with  them,  and
         there was nothing in the evidence reviewed by the judge to  suggest
         that that would be other than reasonable".

42.  In the current appeal, T is a British citizen and his  mother,  who  is
    also a British citizen, is his primary carer. In addition, Mr.  Bramble
    accepted that it would not be reasonable for  T  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom. Furthermore, there  was  no  basis  upon  which  it  would  be
    reasonable to assert that T's mother  should  travel  to  Nigeria  and,
    thereby, bring to an end the family life she enjoyed here with her  new
    partner and child.

43.  The circumstances of the real world that T inhabited  were,  therefore,
    very different to that of a  child  with  two  parents  who  were  move
    subject to removal from the United Kingdom.

44.  As a consequence, in the particular circumstances  of  the  Appellant's
    case it would be unreasonable and a disproportionate breach of his  and
    T's family life right if he was  not  able  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

45.  The Appellant also relied on the private life he  had  developed  since
    first arriving in the United Kingdom in March 2003 and  submitted  that
    it would also be a disproportionate breach of his right to continue  to
    enjoy a private life here, to remove him from the United Kingdom.  When
    considering this submission, I have reminded myself that  there  is  no
    evidence to indicate that the Appellant  has  ever  had  any  leave  to
    remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  section  117B(4)  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 states:

         "Little weight should be given to-

         (a)  a private life

         ...

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully".

46.  The fact that the Appellant was a child for  some  of  this  time  does
    serve to moderate this provision to some extent. The Appellant's father
    had come to the United Kingdom in  January  1981  and  the  Appellant's
    mother joined him here in August 1999, when the Appellant was only five
    years old. The Appellant remained living with his maternal  grandmother
    in Nigeria until March 2003. When he arrived here, his  parents  failed
    to obtain any immigration status for him and, at that time and up until
    the age of 18, he lacked the legal capacity to make such an application
    himself. He was also taken into care by the London Borough of Southwark
    in 2010 and accommodated by them under section 20 of the  Children  Act
    1989 but it also failed to make any appropriate application  for  leave
    to remain on his behalf.

47   However, he did become responsible for making his own  application  for
    leave to remain, when he became 18, and did not do so until 28 November
    2012, when his solicitors applied on his behalf  for  leave  to  remain
    under paragraph 276ADE(1)(v)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   This  sub-
    section potentially provided for him to be granted leave to  remain  on
    the basis that he was under the age of 25 years and had spent at  least
    half of his life living continuously in the United Kingdom. However, he
    also had to show that he met the suitability requirements contained  in
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and, for the reasons given  above,
    he was not able,  at  that  time,  to  establish  that  he  was  not  a
    persistent offender.

48.  Since that time the decision to refuse him leave has been subject to  a
    number of appeals and cross-appeals. However, this has not provided the
    Appellant with any continuing leave to remain under section 3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971, as he has never had any extant leave  to  remain.
    Therefore, it is the case that he has been here  unlawfully  since  his
    arrival.

49.  I have also taken into account the considerable weight that has  to  be
    given to  the  fact  that  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest and note that, even now, it  is  not
    submitted on the Appellant's behalf that he is  entitled  to  leave  to
    remain under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

50.  On the evidence before me at the date of the  hearing  and  applying  a
    balance of probabilities, I do find that the Appellant is no  longer  a
    persistent offender. He has not committed any further offences since he
    was released on immigration bail on 19  October  2012,  after  his  one
    period of imprisonment.

51.  In addition, in their evidence, the Appellant's  parents  and  his  ex-
    partner confirmed that, since his release from prison in December 2012,
    the Appellant had stayed away from his previous friends and stayed  out
    of trouble. In his own witness  statement,  dated  4  March  2015,  the
    Appellant also stated "when I was released from the detention centre on
    bail, I decided to change my life and since then I  have  tried  really
    hard not to be in trouble. I have concentrated on my education  and  my
    life since I was released".

52.  The Appellant's consistency  of  contact  with  his  son  is  partly  a
    testimony to this commitment. As  is  the  fact  that  the  documentary
    evidence confirms that, after his release, he enrolled at [WK]  College
    in September 2013 and obtained a BTEC Level 3 Diploma  in  Business  in
    July 2014. I also note that there were eighteen modules on that  course
    and he obtained a merit  for  seven  of  them  and  a  distinction  for
    another.

53.  The Appellant then obtained a place at  Coventry  University  to  study
    Business Management and Leadership Skills and started there in  January
    2015. He was able to do so as he was still supported by  the  Southwark
    Social Services, as a young person who had previously been in its care.
    They continued to pay his fees and maintained him until 2016.

54.  The Respondent relied on  a  letter  from  Southwark  Social  Services,
    dated 16 December 2015, which stated:

         "The Local Authority had notified all  parties  at  Mr  [O]'s  last
         tribunal that its intention was to withdraw its support to  Mr  [O]
         because he had been asked to leave  University  as  the  result  of
         disciplinary matters and failure to disclose  relevant  information
         to the university".

55.  On 12  June  2019,  the  Appellant's  solicitors  wrote  to  the  local
    authority seeking clarification of this paragraph, but  they  have  not
    received any reply. In  particular,  the  solicitors  asked  the  local
    authority whether they had previously informed Coventry University that
    the Appellant was a "home student"  as  opposed  to  an  "international
    student".

56.  At paragraph 13 of his statement, the Appellant accepted that

         "There is also mention of a disciplinary issue, although  this  was
         not the main reason I was forced to leave the  university  as  that
         was to do with fees. I remember that  I  had  an  argument  with  a
         lecturer and that I refused to leave a class when he demanded  that
         I leave, but this was not the major issues at all and was  resolved
         easily..."

57.  I have taken into account the fact that the Appellant did not  seek  to
    deny that a disciplinary issue had  arisen.  I  have  also  taken  into
    account that, at paragraph 12 of his witness statement, dated  18  June
    2019, the Appellant stated:

         "I also confirm in relation  to  a  letter  from  Southwark  Social
         Services that I was forced to leave Coventry University because  of
         issues surrounding whether I was a home student or whether I was an
         international student. I understand that Southwark Social  Services
         had been helping to pay my fees on the basis  that  I  was  a  home
         student, but the university then demanded that  international  fees
         be paid, so Social Services refused to pay these".

58.  As the local authority did not reply, it was not  possible  to  form  a
    definitive view as to the basis upon  which  it  had  been  paying  the
    Appellant's fees. However, I note that,  as  the  local  authority  was
    paying the Appellant's fees on his  behalf  and  had  accommodated  him
    since 2010, it would have been its responsibility to ensure that it was
    paying the correct level of fees on his behalf.

59.  I have also taken into account the fact that the  Appellant  has  shown
    considerable remorse for his criminal past. For example,  at  paragraph
    11 of his witness statement, dated 4 March 2015, he said "I wish to say
    that I am  extremely  sorry  for  my  past  criminal  behaviour.  I  am
    extremely ashamed of my past behaviour. I am so remorseful. I was  very
    embarrassed of myself when I read the Home  Office's  decision  listing
    all those convictions. I just could not believe that I was that person.
    I was with bad companies and I got into many troubles. I was very young
    and I just did not know what I was doing".

60.  The Respondent had also initially sought to  rely  on  the  Appellant's
    Police National Computer record which noted that the Appellant had been
    released on police bail after an incident in 2016. However,  there  was
    no evidence that this incident led to any prosecution or  sentence  and
    Mr Bramble did not rely on this entry in his final submissions.

61.  For all of  these  reasons,  I  find  that  at  the  current  time  the
    Appellant can no longer be  characterised  as  a  persistent  offender.
    However, this does not directly assist him as he is now over  25  years
    of  age  and  cannot  benefit  from  paragraph  276ADE(1)(v)   of   the
    Immigration Rules.

62.  At the hearing before me Mr Bramble also relied on paragraph  S-LTR.1.6
    of Appendix FM to  the  Immigration  Rules  and  paragraph  10  of  the
    decision letter, dated 24 July 2014, which stated;

         "The Home Office in partnership with the  Metropolitan  Police  had
         created 'Operation Nexus'. The purpose of which is  to  target  the
         increasing number of high-harm  foreign  national  and  immigration
         offenders in London and to actively  reduce  the  significant  harm
         caused by gang-related crime in the London area".

63.  He was seeking to establish that the Appellant's previous  associations
    and activities meant that his presence in the United  Kingdom  was  not
    conducive to the public good. However, he did not seek to rely  on  the
    witness statement by Detective Constable Smith or the contents  of  the
    Crime Reporting Information System. There was also no other evidence to
    link the Appellant to any criminal gang. Therefore, I find  that  on  a
    balance of probabilities there was insufficient evidence  to  establish
    that paragraph S-LTR.1.6. applied. When reaching this decision, I  have
    also taken into account the sentences passed and the fact  that  on  24
    October 2012, the Appellant was found not guilty of false imprisonment,
    sexual touching and possession of an offensive weapon and was convicted
    on one count of harassment.

64.  Therefore, applying a balance of probabilities and taking into  account
    all the evidence about the Appellant's circumstances since his  release
    I find that there was  insufficient  evidence  to  establish  that  the
    Appellant's presence is not presently conductive to the public good.

65.  The Appellant also relied on his  educational  history  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The evidence indicated that he has been in education for  much
    of the time since his arrival. The awards given to the Appellant by [H]
    Primary School confirm that he attended that  school  from  the  Summer
    Term in 2003 until the end of the Summer Term in 2005 and that he had a
    positive attitude to his work and was an active participant  in  school
    activities. He then started at  the  [SHRC]  (Secondary)  School  on  5
    September 2005 and remained there until July 2010.  In the Autumn  Term
    of Year 7, he obtained certificates for achieving 100% punctuality  and
    attendance and also a Bronze Award for gaining 50 merits.

66.  I have also taken into account that he has been  a  successful  student
    and passed a significant number of exams  and  completed  a  number  of
    courses at a secondary level. In particular, in June 2010  he  obtained
    Grade C in GCSE English, mathematics, religious  studies  and  physical
    education, a Grade D GCSE in French, a DD in  Applied  Science  (double
    award) and a Level 2 BTEC in Sport with a merit. The previous  year  he
    had also obtained Grade C in Information and Communications TEC (a half
    GCSE). He then transferred to [ST] College where he was awarded a  BTEC
    Subsidiary Diploma in Business and passed an EDEXCEL Functional  Skills
    qualification in mathematics at level 2. He attended  [KC]  College  in
    2011 - 2012 where he completed an Entry Level Course in Drawing  Skills
    and obtained a Level 2 Award in Food Safety in Catering and a  Level  3
    Award in Introduction to the Hospitality Industry.

67.  He was then offered a place to study for a BSc  in  Business  Economics
    at Middlesex University on 13  March  2012.   He  was  also  offered  a
    conditional place at the University  of  Portsmouth  to  study  Applied
    Economics. However, he was not able to take up either of  these  offers
    due to being arrested on 27 April 2012 for an offence of harassment and
    sentenced to nine months  in  a  young  offender  institution.  He  was
    subsequently transferred into immigration detention powers and was  not
    granted bail until 19 December 2012.  However,  after  his  release  he
    successfully obtained a place at Coventry University and studied  there
    from January 2015 until the London Borough of  Southwark  withdrew  its
    funding in 2016.

68.  However, in order to apply section 117B lawfully, I am obliged to  take
    into account the fact that I must give little weight to the Appellant's
    private  life  which  was  established  here  whilst  he  was   present
    unlawfully. As a consequence, I can also  give  little  weight  to  his
    length of residence, certainly from the age of 18, or  his  educational
    achievements during that time, as they are both integral parts  of  his
    private life. He had also relied on statements from his parents but had
    not  provided  any  further  evidence  about  the   strength   of   his
    relationship with them.

69.  In contrast, I must give considerable  weight  to  the  fact  that  the
    maintenance of immigration controls are in the public interest and  the
    fact that the Appellant does not qualify  for  leave  to  remain  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) of the Immigration Rules. In addition, there was
    insufficient evidence to establish that there would be very significant
    obstacles to his integration into the community and culture of  Nigeria
    for the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). It was  submitted  in  his
    skeleton argument that the Appellant had  no  meaningful  relationships
    with any family members in Nigeria and that he had limited knowledge of
    that country.  It  was  also  submitted  that  he  would  have  limited
    employment opportunities there. However,  these  submissions  were  not
    backed up with sufficient evidence and did not take  into  account  the
    fact that the Appellant was a healthy young man,  who  had  obtained  a
    number of educational qualifications in the past.

70.   As  a  consequence,  having  applied  the  proportionality   balancing
    exercise, I find that it did not amount to a disproportionate breach of
    his private life rights for the purposes of Article 8 of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights to refuse him leave  to  remain  on  private
    life grounds.

DECISION

 (1) The Appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights grounds in so far  as
    his removal would be a disproportionate breach of his  and  T's  family
    life rights taking into account  the  provision  contained  in  section
    117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Nadine Finch

Signed   Date 5 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

