

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: IA311632015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|on    24.07.2017                              |On   28.07.2017              |
|                                              |                             |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                               Muzammil saeed
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Rudolph Spurling  (counsel instructed by Maxwell,
Ilford)
For the respondent: Miss Julie Isherwood

                            DECISION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Nicholas Paul), sitting at Taylor House on 15 September
    2016, to  an EEA  appeal by a citizen of Pakistan, born 1982.

 2. The appellant was here with leave to enter as a student from 2007 - 09.
    On 14 March 2009 he was refused leave  to  enter  and  given  temporary
    admission, on which he failed to report. On 15 July 2010 he  married  a
    Portuguese citizen, on which basis  he  was  given  a  residence  card,
    eventually valid till 2017. However on  29  April  2013  his  wife  was
    sentenced to (according to the decision letter) 3 years'  imprisonment,
    for ill-treating her child or children, not by the appellant, and never
    his responsibility. In November that year the appellant  began  divorce
    proceedings, resulting in a decree absolute on 6 October  2014.  On  27
    February 2015 the appellant applied for a permanent residence card,  on
    the basis of what he said was his retained right of residence; but on 3
    September that year that was refused, and his existing  residence  card
    cancelled.

 3. The basis for that decision, upheld by the judge, was  the  appellant's
    wife's imprisonment, which it was said made her no longer a  'qualified
    person', once the sentence was passed. The  EEA  Regulations  define  a
    'family member who has retained the right  of  residence',  so  far  as
    relevant as follows (at reg. 10):

       (5)    The condition in this paragraph is that the person ("A")-

       (a)    ceased to be a family member of a qualified person or an EEA
             national with a right of permanent residence on the termination
             of the marriage or civil partnership of A;

       (b)    was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with these
             Regulations at the date of the termination;

       (c)    satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and

       (d)    either-

             (i)    prior to the initiation  of  the  proceedings  for  the
                    termination of the marriage or  the  civil  partnership,
                    the marriage or civil  partnership  had  lasted  for  at
                    least three years and the parties  to  the  marriage  or
                    civil partnership had resided in the United Kingdom  for
                    at least one year during its duration;

             (ii)   ...

             (iii)  ...

                iv) the continued right of residence in the  United  Kingdom
                    of   A   is   warranted   by   particularly    difficult
                    circumstances, such as where A or another family  member
                    has been  a  victim  of  domestic  violence  whilst  the
                    marriage or civil partnership was subsisting.

          6) The condition in this paragraph is that the person -

      a) is not an EEA national, but would,  if  the  person  were  an  EEA
         national, be a worker, a self-employed person or a self-sufficient
         person under regulation (6); or

      b) is the family member of a person who falls within paragraph (a).

 4. The provisions in paragraph 10 (5) (d) (i) and (iv)  faithfully  follow
    the alternative conditions set  out  at  paragraphs   (a)  and  (c)  of
    article 13 (2) of Directive 2004/38/EC of the European  Parliament  and
    of the Council [the Citizens  Directive].  The  question  in  issue  is
    whether the Secretary of State was entitled to make those at (5) (a)  -
    (c), and (6), apparently imposing additional conditions. Permission  to
    appeal was given on the basis of NA  [2016] EUECJ  C-115/15,  in  which
    the Court of Justice of the European Communities was asked for  answers
    to questions, including the following

        (1)   Must a third country national ex-spouse of a Union citizen be
           able to show that their  former  spouse  was  exercising  Treaty
           rights in the host Member State at the time of their divorce  in
           order to retain a right of  residence  under  Article 13(2)  of
           Directive 2004/38?
 5. The answer given by the Court appears at some length at paragraphs 31 -
    51. The main reasoning runs as follows:

       40      It is apparent, first, from the wording employed both in the
       heading and in the text of Article 13(2) of Directive 2004/38,  that
       provision is made for the right of residence, to which, on the  basis
       of that provision, a Union citizen's family members who do  not  have
       the nationality of a Member State are entitled, to  be  retained,  in
       particular, in the event of divorce and that, as a consequence,  when
       the conditions laid down in that  provision  are  satisfied,  divorce
       does not entail the loss of such a right of residence.
       41      Second,  as  regards  the  context   of   that   provision,
       Article 13(2) of Directive 2004/38 constitutes a derogation from the
       principle that Directive 2004/38 confers rights  of  entry  into  and
       residence in a Member State not on all third-country  nationals,  but
       solely on those who are a 'family  member',  within  the  meaning  of
       point 2 of Article 2 of that directive, of a Union citizen who  has
       exercised his right of freedom of movement by settling  in  a  Member
       State other than the Member State of which he  is  a  national,  that
       principle being established by the  Court's  settled  case-law  (see,
       inter alia, judgment of 16 July 2015, Singh  and  Others,  C-218/14,
       EU:C:2015:476, paragraph 51).
       42      Article 13(2) of Directive 2004/38 covers  the  exceptional
       cases where divorce does not mean the loss of the right of  residence
       of the third-country nationals concerned,  under  Directive  2004/38,
       when, following  their  divorce,  those  third-country  nationals  no
       longer satisfy the conditions laid  down  in  Article 7(2)  of  that
       directive, and in  particular,  the  condition  of  being  a  'family
       member' of a Union citizen, within the meaning of Article 2(2)(a) of
       that directive.
       43      It must be  added,  first,  that  Article 12  of  Directive
       2004/38, which covers specifically the  retention  of  the  right  of
       residence of family members in the event of the death or departure of
       the Union citizen, provides that the right of residence of his family
       members who do not have the nationality of a Member State  is  to  be
       retained only in the event of the death of the Union citizen, and not
       in the event of his or her departure from the host Member State.
       44      Second, it is therefore clear that, when that directive  was
       adopted, the EU legislature declined to make provision, in the  event
       of the departure from the host Member State of the Union citizen, for
       specific safeguards that would be available,  on  account  of,  inter
       alia, particularly difficult situations, to his family members who do
       not have the nationality of a Member State, that would be  comparable
       to those provided for in Article 13(2)(c) of Directive 2004/38.
       45      Last, as regards the aims  of  Article 13(2)  of  Directive
       2004/38, that provision  corresponds  to  the  objective,  stated  in
       recital 15 in the preamble of  that  directive,  of  providing  legal
       safeguards for family members in the event of the death of the  Union
       citizen,  divorce,  annulment  of  marriage  or  termination   of   a
       registered partnership, taking measures in  that  respect  to  ensure
       that in such circumstances family members already residing within the
       territory of the host Member State retain their  right  of  residence
       exclusively on a personal basis.



 6. The answer given by the Court on the facts  of  the  case  in  question
    appears as follows:

       49      It follows also that an interpretation of Article 13(2)(c) of
       Directive 2004/38 to the effect  that  a  third-country  national  is
       entitled to rely on the right derived from that provision  where  her
       spouse, who is a Union citizen, has resided in the host Member State,
       in accordance with Article 7(1) of Directive 2004/38, not until  the
       date of the commencement of divorce proceedings but, at  the  latest,
       until the date when the domestic violence occurred,  is  contrary  to
       the  literal,   systematic   and   teleological   interpretation   of
       Article 13(2) of Directive 2004/38.

       50      Accordingly, where, as in the  main  proceedings,  a  third-
       country national has been the victim during her marriage of  domestic
       violence perpetrated by a Union citizen from whom  she  is  divorced,
       that  Union  citizen  must  reside  in  the  host  Member  State,  in
       accordance with Article 7(1) of Directive 2004/38, until the date of
       the  commencement  of  divorce  proceedings,  if  that  third-country
       national is to be entitled  to  rely  on  Article 13(2)(c)  of  that
       directive.

       51      In the light of the  foregoing,  the  answer  to  the  first
       question is that  Article 13(2)(c)  of  Directive  2004/38  must  be
       interpreted as meaning that a third-country national, who is divorced
       from a Union citizen at whose  hands  she  has  been  the  victim  of
       domestic violence during the marriage, cannot rely on  the  retention
       of her right of residence in the host Member State, on the  basis  of
       that provision, where the commencement of divorce  proceedings  post-
       dates the departure of the Union  citizen  spouse  from  that  Member
       State.

 7. Mr Spurling's position is as follows. He agrees that, as from the  date
    of her imprisonment, the appellant's wife was no  longer  a  'qualified
    person' (residing in accordance with article 7 (1) of  the  Directive);
    so neither was he. However, he points out that the individual  case  in
    NA was one where the appellant's spouse had left this  country,  rather
    than losing her status by imprisonment. He suggests that the ratio   of
    NA depends on the terms of article 12 of the  Directive,  referring  to
    the death of the EEA spouse, and not to her departure. Mr Spurling goes
    on to argue that recital 15 (see NA paragraph 45 above) requires  legal
    safeguards to protect a family member in the event of the death of,  or
    divorce from the Union citizen; so those should also  be  available  in
    the case of their imprisonment.

 8. Conclusions     While the case-specific answer given at paragraph 51 of
    NA refers to the departure of the Union citizen, the rationale  for  it
    appears at 43 - 44, and  49.  The  EU  legislature  did  make  specific
    provision at article 12 for death of the EU citizen, but not for  their
    departure, which it must have been taken to have declined to  do.  This
    however was not the whole basis for the decision.

 9. My conclusions are as follows:

          a) NA paragraph 42 refers to article 13 (2) as  providing  for  an
             exception in  cases  where  "following  their  divorce"  third-
             country nationals no longer satisfy the conditions in article 7
             (2), which must otherwise be satisfied.

          b) Article 12 provides for rights to be retained on the  death  of
             the EU citizen, but not on their departure; it is silent as  to
             what should happen if they are sent to prison, or in any  other
             case.

          c) Reg. 10 of the EEA Regulations 2016 does not  deal  with  cases
             where the EU citizen has died; so there is nothing contrary  to
             the terms or effect of  article  13  (2)  in  the  regulation's
             requiring (at 10 (5) and (b): see 3) continued residence as the
             spouse  of  a  'qualified  person'  up  to  the  date  of   the
             termination of the marriage.

          d) This appellant's wife, from 29 April 2013, when she was sent to
             prison, was no longer residing here in accordance with  article
             7 (2) of the Directive.

          e) While the judge did not consider in any detail whether  or  not
             the circumstances of  that  imprisonment  might  have  amounted
             under reg. 10 (5) (d) (iv) (reproducing article 13 (2) (c))  to
             "... particularly difficult circumstances, such as where  A  or
             another family member has been a victim  of  domestic  violence
             whilst the marriage or civil partnership was subsisting",

              i. there is no evidence to show that  they  did  so  for  this
                 appellant; and

             ii. even in domestic violence cases themselves, the  protection
                 given does not outlast the departure of the EU citizen (see
                 NA paragraph 51), and there is no reason for it to  outlast
                 her imprisonment in this one.

          f) The EU  legislature  might  have  provided  for  rights  to  be
             retained in such circumstances, but did not; and

          g) it follows that this appellant's rights did not come to an  end
             'following   their   divorce',   but   following   his   wife's
             imprisonment, and could not be retained in accordance with reg.
             10 of the EEA Regulations, even read with  article  13  of  the
             Directive.

10.  Since I have reached that conclusion, it follows that there is no need
    to consider whether the judge was entitled or not to deal with reg.  10
    (5) (d) (iv) as he did, though because of  the  lack  of  any  relevant
    evidence (see above) I have no doubt in any event that he was.

Appeal
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                                                 Decision signed:
                                   24.07.2017
