
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/31884/2015
                                                               IA/32780/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at HMCTS Employment Tribunals,      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|Liverpool                                 |                                  |
|On 18th January 2017                      |On 8th February 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               (1) SHEREE [M]
                                  (2) [T R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Aslam Khan (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Bates (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Brookfield, promulgated on 26th July 2016, following a hearing at
    Manchester on 5th July 2016.  In the determination, the judge dismissed
    the appeals of the Appellants, whereupon  the  Appellants  subsequently
    applied for, and were  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are female nationals of Jamaica.   The  first  Appellant
    was born on 18th May 1977 and entered the UK  in  2002  as  a  visitor,
    following which she applied for leave to remain in the UK as a  student
    nurse in September 2002.  That application was refused  on  3rd  August
    2007 when the first Appellant was served with an  ISI51A  notice.   The
    second Appellant was born to the first Appellant  in  the  UK  on  24th
    December 2011 and she attends a state funded school  in  the  UK.   The
    father of the second Appellant has discretionary leave to remain in the
    UK until 13th November 2018  and  lives  with  his  partner  and  their
    children.  The Appellants themselves live with  the  first  Appellant's
    mother at 19 [ ~ ] Street in Manchester.   The  Appellants  applied  on
    27th March 2015 for permission to remain in the  UK  on  the  basis  of
    their family and private life in this country.

 3. The Respondent Secretary of State decided that the  Appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules to remain in the UK as a
    partner or parent under Appendix FM.  Moreover, the first Appellant did
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE for permission to  remain
    in the UK on the basis of her private life as she had not lived in  the
    UK for twenty years and  failed  to  establish  that  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to her  integration  into  Jamaica.   As  far  as
    Article 8 was concerned, there were no exceptional circumstances  which
    would enable the Appellants to be granted leave to remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge gave proper regard to the legal  position  (at  paragraph  5)
    setting out paragraph 276ADE as a consideration together  with  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act, before dealing with the possible  application  of
    Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   The  judge  was  careful  not  to  exclude
    consideration of Section 55 of the BCIA 2009.  The  evidence  was  then
    taken into account.

 5. The judge's findings (at paragraphs 7 to 8) take account  of  the  fact
    that the first Appellant has lived in the UK for fourteen  years.   She
    gave evidence that she was unable to return to Jamaica as  she  has  no
    family living there and she will be returning as a single mother with a
    young daughter.  She was "scared of being subjected to harm in  Jamaica
    as her own mother was attacked and stabbed  in  Jamaica  prior  to  her
    settling in the UK in 2000" (see paragraph 8(iv)).   Consideration  was
    given to how there was a markedly higher level of gender-based violence
    in Jamaica currently.  However, the Appellant  could  not  satisfy  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE and could point to no very significant
    obstacles in integrating back into Jamaican life with her daughter (see
    paragraph 8(xi)).  The judge then dealt with the  issue  of  Article  8
    ECHR and had no difficulty  in  holding  that  Article  8  was  engaged
    (paragraph 8(xii)).  However, the Respondent  intended  to  remove  the
    Appellant from the UK "as a family unit" and, "there  was  no  credible
    evidence before me to suggest that the Appellants would  be  unable  to
    enjoy family life together in Jamaica" (paragraph 8(xiii)).

 6. The judge then gave  consideration  to  Section  117B  and  the  public
    interest in immigration control and observed that, "the first Appellant
    does not work in the UK and is wholly dependent on her mother and other
    relatives to provide  her  with  accommodation  and  maintenance",  and
    although it was the case that the first Appellant "has  never  received
    public benefits in the  UK"  this  did  not  mean  that  the  Appellant
    obtained a positive right to remain in this country (paragraph 8(xiv)).



 7. It was necessary then to give consideration to Section  55  BCIA  given
    the existence of the second Appellant,  her  child,  and  the  need  to
    safeguard and promote the welfare of  children  in  this  country.   In
    particular, the well-known case of Azimi-Moayed  [2013]  UKUT  197  was
    noted.  However, all things considered, the Respondent's  decision  was
    in accordance with the law and the appeal could not succeed  (paragraph
    8(xxvi)).

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to carry  out  a
    proportionality assessment of the Appellants' claim in relation to  the
    public interest and failed to have proper regard to Section 55  of  the
    BCIA 2009.

 9. On 2nd November 2016, permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that it was arguable that  at  paragraph  8(xiv)  the  judge  erred  in
    failing to address the provisions of Section 117B in the context of the
    best interests of the minor Appellant child.

10. On 23rd November 2016, a Rule 24 response was entered.  This made  four
    specific points.  First, that the judge did give consideration  to  the
    child's best interests and balanced this against the public interest in
    removal.  In considering Section 117B the judge found  that  the  first
    Appellant was not financially independent and  her  immigration  status
    was precarious.  Second, the second  Appellant  was  not  a  qualifying
    child under the definition of Section 117B because  she  is  neither  a
    British citizen nor has she lived in the UK for a continuous period  of
    seven years.  Third, as  far  as  Section  55  of  the  BCIA  2009  was
    concerned, the second Appellant's father has discretionary leave in the
    UK and there was no guarantee that he would be granted further leave to
    remain after 2018, in which case he would also return back to  Jamaica,
    and the judge did specifically give consideration to this  and  decided
    that the father would be able to visit  his  daughter  in  Jamaica  and
    maintain contact there.  Fourth, the child did not meet  the  threshold
    of having resided in the UK for a period of  seven  years  and  it  was
    reasonable for the judge to conclude that the child would  be  able  to
    adapt to life in Jamaica.

The Hearing

11. At the hearing before on 18th January 2017, Mr Aslam Khan, appearing on
    behalf of the Appellants, stated that he had to accept that  the  first
    Appellant  was  not  gainfully  employed  and   was   not   financially
    independent.  However, the reason why this was so was because  she  was
    not allowed to work and had  a  restriction  placed  upon  her  by  the
    immigration authorities.  She ought not to be penalised for this in the
    circumstances.  Second, the judge had set out under  the  heading  "The
    Legal Position" the "fundamental  legal  principles  on  which  I  have
    decided the appeal" (paragraph 5), but these were all in favour of  the
    Appellants.   The  Appellants  were  law-abiding  and  there   was   no
    criminality involved.  Third, although it  was  said  that  the  second
    Appellant's natural father only had discretionary leave,  and  although
    the facts suggested that he was living separately with his own partner,
    the reality was that he  daily  picks  up  the  second  Appellant  from
    school, and he provides for her, and is  a  constant  presence  in  her
    life.  This was not a matter that the judge  had  properly  taken  into
    account.

12. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that the fact here was that the second
    Appellant was not a qualifying child and  her  primary  carer  was  her
    mother.  Given that mother and child were to be removed together  as  a
    single  family  unit,  especially  in  circumstances  that  the  second
    Appellant's natural father only had discretionary leave until 2018, the
    judge  was  right  to  conclude  as  he  did.   He  did   give   proper
    consideration to the best interests of the child.  Neither of  the  two
    Appellants were British citizens and neither stood to be granted  leave
    to remain.  Their status was precarious.   In  the  circumstances,  the
    judge had to place emphasis  on  the  public  interest  in  immigration
    control (at paragraph 22), and when this was balanced against the "best
    interests" of the second Appellant child, the balance of considerations
    fell to be  applied  against  the  Appellants,  particularly  as  "best
    interests" was not a trump card.  This challenge was nothing more  than
    a disagreement with the findings of the judge.

13. In  reply,  Mr  Aslam  Khan  submitted  that  even  though  the  second
    Appellant's natural father had discretionary leave  to  remain,  it  is
    entirely possible that after 2018 he would be granted indefinite  leave
    to remain, in which case it would then lead  to  the  second  Appellant
    being  separated  from  her  natural  father  permanently.   This   was
    important given that the second Appellant was in  a  relationship  with
    her natural father who picked her up from school and  spent  time  with
    her daily.  Secondly, the second Appellant child had an  active  family
    life relationship with her other siblings,  all  of  whom  are  British
    citizens, and who live with the  natural  father's  family,  being  his
    children, and  the  children  of  his  current  partner.   The  natural
    father's current partner has the second Appellant over at the weekends,
    and she herself has a family life interest with the  second  Appellant.
    These matters have not been considered.

No Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.  First, there is no suggestion here  whatsoever,  that  the
    facts as presented to the judge  at  the  time  of  the  hearing,  were
    wrongly understood by him.  No such suggestion  has  been  made  before
    this Tribunal by Mr Aslam Khan, who did represent the Appellants on the
    earlier occasion as well.   Indeed,  Mr  Khan  has  accepted  that  the
    Appellants are not financially independent, the  first  Appellant  does
    not work, they are not British citizens, and the second Appellant is  a
    not a "qualifying child".

15. Neither is it in dispute that insofar as the  second  Appellant  has  a
    relationship with her natural father, that he  has  only  discretionary
    leave to remain until 2018.  The essential issue, and the one on  which
    permission to appeal was granted, arises in relation to the application
    of Section 55 of the  BCIA  2009,  and  whether  that  application  was
    lawfully undertaken.  There is nothing to suggest that it was not.

16. The judge gave detailed consideration to the "best  interests"  of  the
    child at paragraph 8(xxiii),  noting  the  principle  that  Section  55
    mandates a need to safeguard and promote the welfare of  children.   He
    also noted that the starting point is that it is in the best  interests
    of the children to be "with both their parents".  This is  because  "it
    is generally in the interests of children to have  both  stability  and
    continuity of social and  educational  provision  and  the  benefit  of
    growing up in the cultural norms of the society to which they  belong".



17. Due regard is given by the judge to the fact that lengthy residence  in
    a country other than the state of origin can  lead  to  development  of
    social, cultural and educational ties.  However, that what  amounts  to
    lengthy residence is not clear cut, it  is  the  case  that  "past  and
    present policies have identified seven years  as  a  relevant  period",
    whereby the seven years from age 4 are more important  than  the  first
    seven years of a child's life.  In this case, the second Appellant  had
    not been in the UK for seven years and the judge was right to  conclude
    that very young children "are focused  on  their  parents  rather  than
    their peers and are adaptable" (paragraph 8(xxiii)).

18. Second, the judge also had regard to  the  important  judgment  of  the
    Supreme Court in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 where it was  held  that  there
    was

         "No irrationality in the conclusion that it was in  the  children's
         best interests to go with their parents to the Republic  of  Congo.
         No doubt it would have been possible to  have  stated  that,  other
         things being equal, it was in the best interests  of  the  children
         that they and their parents stayed in the United  Kingdom  so  that
         they could obtain such benefits as health care and education  which
         the decision maker recognised might be of a  higher  standard  than
         would be available in the Congo.  But other things were not  equal.
         They were not British  citizens.   They  had  no  right  to  future
         education and health care in this country" (see paragraph 8(xxiv)).

19. Third, it was applying these principles, that led the judge to conclude
    that the Respondent proposed to remove the Appellants as a family  unit
    to Jamaica, which was their country of nationality.  There would be  no
    interruption or intervention with the family life that  the  Appellants
    enjoy together.  The Appellant child would be  brought  up  in  Jamaica
    with her mother.  She would  enjoy  the  stability  and  continuity  of
    social and educational and health care provision  and  the  benefit  of
    growing up in the cultural norms of the society to which she belongs.

20. As the judge held, "there was no evidence before me to suggest that the
    second Appellant would be unable to adapt to life in Jamaica  with  the
    help of both her mother" such that "I conclude that the best  interests
    of the Appellant child are served by her continuing to  live  with  her
    mother and there is no irrationality in the conclusion that  it  is  in
    the children's best interests to accompany her mother to Jamaica"  (see
    paragraph 8(xxv).



Notice of Decision

21. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

22. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 7th February 2017

