
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31995/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th October 2017                          |On 9 November 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           Guriqbal Singh Dhillon
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr F Khan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    a First-tier Tribunal (Judge Majid).  In a decision promulgated on 10th
    February 2017, the FtT allowed  the  Respondent's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's refusal to vary his leave to remain and to  remove
    him under Section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act
    2006.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, for ease of reference, I shall refer
    to the Secretary of State as "the Respondent"  and  to  Guriqbal  Singh
    Dhillon as "the Appellant" reflecting their respective positions before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of  India  (born  13th  January  1988).   In
    October 2009 he entered the United Kingdom with entry  clearance  valid
    until 30th August 2013.

 4. In August 2013 he applied for leave to remain and with the  application
    he submitted a CAS (Confirmation of  Acceptance  for  Studies)  for  an
    establishment whose licence had been revoked by the Respondent.

 5. In accordance  with  the  usual  procedure,  the  Respondent  suspended
    consideration of the Appellant's application for 60 days,  the  primary
    reason being for the Appellant to find a new course run by  a  properly
    licensed supplier.  The Appellant was informed of this decision by post
    dated 10th July 2015.

 6. Since nothing was forthcoming from the Appellant, his  application  was
    considered by the Respondent and subsequently refused by a notice dated
    9th September 2015.

 7. The Appellant appealed the refusal, his appeal notice being dated  28th
    September 2015.  The Grounds of Appeal were generalised  in  form,  but
    essentially claimed that  the  Respondent's  decision  contravened  the
    Appellant's human rights.  At a later stage the  Appellant  advanced  a
    claim that he had not been given the opportunity to respond to the  60-
    day period of grace for resubmission of a valid CAS.

 8. The appeal came before Judge Majid.   The  core  issue  in  the  appeal
    centred on whether or not the Appellant  had  been  given  60  days  to
    provide a valid CAS.  The requirement to  provide  a  valid  CAS  is  a
    mandatory one with which the Appellant had to  comply.   It  is  not  a
    matter than can be waived at the discretion of the First-tier Tribunal.



 9. In his decision Judge Majid, having noted that the Appellant gave  oral
    evidence consistent with  the  assertions  contained  in  his  original
    application form [6], followed this up by saying at [7] the following:

         "I have outlined the evidential elements of the evidence adduced on
         behalf of the Appellant which are relevant to the fair disposal  of
         this appeal.  I have taken into account all of the documentary  and
         oral evidence in making up my mind on  factual  issues.   To  avoid
         repetition, I shall refer to  some  evidence  in  my  deliberations
         below."

10. There then follows several paragraphs of assertion  and  comment  until
    paragraph [15] where the judge says the following:

         "Having  regard  to  his  particular  circumstances  this   student
         deserves  human  care  and  the  benefit  of  discretion   properly
         available to advance the interest of genuine students."

    Under the heading of "The Relevant Law" the judge says this at [21]:

         "I  found  the  Appellant  a  bona  fide  student.   The   superior
         precedents are  correct  in  stating  that  his  discontinuance  of
         education will be devastating for him.  He has spent a lot of money
         and that should not be allowed to go to waste.  He should be helped
         and I am happy to allow the appeal."

11. There then follows numerous lengthy paragraphs [23] to [28]  commenting
    on debates concerning the position of international students,  none  of
    which appear to bear any relevance  to  the  factual  issue  which  was
    before the judge.

12. Further comment on  the  interpretation  of  statute  law  follows  and
    finally in [35] there is what can be described as a sweep up  paragraph
    where the judge says the following:

         "In the circumstances in view of my deliberations in the  preceding
         paragraphs and having taken  into  account  all  of  the  oral  and
         documentary evidence as well as the  submissions  at  my  disposal,
         cognisant of the fact that the burden of proof is on the  Appellant
         and the standard of proof is the balance  of  probabilities,  I  am
         persuaded that the Appellant comes within the relevant  Immigration
         Rules as amended and should have the benefit of discretion."

    He then allowed the appeal.

Onward Appeal

13. The Respondent appealed the decision on the  basis  that  there  was  a
    failure to make any findings of  fact,  let  alone  sufficiently  clear
    reasons for the decision.  Permission having been  granted  the  matter
    therefore came before me as an  error  of  law  hearing  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law Hearing

14. Before me Mr Nath appeared for the  Respondent  and  Mr  Khan  for  the
    Appellant.   Mr  Nath  simply  relied  on  the  grounds  and  grant  of
    permission saying that he need not expand any further on what  was  set
    out there.

15. Mr Khan for the Appellant, sought to  persuade  me  that  the  decision
    should stand.  He said the judge  had  found  the  Appellant  to  be  a
    credible and genuine student who had paid a full fee to an institution.
    It was not the appellant's fault  that  the  institution  had  had  its
    licence revoked.

16. At the end of submissions I announced that I  was  satisfied  that  the
    decision of Judge Majid must be set aside for legal  error  and  I  now
    give my reasons for this finding.  Whilst I accept that Mr  Khan  could
    do no more than he did to try to persuade me  otherwise,  I  find  that
    Judge Majid failed completely to recognise the issue before  him.   Put
    at its simplest, he was tasked in this appeal to make a factual finding
    on whether or  not  the  Appellant  had  taken  steps  to  find  a  new
    educational Sponsor within the 60-day period given by  the  Respondent,
    starting on 10th July 2015.  If the Appellant had not taken appropriate
    steps then it was for him to say why not and  for  the  judge  to  then
    assess the credibility or otherwise of that explanation. That  was  the
    starting point in this appeal.

17. It is clear that Judge Majid did not grasp the evidential  task  before
    him.  I find on a reading of the decision that nowhere  has  the  judge
    made a properly reasoned finding on this issue.  Indeed it is  hard  to
    see altogether what factual  matrix  the  judge  was  relying  on  when
    allowing the appeal.  This places the Respondent in the position of not
    knowing why she was the losing party.  It is trite law  that  a  losing
    party in an appeal is entitled to know why they  lost,  set  out  in  a
    properly considered decision.

18. I find therefore that there is no alternative other than to  set  aside
    the FtT's decision for legal  error.  It  will  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety.  Having announced my decision to the parties at the  hearing,
    both representatives were of the view that there is a need  for  a  new
    fact-finding exercise.  Both considered that the appropriate course  is
    for this appeal to be returned to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  that
    Tribunal to remake the decision afresh.  There is nothing that  can  be
    preserved from the original decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  10th  February  2017
is hereby set aside for legal error.  The appeal shall be considered  afresh
by the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Majid) and that Tribunal shall  remake
the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     08 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts


