
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA317962015
     IA317992015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st June 2017                             |On 26th June 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                    Mr Nileshkumar Ghanshyambhai Kevadia
                     Mrs Ankitaben Nileshkumar Kevadiya
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr S Muquit, Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary  of  State  in
    relation to a Decision and Reasons of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Judge
    McIntosh, promulgated on 25th April 2017  after  a  hearing  at  Taylor
    House.  This is one example of a great number of cases  concerning  the
    alleged fraud committed by student migrants in having proxies take  the
    TOEIC test run by the ETS.

 2. There has been much litigation and many cases about this and  the  main
    case in the Upper Tribunal was SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of
    Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC).  That then came  before  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Qadir v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 1167.  The Court of Appeal  gave
    only a short judgment because the matters were actually settled on 25th
    October 2016.  I shall return to that in a moment.

 3. The First-tier Judge heard evidence from the Appellant.  There was also
    an appeal by his wife but she  was  his  dependant  and  therefore  her
    appeal was entirely dependent on the outcome of his.  It  was  said  by
    the Secretary of State that the Appellant had used fraud in taking  the
    test on 20th March 2013 at the test centre  at  Cauldon  College.   The
    Secretary of State relied on the usual statements by  Rebecca  Collings
    and Mr Millington and also relied upon a witness statement from another
    civil servant, Mona Shah, another person  without  expertise  in  voice
    recognition, and also a report from Professor French.

 4. The judge noted the  Secretary  of  State's  evidence  and  came  to  a
    conclusion at paragraph 30 that the Respondent had not  discharged  the
    burden of proof in establishing fraud by the Appellant.   In  that  the
    judge has made an error of law because it is quite clear from the Court
    of Appeal's Decision and indeed from the Tribunal's Decision that there
    is a shift in burden in such cases. How  it  operates  is  set  out  at
    paragraph 18 of the Court of Appeal's Decision where it  is  said  that
    the generic evidence produced by the Secretary of State was  sufficient
    to discharge the evidential burden that lay on her which  then  shifted
    again an evidential burden onto the Appellants  to  raise  an  innocent
    explanation.

 5. In deciding whether there should be an  innocent  explanation  relevant
    factors included what  the  person  accused  had  to  gain  from  being
    dishonest, what he had to lose, what is known about his character,  the
    cultural environment in which he operated, how the  individual  accused
    of  dishonesty  performed  under  cross-examination  and  whether   the
    Tribunal's assessment of that person's English language proficiency  is
    commensurate with his or her  TOEIC  scores  and  whether  his  or  her
    academic achievements are such that it was unnecessary or illogical for
    them to have cheated.

 6. The judge did in this case look at the evidence provided both  in  oral
    evidence and documentary evidence by the Appellant and noted  that  the
    Appellant had undertaken a number of academic  courses,  prior  to  all
    this taking place, at a significantly high level and all of the  course
    were studies in English.  He also noted that there was a document  from
    Cromwell College for IT and Management indicating the Appellant to be a
    diligent and well-motivated student.  He had also taken  other  English
    tests which he had passed and he gave his evidence in English.

 7. Therefore, whilst the judge did make an error in  declaring  where  the
    burden of proof lay that error is  not  material  because  the  outcome
    would have been the same had he not made that error.  This  is  a  case
    that is among those that falls into the category described at paragraph
    32 of the Court of Appeal's Decision, namely one where  the  appeal  by
    the Secretary of State is against a Decision in which it was held  that
    the generic evidence had not discharged the initial burden and was thus
    erroneous in that respect  but  that  other  evidence  meant  that  the
    Secretary of State would not have been  able  to  discharge  the  legal
    burden.

 8. Mr Bramble on behalf of the Secretary of State before me accepted  that
    that was the situation in this case and did not pursue the  application
    further.  On that basis the Secretary of State's appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date 23rd June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
