
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31557/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 July 2017                         |On 20 September 2017                 |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                              saeed ahmed sahaf
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Ilahi, Counsel instructed by Abbott Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1980.  He came to the UK
    as a Tier 4 Migrant on 27 August 2011.

 2. He applied for further leave to remain  as  the  spouse  of  a  British
    national but that  application  was  refused  in  a  decision  dated  9
    September 2015.  The appellant appealed against that decision  and  his
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge V C Dean ("the FtJ") at  a
    hearing on 17 November 2016.  The appeal was dismissed  with  reference
    to the Article 8 Immigration Rules and otherwise under Article 8 of the
    ECHR.

    The decision of the FtJ

 3. In summary, the FtJ's decision is as follows.  At [12]  she  identified
    the documentation that she had before her and noted that the  appellant
    had attended to give evidence.  She also noted that his spouse, KP, had
    not attended.  She stated that she had indicated to the appellant  that
    his wife's witness statement and that of any  witness  whose  statement
    was unsupported by the attendance of  the  witness,  had  more  limited
    weight unless objectively supported.

 4. She referred generally to the relevant paragraphs  of  the  Rules  that
    were in play.  She considered the issue of the suitability requirements
    of the Rules in the light of the fact that  the  respondent's  decision
    included the rejection of the application for further leave  to  remain
    on the basis that the appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of  S-
    LTR.1.6, i.e. that his presence in the UK  was  not  conducive  to  the
    public good because his conduct made it undesirable  to  allow  him  to
    remain.  This was because he had, in an application dated 20 July 2012,
    relied on a fraudulently obtained  ETS  (Educational  Testing  Service)
    certificate of English language.  She concluded that the respondent was
    entitled to decide that the appellant  did  not  meet  the  suitability
    requirements of the Rules in that respect.  She set out her reasons  in
    full with reference to relevant authority.

 5. At [23] she said that "It is not a disputed fact"  that  the  appellant
    met KP, a single mother, in February 2013 and they began a  friendship.
    She referred to their marriage and cohabitation.  She also referred  to
    the appellant's wife having a daughter, ZS, who was born in May 2003.

 6. She referred to a number of statements from friends of  the  appellant,
    and a statement from his wife.  She stated at [24] that none  of  those
    witnesses other than the appellant had attended to give evidence and be
    questioned at the hearing before her.  She noted  that  notice  of  the
    hearing was given in May  2016  but  also  that  it  was  said  by  the
    appellant that his wife was unable to obtain leave from work to  attend
    and give evidence.  She stated in  the  following  paragraph  that  the
    respondent had been deprived of the opportunity to raise  questions  in
    relation to KP's income and in  relation  to  the  assertion  that  the
    appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with her  daughter,
    a British citizen, as well as the assertion that KP had concerns  about
    relocating to Pakistan with the appellant.

 7. She noted that KP's witness statement was dated 24 June  2016  and  had
    not  been  updated,  although  the  bundle  included   photocopies   of
    additional  financial  information  in  relation  to  her   employment,
    including pay advice slips.

 8. In relation to the financial eligibility requirements of the Rules, she
    referred to the fact that the appellant had not  produced  any  of  the
    original documents, only copies having been provided to the  respondent
    in support of the application.

 9. At [26] she stated that "There is no dispute as to the  genuineness  of
    the marriage between the appellant  and  his  sponsor".   However,  she
    stated that KP's statement at the time that  it  was  signed,  24  June
    2016, referred to the appellant having a  father-daughter  relationship
    with his wife's daughter, ZS, who at  the  time  was  13.   She  stated
    however, that in the absence of evidence in person from the appellant's
    spouse to answer questions from the respondent, and indeed from the FtJ
    herself,  to  clarify  her  account  of  the  appellant's  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with her daughter "in an historic account", she
    was unable to find on the basis of the appellant's account  alone  that
    he had developed such a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with her.

10. At [27] she said that absent a contemporary account of her relationship
    with  the  appellant  and  of  his  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
    relationship  with  ZS,  his  spouse's   daughter   from   a   previous
    relationship, she would go on to consider the issue of  his  return  to
    Pakistan.

11. She concluded that the provisions of EX.1 did not apply in terms of the
    appellant having a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a
    child under the age of 18, in the UK and a British citizen.   Likewise,
    in the absence of "contemporary evidence" from KP,  she  did  not  find
    that the relationship with KP was genuine and subsisting.

12. She referred to the fact  that  original  documentation  had  not  been
    provided (a matter raised in the decision letter).  She said  that  the
    absence of the critical 'in-person' evidence of KP was significant, and
    she did not accept  the  appellant's  assertions  in  relation  to  the
    relationship.

13. Referring again to the financial requirements of the Rules, she  noted,
    amongst other things, that original documents had  not  been  provided,
    either at the hearing, or indeed to the respondent at the time  of  the
    application.

14. She found that the respondent was entitled to decide  the  question  of
    'suitability' under the Rules against the  appellant  for  the  reasons
    that were given.  She did not find that the appellant  had  a  parental
    relationship with ZS, or parental responsibility  for  her.   She  said
    that the marital status between the appellant and KP was not sufficient
    to establish that.  She concluded that the  appellant's  removal  would
    not amount to  a  disproportionate  interference  with  his  Article  8
    rights, noting that the appellant had  failed  to  meet  the  financial
    requirements of the Rules. KP had not attended and was not  present  to
    enable "contemporary enquiries" to be made as to their relationship and
    the impact of the appellant's removal.  She noted  that  the  appellant
    continued to have family, his parents and siblings, living in Pakistan.





    The grounds and submissions

15. The grounds in support  of  the  appeal  against  the  FtJ's  decision,
    notwithstanding their length, can be distilled quite succinctly.  It is
    argued that the evidence of the  appellant's  spouse's  daughter  would
    have been crucial in assisting  the  FtJ  in  determining  whether  the
    appellant had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  her  as  a
    British citizen child.  It is pointed out in the grounds that  the  FtJ
    accepted that the appellant had lived with ZS since he  moved  in  with
    her mother after 13 August 2014.  At the time of the hearing therefore,
    the appellant would have been living with his wife's daughter for  some
    two years.

16. It is asserted that the FtJ and the  respondent  failed  to  take  into
    account the views of the "other family members" and had failed to  give
    effect to the appellant's Article 8 rights and the rights of the  other
    family members who might be affected.  It is further said that, in  the
    alternative, there had been a failure on the part of the FtJ and/or the
    respondent to make any or any adequate enquiries which "could lead them
    to conduct a test of proportionality" in relation to the appellant  and
    his family's Article 8 rights.  It is contended that the  FtJ  made  an
    error of law in finding that the appellant did not have a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a British citizen child.

17. Various authorities are referred to and various aspects of  Article  8,
    the proportionality exercise and the need to give effect to the Article
    8 rights of the appellant and others, are cited.

18. In submissions before me on behalf of the appellant, it was said by  Mr
    Ilahi that his instructions were that the appellant and KP are still in
    a relationship.  She had not attended the hearing before me because  it
    was  the  appellant's  understanding  that  the  hearing  was  only  to
    determine, initially at least, whether there was an error of law in the
    FtJ's decision.  It was said that thereafter, further evidence would be
    produced.

19. The grounds upon which permission was granted were referred to.  It was
    submitted that the FtJ had made contradictory findings in stating  that
    the evidence of the relationship was not disputed but then going on  to
    find that she did not accept that they were in a genuine and subsisting
    relationship.

20. Submissions were then made on the FtJ's conclusions  in  terms  of  the
    suitability requirements of the Rules.  It was submitted  for  example,
    that the FtJ had not considered that when giving  evidence  before  the
    FtJ the appellant did not use  an  interpreter,  and  furthermore,  the
    appellant already had an IELTS certificate (and so presumably, did  not
    need to rely on any  deception).   It  was  contended  that  the  FtJ's
    findings in terms of the  appellant's  deception  in  relation  to  the
    English language test certificate were therefore flawed.

21. However,  it  was  accepted  that  no  such  argument  appears  in  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal in relation to the  FtJ's  decision,  and
    there  had  been  no  application  to  amend  the  grounds.    It   was
    nevertheless submitted that the suitability requirements of  the  Rules
    were relevant to the proportionality assessment under  Article  8.   It
    was  contended  that  this  issue  was  the  very  foundation  of   the
    proportionality assessment.

22. In reply, Mr Jarvis agreed that the evidence  of  KP's  daughter  would
    have been crucial, but the point is that neither she nor KP were called
    to give evidence.  At [12] the FtJ had put the parties on notice as  to
    her concerns about the absence of the appellant's spouse.  There was no
    application for an adjournment on the day of the hearing before the FtJ
    in the light of her having expressed concerns about the absence of  the
    appellant's  spouse.   This,  it  was  submitted,  was  a   "litigation
    strategy" on behalf of the appellant to allow the appeal to proceed.

23. It was submitted also, that  it  was  significant  that  there  was  no
    further evidence from the appellant's spouse in relation to the hearing
    before the FtJ.

24. Although the FtJ had referred to the fact that the respondent  had  not
    disputed the genuineness of the relationship between the appellant  and
    his spouse, the FtJ had herself nevertheless alerted the parties to her
    own concerns about his wife's absence.

    Conclusions

25. In relation to the criticism of the FtJ's assessment of the suitability
    requirements of the Rules, this is not a matter that  features  in  the
    grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and  therefore  not  a  matter
    upon which permission  was  sought  or  granted.   There  has  been  no
    application  to  amend  the  grounds  and  accordingly,  I  decline  to
    entertain the argument.

26. However, even if I considered that this was a matter  that  was  before
    me, the argument has no merit.  The FtJ undertook a thorough assessment
    of  this  issue  between  [14]  and  [21],  taking  into  account   the
    appellant's evidence and explanations on the issue.

27. In relation to the FtJ's assessment  of  the  appellant's  relationship
    with his spouse, and his spouse's daughter, the argument on  behalf  of
    the appellant essentially boils down to a question of whether  the  FtJ
    was entitled to conclude that  the  appellant  was  not  in  a  genuine
    relationship with KP and did  not  have  a  parental  relationship,  or
    anything like it, with her daughter.

28. It is true that the FtJ said at [26] that there was no dispute  "as  to
    the genuineness of the marriage" between the appellant and the sponsor.
     Here, I take her reference to the marriage as being a reference to the
    relationship.

29. What is said in the grounds at [11] about the evidence of KP's daughter
    being crucial in  determining  the  'parental  relationship'  issue  is
    rather puzzling  in  the  context  of  there  having  been  no  witness
    statement from ZS, and no apparent effort to call her as a witness.  It
    is, it seems to me, a moot point as to whether her evidence would  have
    been crucial, as is suggested, but the fact is no attempt was  made  to
    adduce evidence from her.  At least, no  such  suggestion  is  made  on
    behalf of the appellant.

30. Whilst the FtJ identified the fact that the respondent had not disputed
    the genuineness of the relationship between the appellant and KP,  that
    does not mean that the FtJ was debarred from undertaking an  assessment
    of that issue herself, particularly bearing in mind the  fact  that  KP
    did not attend the hearing. Furthermore, a judge  may  decide  that  an
    issue that is not disputed can be  resolved  in  favour  of  the  party
    seeking to establish the particular fact, but that does not mean that a
    judge is bound to resolve that fact in that party's  favour.   Fairness
    would demand that the judge put the parties on notice that this was  an
    issue about which he or she had concerns, giving the party  relying  on
    the fact the opportunity to address those concerns.

31. This, it seems to me, is precisely what the FtJ did in  this  case,  as
    can be seen from [12] of her decision.  It does not appear, and has not
    been suggested, that there was any application for  an  adjournment  on
    behalf of the appellant in  order  to  ensure  the  attendance  of  the
    appellant's spouse on a future occasion.  Indeed, I was not referred to
    any evidence which  actually  established  the  reason  for  KP's  non-
    attendance, apart from what seems to have  been  an  assertion  by  the
    appellant that she was unable to obtain leave from work.  It  seems  to
    me that there is some merit in the proposition advanced  on  behalf  of
    the respondent before me to the effect  that  this  was  a  "litigation
    strategy" on the appellant's behalf, to proceed with the hearing.

32. The hearing before the FtJ was in November 2016.  The witness statement
    from KP, as the FtJ noted, is dated June 2016.  The FtJ referred to the
    lack of a "contemporary account" of the relationship  or  "contemporary
    evidence" of it.  It was not just that KP did not attend  the  hearing,
    but that her written evidence was some months out of date.  It  is  not
    apparent that there was  any  up-to-date  witness  statement  from  her
    explaining her inability  to  attend  the  hearing.   No  such  witness
    statement was drawn to my attention.

33. I am satisfied that the FtJ was entitled to  conclude  as  she  did  in
    terms of the lack  of  genuineness  of  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and KP; likewise, in relation to what is said to have been  a
    father-daughter relationship with ZS.  Having alerted  the  parties  to
    her concerns about the absence of KP, she was  entitled  to  take  into
    account the absence of KP from the hearing and thus  the  inability  of
    either the respondent, or  the  FtJ  herself,  to  test  not  only  the
    appellant's relationship with her, but also with her daughter,  by  way
    of questions.

34. It is not even as if it has been sought on behalf of the  appellant  to
    adduce evidence from KP to demonstrate that the FtJ's conclusions  were
    based on a mistake of fact,  as  envisaged  in  the  decision  in  E  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 49, and with
    reference to any further evidence from KP.

35. Although it was said that it was understood that  the  initial  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal  was  an  error  of  law  hearing  only,  the
    assumption being that no evidence would be required,  apart  from  that
    being an erroneous assumption to make, it  is  nevertheless  surprising
    that what is said to be a genuine relationship  between  the  appellant
    and his spouse and against the background of the FtJ's findings, is not
    supported by any evidence since June 2016. Indeed, it also  has  to  be
    borne in mind that both the  appellant  and  KP  would  know  that  her
    evidence would be important in helping to establish that he  should  be
    permitted to remain in  the  UK  so  that  they  could  continue  their
    relationship, as opposed to his being required  to  leave  the  UK  and
    their being separated.

36. The FtJ found, and was entitled to find, that there was no genuine  and
    subsisting relationship between the appellant and KP, or her child.  In
    the light of that conclusion, the other aspects of the grounds in terms
    of the FtJ's proportionality assessment, fall away.

    Decision

37. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point  of  law.   Its  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    therefore stands.








Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 19/09/17


