
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/31622/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|on 7 July 2015                             |On 10 July 2015                |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                             ZURAB ZEKELASHVILI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME OFFICE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G A Dewar, Advocate, instructed by Quinn Martin &
                    Langan, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Georgia.  His wife and two  children  are
    citizens of the United Kingdom.  He is  subject  to  removal  to  Eire,
    being the state which has agreed to consider his latest  asylum  claim.
    He appealed to the First-Tier Tribunal  against  refusal  of  leave  to
    remain, arguing that he should not  be  removed  because  his  children
    could not reasonably be expected to leave the United Kingdom.

 2. First-Tier Tribunal Judge D'Ambrosio dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
    for reasons explained in a determination, including  three  appendices,
    dated 27th and issued to the parties on 28th November 2014.

 3. In the First-Tier Tribunal the appellant put forward a recent change of
    circumstances.  He said that he was estranged from his wife and so  his
    children could not reasonably be expected to leave  the  UK.   A  brief
    statement from his wife was before the Tribunal but she did not  attend
    to give evidence.  The Judge found that the claim that the marriage had
    broken down was false.

 4. Mr Dewar did not seek to argue that it is never reasonable to expect UK
    citizen children to leave the UK, whatever  the  family  circumstances.
    It was accepted that if the  finding  stood  that  there  had  been  no
    marital breakdown, so did the determination.  The question put  to  the
    Upper Tribunal was whether the Judge's factual conclusions could stand.

 5. Mr Dewar at the outset asked to lead the appellant's wife  to  adopt  a
    recent statement.  He said that  she  would  no  doubt  be  subject  to
    rigorous cross-examination on behalf of the  respondent  and  that  the
    credibility of her evidence was likely to be  determinative.   He  said
    that the findings of fact reached by the Judge were  so  plainly  wrong
    that the Upper Tribunal, without further ado, should  proceed  to  hear
    evidence with a view to correcting them.

 6. Mrs O'Brien opposed further evidence being admitted  or  oral  evidence
    heard prior to submissions on error of law.  She said that a foundation
    had first to be laid before further evidence could be admitted,  either
    to show error or in order to remake the decision.

 7. I indicated that error of law  had  to  be  identified  before  further
    evidence might be entertained.  The first question is whether error  is
    there, not whether the appellant might make  a  better  case  if  given
    another chance.

 8. The grounds of appeal (so far as  relevant)  are  along  the  following
    lines.  The Judge's conclusion regarding the marital separation was not
    one he was entitled to reach on the evidence before him, which included
    witness statements referring to the separation.  While  it  might  have
    been open to the Judge to find that the  appellant  was  an  unreliable
    witness and to disbelieve him,  the  Judge  was  "not  entitled  to  go
    further and conclude that the opposite of what the appellant said  must
    be true".  The Judge reached a finding  unsupported  by  the  evidence.
    The Judge took into account the appellant's  use  of  all  appeals  and
    representations open to him and his recourse to the Scottish Legal  Aid
    Board.  Those were neutral and irrelevant factors from which no adverse
    inference could be drawn.  The  findings  on  the  appellant's  use  of
    deceitful methods and use of Eire as  an  intended  staging  post  from
    which to enter Northern Ireland were accusatory, speculative and had no
    basis in evidence.  The  applicant's  previous  convictions  for  theft
    should have been given  limited,  if  any,  consideration  rather  than
    particular weight.

 9.  Mr  Dewar  submitted  further  as  follows.   The  determination   (in
    particular, at paragraphs 158 to 167 and 169) showed that  the  Judge's
    view of whether the family  members  constituted  an  intact  unit  was
    critical.  If his findings on that were not to stand,  the  conclusions
    on insurmountable obstacles and on  proportionality  would  fall  away.
    Although the Judge purported to find at paragraph 66 that the appellant
    left Georgia with the intention of using deceitful methods to enter and
    remain in the UK, and not to settle in Eire, that  was  unsupported  by
    any evidence, and was an inference the Judge was not entitled to  draw.
    At paragraph 93 the Judge inferred from the wife's non-attendance  that
    she had been  "not  prepared  to  risk  imprisonment  or  other  severe
    penalties which could result from a charge of  perjury  by  her  giving
    false evidence to support the claim that the couple are in a  state  of
    irretrievable marital separation".  That was an even clearer example of
    a finding without evidence.  The Judge pre-judged  the  evidence  of  a
    witness  from  whom  he  had  not  heard.   The   Judge   ignored   the
    corroboration of the  appellant's  claim  of  marital  separation  from
    another witness and in his wife's written statement.  He gave no weight
    to any evidence which tended to favour the appellant, contrary  to  the
    obligation of anxious scrutiny  which  required  consideration  of  all
    factors.  While the Judge was entitled in principle not to believe  the
    appellant regarding the marital breakdown, it did not follow that  from
    rejecting evidence that the opposite must be true, and material aspects
    of corroboration were in the  statements  and  documents.   The  matter
    could only be corrected by hearing the wife's evidence to  get  to  the
    bottom of matters.

10. The Presenting Officer replied thus.  The Judge  made  no  error  which
    opened the door to rehearing the evidence, or to further evidence.  The
    case plainly revolved around whether the separation was genuine.   Some
    of what the Judge said might go rather far, but the reasons for finding
    the appellant not to be a reliable witness, in particular at paragraphs
    54 to 64, were properly open to him  and  decisive  of  the  case.   If
    anything further said was superfluous, that was beside the point.   The
    Judge was entitled to find that the weight to be given to the statement
    by the appellant's wife was diminished by  her  non-appearance.   There
    was no error in the determination at least up to that point  (paragraph
    93).  It might go rather far to say that his wife had not appeared  due
    to fear of the consequences of perjury.  Mr Dewar disputed the  Judge's
    reasons at paragraph 91 for rejecting the explanations for  the  wife's
    non-attendance,  but  those   reasons   were   logical   enough.    The
    explanations offered  were  feeble.   The  critical  finding  that  the
    separation was not genuine was  open  to  the  Judge  and  reached  for
    properly explained reasons.  The determination should not be disturbed.

11. I reserved my determination.

12. The opening salvo in the appellant's  grounds  is  that  the  essential
    negative conclusions reached by the Judge were not open to him at  all.
    As the grounds and submissions developed, I do not think that point was
    maintained.  It was plainly open to the  Judge  to  find  the  evidence
    unpersuasive including the allegation of marital breakdown.  The  issue
    is whether those conclusions  are  adequately  reasoned,  or  otherwise
    undermined by legal error.

13. The appellant argues that it does  not  follow  from  certain  evidence
    being found unreliable that the opposite must be true.  That is a  good
    general principle and a trap of which Judges need to be wary, but I  do
    not think it bears on this particular case.  If the evidence  that  the
    marriage had broken down was not reliable, it follows that a convenient
    concoction  was  being  advanced  and  the  marital  relation  remained
    genuine.

14. The determination is as thorough and painstaking  as  the  Judge  could
    make it.  The critical finding is that the appellant is not a  reliable
    witness.  The reasons are to be found at paragraph  53  onwards.   They
    include the previous failed asylum claim by the appellant, dismissed in
    2005; absconding in that year from reporting conditions; three  charges
    of theft in 2005 to 2006 and failure to attend trials in  2006  and  in
    2008; an implausible claimed fear of persecution in  Georgia  (although
    the final resolution of that is for the authorities in  Eire);  failure
    to proceed with his family to Eire when he had the chance, that  having
    been his original stated intention, with no reasonable explanation; and
    failure to progress the asylum claim in Eire, also with  no  reasonable
    explanation.  Those are all reasonable points against  the  reliability
    of the appellant.  The Judge had the advantage of hearing directly from
    him before forming his view.

15. The Judge goes on to refer to the appellant's  "various  manoeuvres  to
    remain in the UK" and makes very specific findings about  an  intention
    to return to the UK via Eire.  Those further findings may not have been
    necessary to  determine  the  appeal,  but  I  think  they  rank  above
    speculation.   They  are  a  reasonable  inference  from  the   adverse
    credibility conclusions.  They may be forceful statements but I do  not
    think they show  that  the  critical  conclusions  on  credibility  are
    legally erroneous.

16. In a case where the marital breakdown had become  the  critical  issue,
    the fact that the appellant's wife was prepared to give a statement but
    did not  appear  to  give  oral  evidence  was  a  matter  calling  for
    explanation and for comment.  The reasons given  at  paragraph  91  for
    rejecting the explanations for her non-attendance are not  particularly
    strong ones, but nor are they obviously wrong.  The fact  is  that  the
    wife was not there and no very good reason  was  advanced.   The  Judge
    again expressed himself forcibly and perhaps went further  than  needed
    on perceived  risk  of  perjury  charges,  but  it  followed  from  his
    justified findings up to that point that her  rather  skimpy  statement
    (248 words) of 26 September 2014 did not do much  for  the  appellant's
    case.  That statement says that although the couple had  separated  she
    started college recently, and as a result the appellant "moved back  in
    so that he could be there for the children even more".  The appellant's
    statement dated 4 October 2014 said the same thing.   The  Judge  noted
    that the most recent evidence was that the couple were both  living  in
    the family home.

17. In my opinion, the appellant has not shown that the Judge went wrong in
    law by concluding as he  did  on  the  issue  of  the  alleged  marital
    breakdown.  He was entitled to reach a negative  conclusion.   He  gave
    several reasons which are not affected  by  any  error.   To  find  the
    assertion untrue led inexorably to the conclusion that the opposite was
    the fact.  The Judge may have expressed  himself  rather  forcibly  and
    pursued his observations further  than  strictly  necessary  but  those
    observations were logical enough given the primary findings, and better
    than guesswork.

18. The appellant disagrees with the factual findings  but  does  not  show
    that their making involved the making of any error on a  point  of  law
    such as to require the determination to be set aside.

19. The determination of the First Tier Tribunal shall stand.






           [pic]


           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
           10 July 2015


