
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31593/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28th August 2014                             |On 4th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COATES

                                   Between

                                ESTHER QUAKOO
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Adama-Adams instructed by BWF Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 23rd November 1989.  By  an
    application dated 19th December 2012 she applied for a  residence  card
    as the family member of an EEA national exercising treaty rights  under
    Regulation 17 Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.
    The Appellant claimed to be the spouse and family member  of  Mr  Kwaku
    Tabi, a Finnish national.  It is the Appellant's case that she  and  Mr
    Tabi were married by proxy under the Ghanaian customary marriage law on
    3rd September 2011.  The application was refused by the  Respondent  on
    8th July 2013  because  the  Respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant was the family member of an EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights.  An appeal against that decision was  allowed  under  the  2006
    Regulations by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Miles  on  18th  June
    2014.

 2. The Appellant's Notice of Appeal  in  form  IAFT-1  requested  an  oral
    hearing and indicated that the Appellant and her EEA Sponsor would give
    evidence.  A Twi interpreter was also requested.  However,  the  First-
    tier Judge's determination records that although the Appellant and  her
    claimed family member attended the hearing, neither gave  evidence  and
    the hearing proceeded on the basis of submissions only.

 3. The First-tier Judge concluded that the Appellant  had  proved  on  the
    balance of  probabilities  that  the  ceremony  conducted  between  the
    respective families in Ghana in September 2011 included  the  essential
    components of a customary marriage as identified  in  McCabe  v  McCabe
    [1994] 1FCR 257, from which it must follow that the customary  marriage
    was carried out in accordance with the requirements of Ghanaian law and
    therefore should be recognised  as  a  valid  marriage  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 4. The Respondent's representative submitted an application for permission
    to  appeal  in  which  it  was  confirmed  that  the  sole  issue   for
    determination was the validity of the Ghanaian customary marriage.  The
    grounds argued that the First-tier Judge had not properly  applied  the
    guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in Kareem (Proxy  marriages  -  EU
    law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24.  The Appellant had adduced no evidence  on
    the issue of Finland's recognition of Ghanaian customary  marriage  and
    the failure of the First-tier Judge to make a  finding  on  that  issue
    amounted to a material misdirection in law.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on 6th July
    2014 on the basis that the First-tier Judge had arguably erred  in  law
    by not engaging with the fact that the Appellant had  not  proved  that
    her proxy marriage was valid in Finland.

 6. Thus the matter came before me in the Upper  Tribunal  on  28th  August
    2014.  The Appellant was  present.   Representation  was  as  mentioned
    above.

 7. After the usual introductory remarks,  Mr  Adama-Adams  conceded,  with
    commendable candour, that he could not  realistically  argue  that  the
    First-tier Judge had correctly applied the guidance given in Kareem  as
    recently clarified by the Upper  Tribunal  in  TA  and  Others  (Kareem
    explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC).  I was helpfully  provided  a
    copy of this decision by  Mr  Jack  and  I  have  noted  in  particular
    paragraphs 11 and 20.  The Upper Tribunal found as follows:

         "It is difficult to see how the Upper Tribunal in Kareem could have
         been any clearer in its conclusion that when consideration is being
         given to whether an applicant has undertaken a valid  marriage  for
         the purposes of the 2006 Regulations, such consideration has to  be
         assessed by reference to the  laws  of  the  legal  system  of  the
         nationality of the relevant Union citizen (in this case Finland)".

 8. Mr Adama-Adams attempted to  persuade  me  to  consider  the  issue  of
    durability but,  as  Mr  Jack  rightly  pointed  out,  the  Appellant's
    original grounds did not mention Regulation 8 and  there  has  been  no
    cross-appeal.

 9. I am satisfied that there was no evidence before the  First-tier  Judge
    to show that the  Appellant's  Ghanaian  customary  marriage  would  be
    recognised as valid in accordance with the laws of Finland.  Therefore,
    I am satisfied that the First-tier Judge materially  erred  in  law  as
    argued by the Respondent's representative in the Grounds of Appeal.

10. The Appellant has still failed to adduce any evidence to show that  her
    marriage would be recognised as valid according to the laws of Finland.
     Directions given in the Upper Tribunal clearly stated that the parties
    shall prepare for the forthcoming hearing (in the  Upper  Tribunal)  on
    the basis that,  if  the  Upper  Tribunal  decided  to  set  aside  the
    determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  any  further   evidence,
    including supplementary oral evidence, that the Upper Tribunal may need
    to consider if it decides to re-make the decision, can be so considered
    at that hearing.  No such evidence has been tendered.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of a material error on a point of law.  I set aside that decision  and  make
a fresh decision to dismiss the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 1st September 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Coates


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Having dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date 1st September 2014


Judge Coates

Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
