
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers IA/31001/2014
                                                               IA/31002/2014
                                                               IA/31003/2014
                                                           and IA/31004/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15th July 2015                    |on 10th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                    I J O
                                    K C O
                                    T E O
                                    D O O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Olawanle (Solicitor, Del & co, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are a  family  from  Nigeria.  The  first  3  Appellants
    arrived in the UK on visit visas in 2004, the fourth Appellant was born
    in the UK in 2005. Having made unsuccessful applications to  remain  in
    the UK and  then  failing  to  leave  the  Appellants  made  a  further
    application on the 13th of August 2012. That  application  was  refused
    for the reasons given in the Refusal Letters of the 22nd of July  2014.
    These proceedings follow from that refusal and  the  dismissal  of  the
    Appellants appeals by the First-tier Tribunal.

 2.  It  is  not  disputed  that  the  Appellants  have  lived  in  the  UK
    continuously since their arrival and the birth of the fourth Appellant.
    Accordingly it follows that the children have lived in the UK for  more
    than 7 years. The applications were  refused  in  line  with  paragraph
    276ADE and appendix FM as they stood after the 8th of July 2012.

 3. The appeals were heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Clayton  at  Taylor
    House on the 26th of November 2014 and dismissed for the reasons  given
    in the decision promulgated on the 9th of January 2015.  It  was  found
    that the adult Appellants had shown complete disregard  for  the  rules
    and had delayed in making applications in the hope that the position of
    the children would assist them (as a "trump card",  paragraph  23)  and
    that they had used visit visas as a means of entering the UK (paragraph
    27). It  was  found  that  the  removal  of  the  Appellants  would  be
    proportionate.

 4. The Appellants sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    grounds of the 9th of January 2015.  These  were  considered  by  Judge
    Brunnen on the 25th of February 2015.  He  granted  permission  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that the  Judge  had  failed  to  apply  the
    correct  version  of  paragraph  276ADE  and  had  not  considered  the
    application of HC760. He also considered  that  it  was  arguable  that
    insufficient consideration had been  given  to  the  interests  of  the
    children.

 5. Before the hearing I looked at the  history  of  paragraph  276ADE  and
    tried to ascertain the history of its amendment. The only  reference  I
    could find at that stage in Phelan, (9th edition, 2015) at page 807 was
    to HC760, the note to  the  paragraph  stated  that  the  amendment  to
    276ADE1(iv) was to apply from the 13th  of  December  2012  subject  to
    savings for applications made before that date.

 6. On the basis that that was correct, and neither of the  representatives
    was able to point to any other provision that might have been  relevant
    I indicated at the hearing that the appeal  would  be  allowed.  Having
    reserved the decision and reasons other cases were then heard and  also
    reserved.

 7. Having risen and conducted further enquiries  I  became  aware  of  the
    terms of HC 820. This has the effect of amending the amendment set  out
    in HC 760 and removed  the  saving  provisions  for  applications  made
    before the 13th of December 2012. By the terms of HC 820 the amended to
    all applications, irrespective of the date on which they had been made.
    The amended version of paragraph 276ADE(iv) reads "[the  applicant]  is
    under the age of 18 and has lived continuously in the UK for at least 7
    years (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK;"  This  applies  to
    all  decision  irrespective  of  the  date  of  the  application  under
    consideration.

 8. It follows from the foregoing that the amended form of paragraph 276ADE
    (iv) applied to the decisions in these appeals and  that  the  argument
    that the Judge  applied  the  wrong  version  of  paragraph  276ADE  is
    unsustainable. Accordingly on that basis  there  is  no  error  in  the
    decision whereby the Judge applied  paragraph  276ADE  in  its  amended
    form.

 9. Directions were sent to the Appellant and the Home Office  setting  out
    the correct  legal  position  on  the  17th  of  July  2015.  In  those
    directions they were invited to make written submissions with regard to
    the manner in which the appeal had been  considered  by  the  Judge  in
    relation to the rules. The Appellants representatives responded by  the
    21st of July 2015, I have received nothing from the  Home  Office.  The
    delay since that date has been due to my being on annual  leave  and  I
    apologise for the delay.

10. The remaining ground of appeal was to the effect that the Judge had not
    given sufficient consideration to the best interests  of  the  children
    and that the decision with regard to their removal  was  unsustainable.
    The factors to be considered whether under paragraph 276ADE(iv) or EX.1
    of Appendix FM are essentially the same, that where a child has spent 7
    years in the UK whether it would be reasonable to expect them to  leave
    the UK.

11. It is clear from the cases of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874  and
    Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  UKSC  74
    that a poor immigration history on the part of the Appellants, and in a
    situation involving children that must mean the parents directing  what
    takes place, is directly relevant to the  question  of  whether  it  is
    reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK.

12. Although unstated in the rule there must be an expectation that in  the
    time that a child has been in the UK they will have made friends and if
    they have attended school will have received education and that removal
    may disrupt what has been established and has taken  place.  The  added
    requirement that the removal would have to be shown to be  unreasonable
    I take to mean that there must be something more than the usual ties or
    life than would be expected in the circumstances and that these must be
    such that, in the light of the immigration history  and  the  statutory
    provision that "The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
    the public interest.", section 117B of the 2002 Act.

13. The Judge had found that the first and second Appellants had used visit
    visas to enter the UK and that they had no intention of leaving and had
    chosen to remain unlawfully and precariously and that they had  been  a
    burden on the tax payer. The Judge  noted  the  claim  made  about  the
    abilities of the third and fourth Appellants but observed, in line with
    EV (Philippines), that it was not the  obligation  of  the  UK  educate
    them. She also observed that they would return to  Nigeria  where  they
    could re-establish themselves. It was found that the only  family  life
    was as a unit and there would be no  interference  with  that  as  they
    would be removed together.

14. It is not an error for a Judge to omit to  mention  the  provisions  of
    section 55 of the 2009 Act, what is necessary is that the Judge  should
    have given substantive consideration  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    children. I also note that the burden is on the Appellants to show what
    those interests are and to provide  evidence  which  would  show  that,
    taking the best interests into account, removal would  be  unreasonable
    having regard to the Appellants immigration history.

15. The Judge referred to the position of the children and  the  life  that
    had been established in the time that they have been in the UK and  the
    fact that their time here had been almost entirely unlawful. Read as  a
    whole it is clear that the Judge had regard to the relevant principles,
    including Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, and on the evidence that was presented
    was entitled to find that Appellants had not shown that  removal  would
    be unreasonable and for the reasons that were given. It may be correct,
    as  the  Appellants'  representative  observed,  that  the  immigration
    history of the Appellants in Zoumbas, was  particularly  poor  but  the
    immigration history of these Appellants was hardly exemplary.

16. The principal complaint, that the wrong version of paragraph 276ADE was
    applied is wholly misconceived and without merit. The  other  complaint
    that the Judge had not  considered  the  issue  of  the  reasonableness
    correctly within the framework of article 8, section 55 and  Razgar  is
    also without merit. The decision was brief and to the  point  and  gave
    adequate reasons for the findings made. The decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not contain an error of law and the decision stands as the
    disposal of the appeals in this case.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

In dismissing the appeals I make no fee award.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)
Dated: 4th August 2015
