
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/31277/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5 June 2015                      |On 17 June 2015                   |
|                                    |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                             HASINA USMAN PATEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Bloomer counsel instructed by ASK Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. I have referred throughout to the parties as they were before the  First-
   tier Tribunal.
3. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on 26 June 1958.  The  Appellant
   is appealing against the decision of the Respondent made on the  21  July
   2014 to refuse to extend her leave to remain in the United Kingdom  under
   paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules as the spouse of a person  present
   and settled in the United Kingdom. The Appellant was refused because  she
   did not produce an original English Language Certificate as  required  by
   Paragraph 284 (ix)(a). The appeal against the refusal was allowed and  at
   a hearing on 9 April 2015 I heard the Respondent's  appeal  against  that
   decision. I found that the Judge made a material error of law in relation
   to the decision under the Rules and also made no findings in relation  to
   Article 8 and adjourned the matter for the appeal to be re heard.
4. Mr Bloomer in preliminary discussions conceded that the  Appellant  could
   not meet the requirements of the Rules as the Appellant did not produce a
   language certificate  with  her  application  and  because  the  language
   provider that had provided the certificate that she produced dated 6  may
   2011 was no longer on the approved list of providers.   Both  he  and  Mr
   Harrison agreed that the Appellant could not  meet  the  requirements  of
   Appendix FM, EX.1 or paragraph 276 ADE and therefore he would be limiting
   his submissions to Article 8 outside the Rules as  he  would  argue  that
   there were compelling reasons why the Appellant should be granted leave.
The Law
5. The burden of proof in this case is upon the Appellant and  the  standard
   of proof is upon the balance of probability.
6. As the Appellant is in the  United  Kingdom,  I  can  take  into  account
   evidence that concerns a matter arising after the date of the decision in
   accordance with Section 85(4) Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
   2002.
7. The Appellant's appeal is pursuant to Section 82 of the 2002 Act.
8. The appeal must be allowed if I find that the decision against which  the
   appeal is brought was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  or  with  the
   Immigration Rules or if the decision or action involved  an  exercise  of
   discretion  by  the  Respondent,  which  should   have   been   exercised
   differently. Otherwise, I must dismiss the appeal.



9. In relation to claims under Article 8 these are addressed by Appendix  FM
   and paragraph 276ADE of the Rules and the Secretary of State's  Guidance.
   If an applicant does not meet the criteria set  out  in  the  Rules  then
   guidance issued by the Secretary of State in  the  form  of  instructions
   provides in effect, that leave to  remain  outside  the  rules  could  be
   granted  in  the  exercise  of  residual   discretion   in   'exceptional
   circumstances' which are defined in the guidance and must be exercised on
   the basis of  Article  8  considerations,  in  particular  assessing  all
   relevant factors in determining whether a decision is proportionate under
   Article 8.2.

10. It is now generally accepted that the new IRs do not provide in  advance
   for every nuance in the application of Article 8 in individual cases.  At
   para 30 of Nagre, Sales J said:


   "30.     ... if, after the process of applying the new rules and  finding
       that the claim for leave to remain under them  fails,  the  relevant
       official  or  tribunal  judge  considers  it  is  clear   that   the
       consideration under the Rules has fully addressed any family life or
       private life issues arising under Article 8, it would be  sufficient
       simply to say that; they would not have to go on,  in  addition,  to
       consider the case separately from the Rules. If there is no arguable
       case that there may be good grounds for  granting  leave  to  remain
       outside the Rules by reference to Article 8, there would be no point
       in introducing full separate consideration of Article 8 again  after
       having reached a decision on application of the Rules."

11. This was also endorsed by the Court of Appeal in Singh and Khalid  where
   Underhill LJ said (at para 64):


   "64.     ... there is no need to conduct a full separate  examination  of
       article 8 outside  the  Rules  where,  in  the  circumstances  of  a
       particular  case,  all  the  issues  have  been  addressed  in   the
       consideration under the Rules."



12. More recently the Court of Appeal  in  SS  Congo  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387
   stated in paragraph 33:


   "In our judgment, even though a test of exceptionality does not apply  in
   every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it is accurate to say
   that the general position outside the sorts of special contexts  referred
   to above is that compelling circumstances would need to be identified  to
   support a claim for grant of LTR outside the new Rules in Appendix FM. In
   our view, that is a formulation which is not  as  strict  as  a  test  of
   exceptionality or a requirement of "very compelling reasons" (as referred
   to in MF (Nigeria) in the context of  the  Rules  applicable  to  foreign
   criminals),  but  which  gives  appropriate   weight   to   the   focused
   consideration of public interest  factors  as  finds  expression  in  the
   Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in Appendix FM. It also
   reflects the formulation in Nagre at para. [29], which  has  been  tested
   and has survived scrutiny in this court: see, e.g., Haleemudeen at  [44],
   per Beatson LJ. "


13. I am obliged if making a 'free standing' Article 8  assessment  to  take
   into account  Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
   2002 (as amended by the Immigration Act 2014) which sets out  the  public
   interest considerations  that  I  must  have  regard  to  in  determining
   proportionality.

14. In relation to  what  constitutes  insurmountable  obstacles  R(on  the
   application of Agyarko) [2015] EWCA Civ 440 it was held that the  phrase
   "insurmountable obstacles" as  used  in  this  paragraph  of  the  Rules
   clearly imposes a high hurdle to be overcome by an applicant  for  leave
   to remain under the Rules. The test is significantly more demanding than
   a mere test of whether it would be reasonable  to  expect  a  couple  to
   continue their family life outside the United Kingdom. ...The phrase  as
   used in the Rules is intended  to  have  the  same  meaning  as  in  the
   Strasbourg jurisprudence. It is clear that the ECtHR  regards  it  as  a
   formulation imposing a stringent test in respect of that factor,  as  is
   illustrated by Jeunesse v Netherlands (see para. [117]:  there  were  no
   insurmountable obstacles to the family settling in Suriname, even though
   the applicant and her family would experience hardship if forced  to  do
   so). However, "although it involves a stringent test,  it  is  obviously
   intended in both the case-law and the  Rules  to  be  interpreted  in  a
   sensible and practical rather than a purely literal way".  Moreover, the
   "insurmountable obstacles" criterion is used in the Rules to define  one
   of the preconditions set  out  in  section  EX.1(b)  which  need  to  be
   satisfied before an applicant can claim to be  entitled  to  be  granted
   leave to remain under the Rules. In that context, it  is  not  simply  a
   factor to be taken into account. However, in the  context  of  making  a
   wider Article 8 assessment outside the Rules, it is a factor to be taken
   into account, not an absolute requirement which has to be  satisfied  in
   every single case across the whole range of cases covered by Article  8.
   The mere facts that Mr Benette is a British citizen, has lived  all  his
   life in the United Kingdom and has a job here - and hence might find  it
   difficult and might be reluctant to re-locate to Ghana to continue their
   family life there - could not constitute insurmountable obstacles to his
   doing so.


Evidence


15. On the file I had the Respondents bundle. I had a  copy  of  the  reason
   for refusal letter. The  Appellant  put  in  an  appeal  and  there  were
   statements from the Appellant and her husband.
16. Mr Bloomer tendered both the Appellant and her husband as witnesses  and
   Mr Harrison did not seek to cross examine them.
Final Submissions
17. On behalf of the  Respondent  Mr  Harrison  relied  on  the  reason  for
   refusal letter dated 21 July 2014.
18. He submitted that the Appellant could return to India and  re-apply  for
   entry clearance with a language certificate from a  provider  that  meets
   the requirements of the Rules.
19. He submitted that the basis of the refusal was a technical  one  and  in
   those circumstances it might be considered that there were 'overwhelming'
   reasons not to require the Appellant to be removed and re apply for entry
   clearance.
20. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Bloomer submitted in essence;
   a) Family life was engaged and the relationship would be severed  if  the
      Appellant were removed.
   b) The background against which  the  decision  was  made  was  that  the
      Appellant's husband had been in the United Kingdom for 30 years.
   c) The Appellant had produced a language certificate in  accordance  with
      the Rules or she would not have been granted entry clearance.
   d) The Rules operated  harshly  in  that  someone  who  had  done  things
      correctly  where there was no criminality or malpractice were affected
      by the language provider no longer being approved. If EMD had remained
      on the list the Appellant's application would  have  succeeded.  Where
      someone acquires a qualification and that is officially  accepted  the
      fact that sometime later the institution loses its status  should  not
      invalidate  the  fact  that  an  applicant  had   met   the   standard
      particularly where it was not known  why  the  test  provider  was  no
      longer on the list . They may have chosen to go off the list we simply
      don't know.
   e) The continuing changing  nature  of  the  Immigration  Rules  puts  in
      jeopardy almost anyone no matter how legitimately they  have  been  in
      the United Kingdom.
   f) The Appellant would not have been able  to  re  do  her  test  as  the
      Respondent has her passport and she is required to provide  it  to  do
      the test.
   g) This was all relevant  to  the  issue  of  proportionality.  Where  an
      applicant had demonstrated that they had achieved a language  standard
      they were entitled to be presumed to  have  maintained  that  standard
      unless the contrary was shown. The Appellant has lived in  the  United
      Kingdom since her arrival and had the opportunity day in and  day  out
      to maintain her language skills and there was no reason to doubt  that
      was the case.
   h) He acknowledged  that  I  was  bound  to  consider  s  117  B  of  the
      Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 but submitted that Article
      8 allowed those who may not technically  comply  with  the  Rules  but
      there were strong  compassionate  circumstances  to  remain  together.
      There was no  immigration  purpose  undermined  by  allowing  her  the
      opportunity to remain in the United Kingdom and  reapply  based  on  a
      fresh certificate.
Findings
21. On balance and taking the evidence  as  a  whole,  I  have  reached  the
   following findings
22. The Appellant is a 56 old citizen of India who was refused an  extension
   of stay as a spouse under paragraph 284. There is  no  dispute  that  the
   Appellant cannot meet the requirements of this Rule. I am satisfied  that
   the only reason that the Appellant could not succeed under the Rules  was
   that the English Language provider in relation  to  the  certificate  she
   relied on for entry clearance in 2012 was no longer on the approved list.
23. The refusal letter also  considered  the  application  by  reference  to
   Appendix FM. She could not succeed under the provisions  governing  leave
   to remain as a partner because she did not have  a  language  certificate
   from a provider on the approved list and therefore the letter went on  to
   consider EX.1. I am satisfied, and indeed  there  was  no  argument  that
   there were insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing  in  India.
   The Appellant had lived the majority of her life in India and  while  her
   husband has lived in the United Kingdom for 30 years they had  apparently
   chosen to conduct their marriage in this way until  2012.  There  was  no
   reason placed before me why, other than preference, why  the  Appellant's
   husband couldn't live with her in India. There was no argument  that  the
   Appellant could benefit from 276ADE in view of her ties to India and  the
   period she had spent in the United Kingdom.
24.  I  accept,  and  Mr  Harrison  conceded,  there  is  no  threshold   of
   arguability for consideration of an application outside the Rules but  SS
   suggests that there would have to be compelling reasons for such a  grant
   of leave.

25. I have determined the issue on the basis of the questions posed by  Lord
   Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27


Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with  the
exercise of the applicant's right to respect for  his  private  (or  as  the
case may be) family life?


26. I am  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  and  her  husband,  children  and
   grandchildren have a family life in the United Kingdom.


If  so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?


27. I am satisfied that removal would have consequences of such  gravity  as
   potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.


If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


28. I am satisfied that there is in place the legislative framework for  the
   decision giving rise to the interference with Article 8 rights  which  is
   precise and accessible enough for the Appellant to regulate  her  conduct
   by reference to it.


If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being  of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of
health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  freedom  of
others?


29. The interference does have legitimate aims since it  is  in  pursuit  of
   one of the legitimate aims set out in Article 8 (2) necessary in  pursuit
   of the economic well being of the country through the maintenance of  the
   requirements of a policy of immigration control. The state has the  right
   to control the entry of non nationals into its territory  and  Article  8
   does not mean that an individual can choose where she wishes to enjoy her
   private and family life.


If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
sought to be achieved?


30. In making  the  assessment  I  have  taken  into  account  those  public
   interest factors set out in section 117B of the  Nationality  Immigration
   and Asylum  Act  2002.  There  I  acknowledge  that  the  maintenance  of
   immigration control is in the public interest. The Appellant's status has
   not been precarious she has been in the United Kingdom with  leave  as  a
   spouse and no doubt anticipated her leave being extended as  there  could
   have been no reason for her to anticipate that her English Language  test
   provider would not remain on the register .


31. I acknowledge that it is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
   the interests of the economic well-being  of  the  United  Kingdom,  that
   persons who seek to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  are  able  to
   speak English, because persons who can speak English are less of a burden
   on taxpayers, and are better able to integrate  into  society.  I  accept
   that the Appellant's ability to speak English was tested when she applied
   for entry clearance and she met the required standard with a  certificate
   from a provider that was on the list of approved providers at that  time.
   Since then I accept that she has  been  living  in  an  English  speaking
   community with all of the opportunities that this presented  to  maintain
   and indeed improve her standard of English. There was nothing  before  me
   to suggest that her language ability acquired when she was not living  in
   an English speaking community had been lost since  living  in  one  where
   English was the common language.  She  appeared  to  me  to  be  able  to
   understand English at the start of the hearing in  conversation  with  Mr
   Bloomer about the use of the interpreter and she had to be encouraged  to
   use her. I can understand why someone who  speaks  English  as  a  second
   language would choose to use an interpreter in court  as  the  atmosphere
   and nature of the proceedings might undermine their ability to understand
   and communicate effectively where they might be able to do that perfectly
   well in a shop for example.


32. I have considered what was said in R (on  the  application  of  Chen)  v
   SSHD (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation  -  proportionality)
   IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC) that there may be cases in which there are no
   insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed  outside  the  U.K.
   but where temporary  separation  to  enable  an  individual  to  make  an
   application for entry clearance may be disproportionate. In all cases, it
   will be for the  individual  to  place  before  the  Secretary  of  State
   evidence that such temporary separation will interfere disproportionately
   with protected rights. It will not be enough to rely solely upon the case-
   law concerning Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40. I am satisfied that given
   that the only reason the Appellant cannot meet the  requirements  of  the
   Rules relates in reality to the issue of the maintenance of  her  ability
   to speak English rather than the initial testing of a standard for  entry
   clearance in circumstances where there is, in fact, no evidence that  she
   has lost that ability and positive practical evidence that she can  speak
   it that requiring her to return to India to retake a test and re apply is
   disproportionate. I find that these are compelling reasons to  allow  the
   appeal.


33. I have considered the  issue  of  anonymity  in  the  present  instance.
   Neither party has sought a direction. The Appellant is an adult and not a
   vulnerable person. I see no reason to make any direction in this regard.

Conclusion

34. I find that the Appellant has failed to discharge the  burden  of  proof
   on her to show that the terms of Appendix FM and paragraph 276 ADE of the
   Rules are met.

35. On the facts as  established  in  this  appeal,  there  are  substantial
   grounds for believing  that  the  Appellant's  removal  would  result  in
   treatment in breach of ECHR.

36. I therefore find that the decision of the  Respondent  appealed  against
   is not in accordance with the law and the applicable Immigration Rules.
Decision
37. The appeal is dismissed under the Rules  and  allowed  under  Article  8
   ECHR.

Signed                                                              Date
13.6.2015.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
as the basis on which the appeal was allowed  were  arguments  and  evidence
that was not before the Respondent

Signed                                                                  Date
13.6.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
