
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31490/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 January 2018                             |On 21 February 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MOHAMMAD AMINUL ISLAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T. Wilding.
For the Respondent:    Mr Z. Malik.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a  citizen  of  Bangladesh
   born on 19 May 1979.


2. On 26 September 2014, having resided in the UK continuously for over  ten
   years,  the  claimant  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  under
   Paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules. By  a  decision  dated  7  March
   2015, the application was refused by the Secretary of State on the  basis
   that the claimant did not satisfy Paragraphs 276B(ii)(c) and 276B(iii) of
   the Immigration Rules. She also refused the application  under  paragraph
   322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.


3. The claimant appealed to the First-tier tribunal  where  his  appeal  was
   heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Scott-Baker. In a decision promulgated
   on 6 February 2017 the judge allowed the appeal under  paragraph  322(1A)
   and then said: "... it follows that the Secretary of State must  consider
   the [claimant's] application for indefinite leave  to  remain  under  the
   Immigration Rules".  In  other  words,  she  remitted  the  case  to  the
   Secretary of State for consideration of paragraph 276B.


4. The Secretary of State is now appealing against that decision.

Background

5. In order to support a previous application for  leave  to  remain  (as  a
   student), made on 18 June 2012, the claimant submitted to  the  Secretary
   of State a Test of  English  for  International  Communication  ("TOEIC")
   certificate from Educational  Testing  Service  ("ETS").  This  concerned
   English language tests taken on 21 February 2012 and 22 February 2012  at
   the Synergy Business College of London.


6. The reason given by the Secretary of State for rejecting  the  claimant's
   application made on 26 September 2014 for indefinite leave to remain  was
   that ETS had undertaken a verification of the claimant's tests  taken  on
   21 February 2012  and  22  February  2012  and  decided  that  there  was
   significant evidence to conclude that the  certificate  was  fraudulently
   obtained by the use of a proxy test taker.


7. The application for indefinite leave to remain was  consequently  refused
   under  Paragraph  276B(ii)(c)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  because   the
   Secretary of State considered that the claimant's presence in the UK  was
   not conducive to the public good  and  under  Paragraph  276B(iii)  (with
   reference to Paragraph 322(1A) of the Rules) because she considered  that
   he had used false representations when making the application on 18  June
   2012. She said she was not prepared to exercise  her  discretion  in  his
   favour.


Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


8. The sole factual issue in contention before the First-tier  Tribunal  was
   whether the claimant had used deception through the use of a  proxy  test
   taker in respect of the tests taken at Synergy Business College of London
   in February 2012.


9. The evidence adduced by the Secretary of State to  establish  that  there
   had been deception included:





     a) Witness statements from Home Office civil servants, Ms Collings and
        Mr Millington. These statements are not specific to the  claimant's
        case and have been relied on in multiple cases  before  the  First-
        tier Tribunal. They explain the process by which ETS has identified
        where deception has been used.






     b) An "ETS TOEIC Test Centre  Look  Up  Tool"  spreadsheet  (Annex  A)
        showing that all eight of the claimant's tests taken on 21 February
        2012 and 22 February 2012 had been identified by ETS as  "invalid".
        This spreadsheet identifies the claimant  by  name  and  lists  all
        eight of the tests he took.





     c) An "ETS TOEIC Test Centre Look Up Tool" spreadsheet (the first page
        of Annex B) showing that on 21 February 2012 125 tests  were  taken
        at Synergy Business College of London, of which 58% were  found  to
        be "invalid" and 42% were found to be "questionable".





     d) An "ETS TOEIC Test Centre Look Up  Tool"  spreadsheet  (the  second
        page of Annex B) showing that on 22 February 2012  104  tests  were
        taken at Synergy Business College of  London,  of  which  68%  were
        found to be "invalid" and 32% were found to be "questionable".





     e) A report  by  Professor  French  commenting,  inter  alia,  on  the
        likelihood of false positives arising from the ETS  methodology  in
        identifying where a proxy test taker has been used.





     f) A report titled "Project Facade- criminal enquiry into abuse of the
        TOEIC Synergy Business School"  (hereinafter  "the  Project  Facade
        Report"). The Project Facade Report summarised  the  outcome  of  a
        criminal investigation into Synergy Business School  and  concluded
        as follows:






             "Between 24/11/2011 and 15/01/2013, Synergy  Business  College
             undertook 4894 TOEIC speaking & writing  tests  of  which  ETS
             identified the following:


                  Invalid                            2410


                  Questionable                            2484


                  Not withdrawn (no evidence of invalidity)        0


                  Percentage invalid                          49%"





10. The evidence of the claimant before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  both  in
   his written statement and given orally, was that he  took  the  tests  in
   February 2012 himself and because of his high level of  English  at  that
   time (as evidenced by his educational attainment in the English language)
   he had no reason to use deception. The claimant claimed that when he took
   the test there were 14-15 other people in the room and  he  did  not  see
   anyone cheat.


11. It is  relevant  to  quote  the  following  extracts  from  the  judge's
   decision:





         "17.  ... Invalid was termed as those  where  evidence  existed  of
             proxy test taking and/or impersonation and  questionable  were
             when  test  takers  should  retest   due   to   administrative
             irregularities. A report into Synergy Business College  showed
             that between 24 November 2011 and 15 January 2013 4,894  TOEIC
             speaking and writing tests had been  undertaken  which  showed
             that 49% were considered invalid.






         19.  The Tribunal has considered these documents in the decision of
             SM and Qadir and it was accepted at  head  note  1  that  this
             evidence combined with evidence particular to appellants [sic]
             sufficed to discharge the evidential burden  of  proving  that
             the TOEIC certificates had been procured by dishonesty.


         20.  The evidence  of  Ms  Collins  [sic]  and  Mr  Millington  was
             considered in detail at paragraphs 14 to 26 of the judgment.


         21.  I was asked to note by Mr Gill that the only  evidence  relied
             upon by the [Secretary of State] were the  documents  produced
             at the outset of the hearing, there was no other evidence such
             as any voice recording or records. The general  assertion  was
             that because of the propensity  of  Synergy  Business  College
             results and that there had been a number of invalid  decisions
             that an inference should be drawn that this decision [sic] was
             invalid but this was an inadequate assessment. He objected  to
             the late production of the evidence and I was  asked  to  note
             that the report by Professor Harrison had been dealt  with  in
             the decision of SM and Qadir but asked to note that before  me
             there was not the same evidence as in  SM  and  Qadir  and  in
             particular ETS had not produced any documents relating to  the
             [claimant]. I  was  asked  to  note  in  particular  that  the
             [claimant] had produced a valid IELTS  certificate  from  2002
             which had been  accepted  as  genuine  by  the  [Secretary  of
             State]. He had also studied in English in the  United  Kingdom
             and he had produced those certificates. Those results had  not
             been forged and he had been given  leave  to  remain  year  by
             year. Mr Gill submitted that the [claimant] had done more than
             enough to offer an innocent explanation and the [Secretary  of
             State] had failed  to  establish  that  his  test  result  was
             invalid. The [claimant]'s ability in the English language  was
             supported by his academic achievements. No test  results  have
             been submitted from ETS and if they had been  submitted  there
             could  have  been  some  cross-examination  and   insufficient
             evidence had been  produced  to  show  that  the  Section  322
             refusal had been made out.


         22.  In SM and Qadir the Tribunal had considered the evidence  from
             Ms Collins [sic] and Mr Millington. It was noted that  neither
             witness had any  qualifications  or  expertise  vocational  or
             otherwise  in  the  scientific  subject  matter  namely  voice
             recognition, technology and techniques. The  Home  Office  had
             been entirely dependent on the information provided by ETS. At
             that time it stated that the Home  Office  had  no  advice  or
             input from suitable experts and there  had  been  no  evidence
             from any ETS witness.


         23.  I noted in particular from Mr Millington's  evidence  that  to
             his knowledge the Home Office had not at  any  time  requested
             ETS  to  provide  the  voice  recordings  in  respect  of  any
             individual. Nor  had  the  Home  Office  ever  asked  for  the
             software used by ETS. The Tribunal noted that in the trial ETS
             had communicated its unwillingness to provide any of the voice
             recordings absent judicial compulsion to do so.


         24.  There was before us a report from Professor French which  does
             not appear to have been before the Upper Tribunal  in  SM  and
             Qadir. His report before me is dated 20 April 2016 which post-
             dated the  case  of  SM.  He  was  asked  to  comment  on  the
             likelihood of false positives having occurred and he confirmed
             for the reasons given that ETS was extremely unlikely to  have
             produced some false positives and he concluded that the number
             of false positives emanating from the overall process followed
             by assessment of two trained listeners to be very small.






         25.  There was no specific evidence against the [claimant]. What is
             evident from the refusal letter is that ETS had  undertaken  a
             check of his test and confirmed to the  SSHD  that  there  was
             significant  evidence  to   conclude   the   certificate   was
             fraudulently obtained by the use of a  proxy  test  taker  but
             there  is  no  actual  evidence  before  me  to  support  that
             assertion. All that is known about Synergy Business Centre  is
             what is set out in the Project Facade report which stated that
             49% of the results of that college were  invalid.  As  it  was
             pointed out at the hearing that meant that 51% of results were
             valid.






         26.   The  [claimant]  stated  that  he  had  completed  an   IELTS
             examination and a copy of the certificate from 2002 was before
             me. There was no allegation by the [Secretary of  State]  that
             this certificate was false. Further he had been in the  United
             Kingdom  since  2002  studying   in   English   and   he   had
             satisfactorily completed a BBA in  2006  and  been  taught  in
             English and he had then  gone  on  to  do  other  postgraduate
             qualifications. I also had the opportunity of  receiving  oral
             evidence from the [claimant] at the hearing and noted  he  was
             able to adequately express himself in the English language.






         27.  On the basis of this evidence I find that  the  [Secretary  of
             State]  has  failed   to   establish   that   the   [claimant]
             fraudulently obtained the  TOEIC  certificate.  This  evidence
             produced, looked at in the round, suggests  that  there  is  a
             possibility  that  the  [claimant]  fell  within  the  51%  of
             students whose certificates had not been cancelled."






         (our emphasis)





Grounds of Appeal and Grant of Permission to Appeal

12. The Secretary of State raised  five grounds of appeal:


     a) Ground 1 is that the judge failed to follow the correct approach to
        the burden of proof in line with SM and Qadir  (ETS-Evidence-Burden
        of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229.


     b) Ground 2 is that the judge misunderstood the Secretary  of  State's
        evidence. There were two specific points raised on the Secretary of
        State's behalf under ground 2, which we will  refer  to  as  ground
        2(a) and ground 2(b) and which are as follows:


   i) Ground 2(a): That the judge misunderstood the Project  Facade  report:
      at paragraph 25 of the decision  the  judge  stated  that  the  report
      recorded that 51% of results were valid when in  fact  no  tests  were
      found to be valid.

     ii)  (Ground 2(b)) The judge  overlooked  relevant  evidence  when  she
             said, in the first sentence of paragraph 25, that  "there  was
             no specific evidence against the [claimant]".


     c) Ground 3 is that the judge failed to recognise that a person who is
        proficient in the English language may nonetheless engage in fraud,
        as explained in MA (ETS -  TOEIC  testing)  [2016]  UKUT  00450  at
        paragraph 57, where the Upper Tribunal said:
              "... we acknowledge the suggestion that the Appellant  had  no
                  reason to engage in the  deception  which  we  have  found
                  proven.  However, this has not deflected  us  in  any  way
                  from reaching our main findings and conclusions.   In  the
                  abstract, of course, there  is  a  range  of  reasons  why
                  persons proficient in English may engage in  TOEIC  fraud.
                  These include, inexhaustively, lack of confidence, fear of
                  failure, lack of time and commitment and contempt for  the
                  immigration  system.   These  reasons  could   conceivably
                  overlap in individual cases and there is scope  for  other
                  explanations for deceitful conduct in this sphere.  We are
                  not required to  make  the  further  finding  of  why  the
                  Appellant engaged in deception and to  this  we  add  that
                  this issue was not explored during the hearing.  We resist
                  any temptation to speculate about this discrete matter."


     d) Ground 4 is that the judge failed to give adequate reasons why  the
        Secretary of State's evidence was not sufficient to  discharge  the
        legal burden.


     e) Ground 5 is that the judge failed to recognise that  a  consequence
        of the claimant's certificate being cancelled by ETS was  that  the
        basis of his leave was removed. The judge should have dismissed the
        appeal rather than remit the case for the  Secretary  of  State  to
        consider paragraph 276B.

  13. In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek noted
      the discrepancy between the Project Facade report which concluded that
      49% of results were invalid  and  51%  questionable  and  the  judge's
      statement in paragraph 25 that "51% of  results  were  valid"  and  in
      paragraph 27 that there is  a  possibility  that  the  claimant  "fell
      within the 51% of students whose certificates had not been cancelled".
      He described the judge's conclusion about the Project Facade report as
      factually incorrect and arguably significant.

14. At the hearing before us, Mr Wilding accepted that ground 5  was  wrong.
   He agreed that the sole issue was whether the judge had materially  erred
   in law in reaching her decision on paragraph 322(1A).  The  Secretary  of
   State's position is that, if the judge did not materially erred in law in
   reaching her finding on the paragraph  322(1A)  issue,  she  should  have
   allowed the appeal outright  under  paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration
   Rules, instead of remitting that aspect of the case to the  Secretary  of
   State.  He submitted that the Tribunal has no power to remit the case  to
   the Secretary of State.

Assessment

  15. In relation to ground 1, it was agreed before  us  that  there  was  a
      three-step approach pursuant to the Upper Tribunal's  decision  in  SM
      and Qadir: The first step was to decide whether the Secretary of State
      had  discharged  the  initial  evidential  burden.  If  so,  then  the
      evidential burden shifted to  the  claimant  to  provide  an  innocent
      explanation.  The third step is to consider whether the  Secretary  of
      State had discharged the overall legal burden to establish deception.

  16. Mr Wilding submitted that paragraphs 19-22 of the judge's decision did
      not reflect her reasoning  in  any  way  but  merely  represented  her
      summary of  the  submissions  before  her.  She  therefore  failed  to
      consider whether the Secretary  of  State's  evidence  discharged  the
      initial evidential burden. It is known, from SM and  Qadir,  that  the
      evidence relied upon in that case discharged  the  initial  evidential
      burden in that case. That evidence was similar to or the same  as  the
      generic evidence in the instant case.

  17. Mr Malik submitted that the judge's assessment began at  paragraph  19
      where she mentioned SM and Qadir. In his submission, it followed  that
      the judge had considered at paragraph  19  whether  the  Secretary  of
      State's  evidence  discharged  the  initial  evidential   burden.   He
      submitted that paragraph 21, from  the  sentence  beginning  "Mr  Gill
      submitted that the [claimant] had done more then enough  to  offer  an
      innocent explanation ..." represented the judge's consideration of the
      second  stage  and  that  paragraphs  22-27  represented  the  judge's
      consideration of whether the claimant's innocent explanation should be
      rejected and whether the Secretary of State had discharged the overall
      legal burden of proof upon her.

  18. We do not  accept  Mr  Malik's  submissions.  We  are  satisfied  that
      paragraph 19 of the judge's decision  was  not  part  of  the  judge's
      reasoning. It is clear from the contents of paragraphs 16-22 that  she
      summarised the parties' respective submissions at paragraphs 16-22. We
      are satisfied that her assessment began  at  paragraph  23.  There  is
      nothing from paragraph 23 onwards that shows that the judge considered
      whether the Secretary  of  State's  evidence  discharged  the  initial
      evidential burden.

  19. We are therefore satisfied that the judge failed to  consider  whether
      Secretary  of  State's  evidence  discharged  the  initial  evidential
      burden.

  20. On the basis of the decision in SM and Qadir  and  on  any  legitimate
      view, the Secretary of State's generic evidence in  the  instant  case
      was sufficient to discharge the initial evidential  burden.  Thus,  if
      the judge had considered this issue, she  would  have  been  bound  to
      conclude in the Secretary of State's favour  on  this  issue,  on  any
      legitimate view.  She could not reasonably have concluded otherwise.

  21. Ground 1 is therefore established.

  22. We have to consider the consequence of ground 1 being established.  As
      will be seen from our analysis and decision on  ground  2,  the  judge
      misunderstood material evidence produced by the Secretary of State. We
      are satisfied that, as a result of her error in relation to  ground  2
      taken together with ground 1, she erred by placing no weight at all on
      the Secretary of State's evidence.  Whilst it is always a  matter  for
      the first-instance judge to decide what weight to attach to particular
      evidence, the judge was not reasonably entitled to place no weight  at
      all on the Secretary of State's evidence, on any legitimate view.

  23. For these reasons,  we  are  satisfied  not  only  that  ground  1  is
      established but also that ground 1 is material to the outcome.

  24. We turn to ground 2 (a).

  25. The Project Facade Report summarises the  outcome  of  a  Home  Office
      investigation of Synergy Business College of London. The report states
      that between 24 November 2011 and 15 January 2013,  4894  TOEIC  tests
      were taken at the Synergy Business School, of which 49% were found  to
      be "invalid" and 51% were found to be "questionable".  It follows that
      no tests were found to be valid. The report states  that  all  of  the
      tests taken during this period were withdrawn.

  26. Although the Project Facade Report makes clear  that  no  tests  taken
      between 24 November 2011 and 15 January 2013 were found  to  be  valid
      and that all tests were withdrawn, the judge stated that:

   a) "All that is known about Synergy Business Centre is what is set out in
      the Project Fa�ade report which stated that 49% of the results of that
      college were invalid. As it was pointed out at the hearing that  meant
      that 51% of results were valid" (our emphasis) (paragraph 25); and

   b) "... there is a possibility that the [claimant] fell within the 51% of
      students whose certificates had not been cancelled" (paragraph 27)

  27. We agree with Mr Wilding that the  judge  misunderstood  the  report's
      conclusions - mistakenly inferring, from the  fact  that  49%  of  the
      results were invalid, that therefore 51% of results were  found  valid
      and not cancelled when in fact it is clear that 49% were  invalid  and
      51% were questionable from which it follows that  none  of  the  tests
      were found to be valid.  This  led  the  judge  to  mistakenly  infer,
      further, that 51% of certificates were not cancelled when in fact  all
      test  certificates  were  withdrawn,  i.e.  cancelled.    Mr   Wilding
      characterised this as a clear factual inaccuracy which undermined  the
      judge's decision.

  28. Mr Malik argued that paragraphs 25 and 27 of the decision need to read
      in context. He asked us to  consider  paragraphs  25  and  27  in  the
      context of paragraph 17 of the judge's decision.

  29. Paragraph 17 contains a summary of the Project  Facade  Report,  where
      the judge stated that:

         "... [ETS] used voice analysis software corroborated by two   human
         assessors independent of each other to  assess  the  scale  of  the
         abuse. They identified 33,725 test scores that  were  found  to  be
         invalid and 22,694 that were questionable. Invalid  was  termed  as
         those  where  evidence  existed  of  proxy   test   taking   and/or
         impersonation and questionable were  when test takers should retest
         due  to  administrative  irregularities.  A  report  into   Synergy
         Business College showed  that  between  24  November  2011  and  15
         January 2013 4,894  TOEIC  speaking  and  writing  tests  had  been
         undertaken which showed that 49% were considered invalid."


  30. Mr Malik submitted that paragraph 17 of the decision  shows  that  the
      judge understood the distinction between "invalid" and  "questionable"
      tests. He submitted that the phrase "...that meant that 51% of results
      were valid" in paragraph 25, when read in the context of paragraph 17,
      should properly be read as follows: "...that meant that 51% of results
      were  not invalid but questionable".

  31. We have no hesitation in rejecting Mr Mali's submission. Paragraph  17
      of the decision sets out the judge's summary  of  the  Project  Facade
      Report. It does not contain any analysis of it. The  extract  we  have
      quoted from paragraph 17 shows that the judge's attention was drawn to
      the meaning of the  term  "invalid"  in  the  Project  Facade  report.
      However, that does not mean that the judge had that in mind  when  she
      assessed the evidence. The judge's  analysis  of  the  Project  Facade
      report is contained in paragraphs 25 and 27. It is  clear  from  those
      paragraphs that the judge understood the  conclusion  of  the  Project
      Facade Report to be that 51% of results were valid and not  cancelled,
      which is plainly incorrect.

  32. It is plain and beyond any doubt, in our  judgement,  that  the  judge
      drew the inference, from  the  fact  that  49%  of  the  results  were
      invalid, that "that meant that" 51% were valid. This demonstrates that
      her  thinking  was  that  there  were  only  two  possible  categories
      identified in the report: test results were either invalid  or  valid.
      It is clear from paragraphs 25 and 27, taken  in  context  and  having
      regard to the decision as a whole including  paragraph  17,  that  the
      judge did not merely misstate the conclusions of  the  Project  Facade
      Report but misunderstood them. Mr Malik's suggested interpretation  of
      the relevant phrase in paragraph 25, whilst ingenuous, is  an  attempt
      not only to re-write the  judge's  words  but  also  to  re-write  the
      judge's clearly expressed thought process. We have  no  hesitation  in
      rejecting this submission.

  33. We have  therefore  concluded  that  the  judge  did  err  in  law  by
      misapprehending the Project Fa�ade report relied upon by the Secretary
      of State when she said that 51% of the test results were valid.

  34. Ground 2(a) is therefore established.

  35. Mr Malik submitted that any error in relation to ground 2(a)  was  not
      material for the following two reasons:

   (i)    Firstly, he submitted that the error was not material because,  at
       paragraph 27,  the judge mentioned the fact "there is a  possibility
       that the [claimant] fell within the 51% whose certificates  had  not
       been cancelled" after she had already found, at paragraph  27,  that
       "On the basis of this evidence I find that the [Secretary of  State]
       has failed to establish that the  [claimant]  fraudulently  obtained
       the TOEIC certificate". He submitted that, given that the judge  had
       already made her finding that the Secretary of State had  failed  to
       establish  that  the  claimant  fraudulently  obtained   the   TOEIC
       certificate before she mentioned that the claimant fell  within  the
       51% whose certificates had not been cancelled,  her  misapprehension
       of the evidence was not material to this finding.

         We drew Mr Malik's attention to the fact that the  judge  had  also
       said, at paragraph 25, i.e. before her finding at paragraph 27, that
       the 51% of the test certificates were valid. Mr Malik did  not  wish
       to address us further, asking us to assess his submission.

     Mr Malik seeks to rely  upon  the  form  of  the  judge's  language  at
       paragraph 27.  One should not focus on form over substance.  In  any
       event, even on the basis of form, the fact is that the judge made  a
       similar finding at the end of paragraph 25 which Mr Malik ignores.

     In terms of substance, it is clear that the judge relied upon her  view
       that 51% of the test results  were  valid  in  order  to  reach  her
       conclusion, taking into account the claimant's oral  evidence,  that
       the Secretary of State had not discharged the burden of  proof  upon
       her. We have no hesitation in rejecting  Mr  Malik's  submission  on
       this issue.

     (ii)     Secondly, Mr Malik submitted that any errors  in  relation  to
       ground 2(a) as well as ground 2(b)  are  not  material  for  reasons
       which he relied upon to resist grounds 3 and 4.

  36. We will therefore deal with whether ground 2(a) and  (if  established)
      ground 2(b) are material when we consider grounds 3 and 4.

  37. Before dealing with grounds 3 and  4,  it  is  necessary  to  consider
      ground 2(b),  i.e. that the judge overlooked  relevant  evidence  when
      she said, in the first sentence of paragraph 25, that  "there  was  no
      specific evidence against the [claimant]".

  38. Mr Wilding submitted that the fact  that  the  judge  considered  that
      there was no specific evidence against the  claimant  shows  that  she
      overlooked the following evidence relied  upon  by  the  Secretary  of
      State before her and which showed that the claimant's certificate  had
      been deemed to be invalid and was therefore cancelled:

   i)     Annex A to the ETS Look Up Tool shows that all eight of the  tests
       he took at the Synergy Business College were  declared  invalid,  as
       opposed to questionable. Mr Wilding submitted that this was specific
       evidence against the claimant.

   ii)    Annex B was in two parts, the first relating to all the tests that
       took place at the Synergy Business College on 21 February  2012  and
       the second relating to all the tests that took place at the  Synergy
       Business College on 22 February 2012. In relation to the tests  that
       took place on 21 February 2012, 125 tests were taken, of  which  42%
       were questionable and 58% invalid. In relation  to  the  tests  that
       took place on 22 February 2012, 104 tests were taken  of  which  32%
       were questionable and 68% were invalid.   It follows that   none  of
       the tests that took place on 21 February 2012 and 22 February  2012,
       the dates upon which the claimant took his  tests,  were  valid.  Mr
       Wilding submitted  that  this  was  specific  evidence  against  the
       claimant as it was capable of showing that the claimant did not take
       the tests that resulted in the award of his certificate,  which  the
       judge failed to consider.

  39. Mr Malik did not dispute Mr Wilding's submission that i) and ii) above
      comprised specific evidence against the  claimant.  We  are  satisfied
      that i) and ii) above each comprised  specific  evidence  against  the
      claimant.

  40. Mr  Malik  submitted  that  the  judge  had  considered  the  specific
      evidence. He asked us to  read  the  first  and  second  sentences  of
      paragraph 25 together. They read:

         "There was no specific evidence against  the  [claimant].  What  is
         evident from the refusal letter is that ETS had undertaken a  check
         of his test and confirmed to the SSHD that  there  was  significant
         evidence to conclude the certificate was fraudulently  obtained  by
         the use of a proxy test taker  but  there  is  no  actual  evidence
         before me to support that assertion...."


         (our emphasis)


  41.  Mr Malik submitted that these two sentences, when read together, show
      that the judge had taken into account the ETS Look Up  Tool.  However,
      one difficulty with this submission is that the ETS Look Up  Tool  was
      not produced with the refusal letter. It was not even referred  to  in
      the refusal letter. As we understand it, it was only produced  at  the
      outset of the hearing before the  judge,  as  the  first  sentence  of
      paragraph 21 of the judge's decision shows.  If  we  are  right,  then
      judge could not have been referring to the evidence in the ETS Look Up
      Tool in the second sentence  of  paragraph  25  which  refers  to  the
      refusal letter.  However, even if we are wrong about this,  the  judge
      expressed the view that "there is no  actual  evidence  before  me  to
      support that assertion", which plainly shows, in our  judgement,  that
      she was completely unaware that she did have specific evidence against
      the claimant before her.

  42.  Ground 2(b) is therefore established.

  43. We turn to consider Mr Malik's submissions on grounds 3  and  4  given
      that he relied upon them in submitting that any errors in relation  to
      grounds 2 (a) and (b) are not material.

  44.  In relation to ground 3, Mr Malik  referred us to the judgment of the
      Court of Appeal in SM and Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167  at paragraphs 13
      and 18 where  the Court of Appeal said:

         "13. Another reason given in the determination is the  recent  case
             decided by the UT, Home Secretary v MA  [2016]  UT  00450,  in
             which, in a decision promulgated on 16 September 2016, the  UT
             observed that there was far more evidence,  both  general  and
             specific, than there was in the cases before us.  The Tribunal
             stated that there was clear evidence of  TOEIC  corruption  at
             the test centres where MA claimed to have been  examined,  and
             outlined the nature of the new expert and individual evidence.
              The schedule, however, did not explain how the fact that,  in
             cases that will come before the UT in  future,  there  may  be
             more evidence can affect the large number of applications  and
             appeals that are pending in this court,  many  of  which  have
             been through the Tribunal.  There is also no explanation as to
             why guidance by this court is no longer  necessary  for  cases
             already  decided  in  the  UT,  either  before  or  after  its
             determination in the cases of these  respondents,  on  similar
             evidence to the evidence in their cases.


         18.  I have stated that the UT decided that the Secretary of  State
             had discharged the evidential burden that lay on the Secretary
             of State so there was a burden, again an evidential one, on Mr
             Majumder and Mr Qadir of raising an innocent explanation.  The
             UT  accepted  (at  [69])  the  submission  on  behalf  of  the
             Secretary of State,  that  in  considering  an  allegation  of
             dishonesty the relevant factors included the  following:  what
             the person accused had to gain from being dishonest;  what  he
             had to lose; what is known about his character;  the  cultural
             environment in which he operated; how the  individual  accused
             of dishonesty performed under cross-examination,  and  whether
             the Tribunal's assessment of that  person's  English  language
             proficiency is commensurate with his or her TOEIC scores;  and
             whether his or her academic achievements are such that it  was
             unnecessary or illogical for them to have cheated.  There  was
             no criticism in this court by Mr Kovats of that approach."


  45.  Mr Malik submitted that the approach suggested by the Court of Appeal
      at paragraph 18 of SM and Qadir  was exactly  the  approach  that  the
      judge followed, at paragraph 26 of her decision.  She  considered  the
      fact that the claimant had passed an IELTS test in 2002. that  he  had
      completed a BBA in 2006, that  he  had  studied  and  been  taught  in
      English and that he had then gone on to  complete  other  postgraduate
      qualifications. She took into account his oral evidence and formed the
      view that he was able to adequately express  himself  in  the  English
      language. The claimant was cross-examined at the hearing.  There  were
      no inconsistencies in his evidence. Mr Malik submitted that,  in  view
      of the circumstances described by  the  judge  at  paragraph  26,  one
      wonders why the claimant would cheat.

  46. Mr Malik submitted that the judge did not say that  she  was  allowing
      the appeal simply because  he  had  been  able  to  give  evidence  in
      English. The fact that he was able to do so  was  merely  one  of  the
      factors in his favour.

  47.  In view of the judge's reasoning at paragraph 26, Mr Malik  submitted
      that ground 3 was not established. He relied upon the same submissions
      in respect of grounds 4.

  48.  We  accept  that  the  judge  followed  the  guidance  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal's decision in SM and Qadir and the Court of Appeal's judgment
      in SM and Qadir at paragraph 26 when assessing  whether  the  claimant
      had provided an innocent explanation. However, she failed to take into
      account the reasoning of the Upper Tribunal in MA, that  there  are  a
      range of reasons why a person who is proficient in English may  engage
      in TOEIC fraud when assessing his evidence.

  49. In any event, the reality is that the errors she made and as  we  have
      explained in relation to grounds 1, 2(a)  and  2(c)  have  the  result
      that: (a) she placed no weight at all  on  the  Secretary  of  State's
      generic evidence; (b) she misapprehended the  Project  Facade  report;
      and (c) she overlooked entirely  the  specific  evidence  against  the
      claimant. We are satisfied  that,  if  she  had  not  committed  these
      errors, she may have reached a  different  decision  on  the  question
      whether the claimant had fraudulently obtained  his  certificate.   We
      are satisfied that each of these errors is material.

  50.  For the above reasons, we are also satisfied that ground  4  is  also
      established. As a consequence of  the  errors  we  have  explained  in
      relation to grounds 1, 2(a), 2(b) and 3,  the  judge  gave  inadequate
      reasons for concluding that the Secretary of State had not  discharged
      the legal burden of proof upon her  to  show  that  the  claimant  had
      fraudulently obtained his test certificate.

  51.  For all of these reasons, we set aside the decision of the  judge  in
      its entirety. None of her findings shall stand.

  52. Both parties were of the view that if we found there to be an error of
      law the appeal should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
      fresh hearing. We agree. We note the extent of judicial  fact  finding
      which is likely to be necessary for the decision to be re-made. In our
      judgement, this case falls within paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Practice
      Statements for the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal. In addition, we take into account the
      fact that the claimant won his appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal.
      We have had regard to the Court of Appeal's judgment in JD  (Congo)  &
      Others [2012] EWCA Civ 327. In all of the circumstances,  we  consider
      this an appeal  which  is  appropriate  to  remit  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.

  53. The parties agreed before us that the sole factual issue at  the  next
      hearing is whether the claimant had fraudulently  obtained  the  TOEIC
      certificate that he obtained from ETS and which he  submitted  in  his
      application of 2012, following tests taken on 21 and 22 February  2012
      at the Synergy Business College. If he did,  then  Mr  Malik  accepted
      that, although Article 8 was raised in the grounds of appeal  and  the
      claimant has submitted a witness statement in which he relied upon his
      right to his private life, his Article 8 claim cannot  succeed  if  he
      had fraudulently obtained his TOEIC certificate.  However,  the  judge
      will then need to consider  whether  to  exercise  the  discretion  in
      paragraph 276B in the claimant's favour. This is because there  is  no
      power to remit any case to the Secretary of State. If the claimant did
      not  obtain  his  TOEIC  certificate  fraudulently,  then  Mr  Wilding
      accepted that the  claimant's  appeal  under  paragraph  276B  of  the
      Immigration Rules should succeed, because the deception issue was  the
      sole reason for refusing his application under paragraph 276B.

  54. The evidence summarised by Judge Scott-Baker at paragraphs 14  and  15
      of her decision, to the  extent  relevant  to  the  paragraph  322(1A)
      issue, shall stand as the record of his evidence at the hearing before
      her and may be relied upon by either party at the next hearing.

Notice of Decision

  55. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
      material error of law and is set aside in its entirety.


  56. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  afresh
      by a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Scott-Baker.


   |                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated:  28 January 2018              |


