
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/31546/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 30 April 2015                     |On 6 May 2015                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                 CELAL ASLAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Syed of Hadi solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is the resumed hearing of an appeal against a refusal  of  further
    leave to remain as the spouse of a person present and  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom. On 20 February 2013 I heard the appeal  and  set  aside
    the decision made by the Judge as he had made errors of law in applying
    the incorrect law to the Appellant's application. This hearing  was  to
    consider whether the Appellant met the requirements  of  paragraph  284
    and 285 of the Rules which in so far are they applied to the  Appellant
    were those that applied at the time  he  was  initially  granted  entry
    clearance as provided by the transitional  provisions  of  Appendix  FM
    (Appendix FM A280 (c)) as agreed at the error of law hearing. The  only
    provisions in dispute were:

         "Requirements for an extension of stay as the spouse or civil
         partner of a person present and settled in the United Kingdom

         284. The requirements for an extension of stay  as  the  spouse  or
         civil partner of a person present and settled in the United Kingdom
         are that:

             ...

             (vii) there will be adequate accommodation for the parties and
             any  dependants  without   recourse   to   public   funds   in
             accommodation which they own or occupy exclusively; and

             (viii) the parties will be able to maintain themselves and any
             dependants adequately without recourse to public funds; and

             (ix)      (a)  the  applicant  provides  an  original  English
                  language test certificate in speaking and  listening  from
                  an  English  language  test  provider  approved   by   the
                  Secretary of State for these purposes, which clearly shows
                  the applicant's name and the qualification obtained (which
                  must meet or  exceed  level  A1  of  the  Common  European
                  Framework of Reference)"

The Law

 3. The burden of proof in this case is upon the Appellant and the standard
    of proof is upon the balance of probability.

 4.  As the Appellant is in the United Kingdom, I  can  take  into  account
    evidence that concerns a matter arising after the date of the  decision
    in accordance with Section 85(4) Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.

 5. The Appellant's appeal is pursuant to Section 82 of the 2002 Act.

 6. The appeal must be allowed if I find that the  decision  against  which
    the appeal is brought was not in accordance with the law  or  with  the
    Immigration Rules or if the decision or action involved an exercise  of
    discretion  by  the  Respondent,  which  should  have  been   exercised
    differently. Otherwise, I must dismiss the appeal.

Evidence

 7. On the file I had the Respondents bundle. I had a copy  of  the  reason
    for refusal letter. The Appellant put in an  appeal  I  have  now  been
    provided with an additional statement from the Appellant addressing the
    specific issues relating to this hearing together with a schedule  that
    addresses the maintenance issue in this case.

 8. Before the Appellant gave evidence Mr Harrison indicated  that  he  had
    had the opportunity to study the maintenance schedule  and  discuss  it
    with Mr Syed. He indicated that while the Appellant's earnings were  in
    cash and not reflected in bank deposits he accepted that even  if  that
    sum was excluded from the  calculation  taking  the  other  sources  of
    income into account the income into the household exceed the  sum  that
    the Appellant and his wife would receive in income support.

 9. I heard evidence from the Appellant.

10. He adopted the contents of his witness statement. He confirmed that  at
    present the Appellant and his wife were not  living  together  although
    that was their intention when he found a job in Blackburn.

11. He explained that he had an  extendable  tenancy  on  a  two  bedroomed
    property.

12. He confirmed that when he had first been granted entry clearance he had
    provided an English Language Certificate that met the  requirements  at
    level A1 and those documents were in the bundle at pages 46-48.

Final submissions

13. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Harrison made the following submissions:

      a) The refusal letter was of little assistance as he conceded that  it
         wholly failed to address the relevant law in this  case  which  was
         paragraph 284 and 285.

      b)  He  conceded  that  it  appeared  that  the  Appellant  met  those
         requirements.

14. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Syed made the following submissions

      a) He relied on  the  documentary  evidence  and  the  copies  of  the
         relevant provisions of the Rules.

Findings

15. On balance and taking the evidence as  a  whole,  I  have  reached  the
    following findings

16. The Appellant  is  a  44  year  old  national  of  Turkey  who  was  an
    application made on 23 May 2014 for further  leave  to  remain  as  the
    spouse of Jean Armstrong a British Citizen that he had  married  on  20
    April 2010. He has not yet applied for indefinite leave to remain as he
    failed the life in the United Kingdom test.

17. As a result of that marriage the Appellant made an application to enter
    the United Kingdom as a spouse which  was  granted  and  the  Appellant
    entered the United Kingdom on 8 March 2012.

18. I am satisfied that the refusal letter in this case was wrong  in  that
    it considered the Appellant's application by reference to the new Rules
    governing family life  which  were  introduced  on  9  July  2012.  The
    Appellant's application was an application for further leave to  remain
    and as  such  was,  in  accordance  with  the  transitional  provisions
    referred to above to be considered by reference to paragraph 284.

19. The issues in this case were narrow as it was always accepted that  the
    Appellant and his wife were in a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    and I have no reason to doubt this was a very proper concession.  While
    they are not at present living together this is because of problems  in
    relation to employment as the Appellant has been unable to find work in
    Blackburn where his wife lives.

20. The first  concern  was  in  relation  to  maintenance.  Mr  Syed  very
    helpfully provided me  with  a  schedule  setting  out  a  'maintenance
    calculation using the examples set out in the Home Office Guidance.

21. I accept that  the  schedule  sets  out  an  accurate  account  of  the
    Appellant's income. I found him to be a credible witness and  while  he
    is paid in cash there is no mandatory documentary requirements as there
    are in Appendix FM. I find that the Appellant and  his  wife  meet  the
    required level of assessment which is the equivalent income support for
    a married couple.

22. In relation to their accommodation the Appellant has produced  evidence
    of a joint tenancy agreement in respect of the property where his  wife
    is currently living. I accept that this would be adequate accommodation
    for the purposes of the Rules in the event of  him  living  permanently
    with her.

23. In relation to the language proficiency I  accept  that  the  Appellant
    would not have been granted entry clearance if the language certificate
    he had provided had not shown that he  met  the  required  standard  in
    speaking listening and writing, A1. The certificate appears at page  46
    of the bundle. The Appellant has gone on to pass English qualifications
    at a higher level since he has been in the United Kingdom. The  refusal
    letter did not of course address the language issue but Mr Harrison did
    not seek to suggest that the evidence that the Appellant  had  produced
    did not meet the requirements. I accept  they  show  this  particularly
    taking into account what is said in paragraph 32 D  of  Appendix  FM-SE
    which suggests that even if the language provider is no longer approved
    provided the test certificate was accepted for the previous application
    and the Appellant has had continuous  leave  since  then  and  was  not
    withdrawn by the provider.

Conclusion

24. I find that the Appellant has discharged the burden of proof on him  to
    show that the terms of paragraph 284 of the Rules are met.

25. I therefore find that the decision of the Respondent  appealed  against
    is not in accordance with the law and the applicable Immigration Rules.

Decision

26. The appeal is allowed.

27. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed      Date 5.5.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

