
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31613/2015
                                                               ia/31614/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 June 2017                               |On 3 July 2017                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                 SEEMA THAPA
                             MOHAN BAHADUR THAPA
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellants:    Mr P. Richardson, Counsel instructed by Paul John &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The first appellant (hereinafter "the appellant") is a citizen of
    Nepal born on 13 July 1990 who has been in the UK as a Tier 4 (General)
    Student Migrant since October 2009. The second appellant is her
    dependent partner.


 2. On 23 September 2014 the appellant applied for further leave to remain
    in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student. On 8 September 2015 the
    application was refused under paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration
    Rules, which concerns the making of false representations in seeking a
    variation of leave. The appellant's ensuing appeal to the First-tier
    Tribunal was heard by Judge Rayner. In a decision promulgated on 7
    November 2016 the judge dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals
    against that decision.


 3. The reason given by the respondent for refusing the appellant's
    application under paragraph 322(2) was that the Home Office had been
    provided information by Educational Testing Service (ETS) which
    satisfied them that the appellant had, when making a previous
    application (on 4 April 2013), submitted a Test of English for
    International Communication (TOEIC) certificate that was fraudulently
    obtained by use of a proxy test taker and which therefore was invalid.
    The test in question was taken on 19 February 2013.


 4. The evidence relied upon by the respondent  to show the appellant's
    English language test taken on 19 February 2013 was invalid included,
    along with the generic evidence (notably witness statements of  two
    civil servants Rebecca Collings and Peter Millington)  that has been
    adduced in multiple case and which has been subject to considerable
    judicial comment (see SM and Qadir v SSHD (ETS-Evidence-Burden of
    Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229), a print out of a "look up tool" and of a
    document titled "ETS Invalid Test Analysis", both of which identified
    the appellant's test as invalid.


 5. The print out from the "look up tool" appears to contain an error. It
    identifies the appellant by the correct name and date of birth, and
    gives the correct test date; but lists her nationality as Chinese (she
    is from Nepal). A further document identifying the appellant as having
    an invalid test relied upon by the respondent is a single sheet of
    paper titled the "ETS Invalid Test Analysis". This document gives the
    appellant's correct name, nationality, date of birth and passport
    number but lists the date of the test as 19 February 2012, rather than
    19 February 2013.


 Burden and standard of proof


 6. The burden and standard of proof, where it is alleged that an
    appellant's ETS test is invalid, was discussed in SM and Qadir and is
    as follows:


 7. The legal burden of proving that the appellant used deception lies on
    the respondent albeit that there is a three stage process.


     a) Firstly, the respondent must adduce sufficient evidence to raise
        the issue of fraud.


     b) Secondly, the appellant then has a burden of raising an innocent
        explanation which satisfies the minimum level of plausibility.


     c) Thirdly, if that burden is discharged, the Secretary of State must
        establish on a balance of probabilities that this innocent
        explanation is to be rejected.


 8. There is one civil standard of proof (which is the standard to be
    applied). The seriousness of the consequences does not require a
    different standard of proof but flexibility in its application will
    involve consideration of the strength and quality of the evidence. The
    more serious the consequence, the stronger must be the evidence adduced
    for the necessary standard to be reached.

 Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 9. The judge found there to be no significant difference between the
    evidence provided in SM and Qadir and that before him and consequently
    that there was no reason to depart from the conclusion in SM and Qadir
    that the respondent's evidence was sufficient to satisfy the initial
    evidential burden thereby shifting the burden to the appellant to
    provide an innocent explanation for the alleged deceit. The judge noted
    that the look up tool listed the incorrect nationality for the
    appellant and the ETS Invalid Test Analysis gave the wrong date for the
    test. He stated that this demonstrated how errors may occur in
    transposing information from one source to another. However, he
    concluded that notwithstanding these errors the evidential burden
    shifted to the appellant to give an innocent explanation.


10. The judge then turned to consider the appellant's account and whether
    she gave a credible explanation. After a detailed analysis of her
    academic achievements, scores on English language tests and the
    importance to her of remaining in the UK, he made, inter alia, the
    following findings:


     a) Her academic achievements did "not compellingly suggest that she
        would be able to pass the English language test without
        difficulty".


     b) Obtaining an extension to her visa was so important to her that she
        would be prepared to use a proxy if necessary, given her poor
        academic achievement.


     c) It suggests something was amiss that she performed less well in an
        English language test taken a year after the disputed test, given
        that her language skills could be expected to have improved during
        that time. The judge rejected the argument that the later test was
        harder.


     d) There is nothing known of a negative nature in her character and
        she gave a credible account of the process of taking the test,
        which was detailed but not conclusive.


11. The judge concluded that overall he was satisfied that the respondent
    has demonstrated that the appellant provided a false test result with
    her 2013 application.


12. The judge briefly considered the appellant's claim that removing her
    and her partner would be contrary to Article 8 ECHR. He found that she
    could not meet the Immigration Rules and there were no compelling
    circumstances to suggest removal from the UK would be a
    disproportionate interference with her, or her partner's, family or
    private life.

Grounds of appeal and submissions

13. The grounds of appeal argue, firstly, that, in contrast to SM and
    Qadir, there was not, in this case, reliable evidence identifying the
    appellant's ETS TOEIC certificate as having been obtained fraudulently
    due to the errors in the look up tool and ETS Invalid Test Analysis.
    Accordingly, the judge erred by finding the respondent's evidence was
    sufficient to shift the burden.


14. Secondly, the grounds argue that the judge erred by failing to
    recognise that the appellant gave sufficient evidence to constitute an
    innocent explanation and that he effectively required her to disprove
    dishonesty rather than provide a plausible explanation.


15. Thirdly, the grounds maintain that the judge improperly assumed the
    role of assessing the appellant's level of English.


16. The fourth ground of appeal submits that the decision was "littered
    with errors" indicating a lack of care and attention.


17. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Coker, who identified as an
    arguable error that the judge considered the mistakes in the look up
    tool as indicative of transcription errors without giving reasons for
    that finding and without factoring into his decision overall whether
    there was a possible error in the reliance by the respondent on
    documents that did not in fact apply to the appellant.


18. Before me, Mr Richardson focused on the two mistakes in the
    documentation. The mistakes are summarised above, at paragraph 5. He
    argued that these mistakes show that the process of transferring data
    from ETS to the Home Office has errors and they cast into doubt whether
    the documents can be relied upon in this case. He argued that in light
    of these mistakes, the respondent's evidence is less reliable: if an
    error can be made in one field, it could equally be made in another
    field - including the field stating the test was invalid. Mr Richardson
    clarified that he was not arguing the respondent did not meet the
    initial evidential burden. Rather, his argument was that these errors
    need to be factored into the overall assessment of whether there was
    deception and the judge had plainly failed to do this.


19. Mr Richardson was also critical of the judge giving weight to the
    appellant's poor academic record. The appellant had been studying
    business, not English, and her lack of academic success could be
    unrelated to her ability in English. He was also critical of the
    judge's approach to comparing the appellant's score on the disputed
    2013 test and her (poorer) score on the test taken a year later,
    arguing that the judge's finding that the tests were of equal
    difficulty level was not based on evidence.


20. Mr Kotas' response was that the judge was alive to the mistakes in the
    look up tool and ETS Invalid Test Analysis and it is clear he gave
    those mistakes consideration. He submitted that it is fanciful to
    contend the documents did not apply to the appellant. They had the
    correct name, college, date of birth and passport number.


21. Mr Kotas submitted that the judge had dealt properly - and thoroughly -
    with the evidence relevant to the appellant's innocent explanation and
    having accurately set out the law proceeded to apply it appropriately
    and in an even handed way.

Consideration


22. The Court of Appeal in Shehzad and Chowdrey [2016] EWCA Civ 615 has
    made clear that the 'generic evidence' of Mr Millington and Ms Collings
    about ETS's analysis of the spoken English component of the TOEIC test
    taken together with evidence that the test of the individual under
    consideration has been assessed as "invalid" suffices to satisfy the
    initial evidential burden on the respondent.


23. In this case, the only tenable argument that the initial evidential
    burden was not met is that the documentation purporting to show that
    the appellant's test was invalid did not in fact pertain to her.


24. There are clear errors in the documentation relied upon by the
    respondent to show the appellant was identified by ETS as having an
    invalid test. In the document headed "ETS Invalid Test Analysis" the
    wrong year is given for the test; and in the "look up tool" the
    appellant is incorrectly described as being Chinese.


25. However, the documents are otherwise accurate. The "look up tool"
    states the appellant's correct name, date of birth, test date, test
    centre and certificate number. The "ETS Invalid Test Analysis" states
    the appellant's correct certificate number, test centre, reference
    number, name and date of birth. The error in the date of the test only
    relates to the year: it is stated as 19.02.2012 rather than 19.02.2013.


26. Given the number of accurate details about the appellant contained
    within these documents, I agree with Mr Kotas that it is fanciful to
    suggest they do not relate to her. Accordingly, the judge was entitled
    to find that the initial evidential burden was met. The appellant
    cannot therefore succeed under the first ground of appeal.


27. Nor can she succeed under the related argument that the judge erred by
    failing to take into account the errors in the look up tool and ETS
    Invalid Test Analysis when considering whether the respondent met the
    legal burden of proving deception. There is an overwhelmingly strong
    likelihood that, notwithstanding the errors, the look up tool and ETS
    Invalid Test Analysis relate to the appellant. Accordingly, the errors
    do not make a material difference to the question of whether, on the
    balance of probabilities, the appellant used deception.


28. There is no merit to the second ground of appeal, which challenge's the
    judge's approach to the appellant's "innocent explanation". The judge
    has directed himself correctly as to the law and has then proceeded to
    apply it. He has engaged with the appellant's arguments and evidence
    and having taken into account a number of factors reached a conclusion.
    This approach is entirely appropriate and there is no discernable error
    of law.


29. The third ground of appeal is equally without merit.  There was no
    error of law in the judge considering the appellant's academic record
    in subjects other than English. As explained in SM and Qadir, a
    relevant factor in assessing if there has been deception is whether the
    appellant's academic achievements are such that it was unnecessary or
    illogical for them to have cheated.


30. I am also satisfied that the judge did not engage in an improper
    assessment of the appellant's English language ability. His core
    finding about her language pertained to her performing worse on a test
    taken a year after the disputed test. It is apparent that the judge
    considered the appellant's explanation for this before concluding that
    "an equally likely explanation for any deterioration in her language
    skills is that her results in the TOIC tests had been obtained
    fraudulently".  There is no error in the approach taken by the judge to
    the evidence and his conclusion was open to him based on his evaluation
    of that evidence.


31. The fourth ground, which contends there was a lack of care and
    attention on the part of the judge, is entirely without merit. This is
    a well written and detailed decision where the judge has dealt
    thoroughly with the evidence.


 Decision


A. The appeal is dismissed.

B. The judge has not made a material error of law and the decision of the
First-tier Tribunal stands.


      |                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 30 June 2017                  |


