

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/31379/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                    Determination    |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 23 September 2015                  |                    On 25 September  |
|                                      |2015                                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH



                                   Between

                             VIVIEN CHIMWAN DAMS
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Charlton, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  find  that  no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case  that  give  rise  to  the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.





                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria.  She  appeals  against  the
       respondent's decision dated 17  July  2014  refusing  her  leave  to
       remain on Article 8 ECHR  grounds  and  seeking  to  remove  her  to
       Nigeria by way of directions under section 47  of  the  Immigration,
       Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

    2. The Appellant's immigration background is set out at [4] to  [5]  of
       the Tribunal's decision promulgated on 27 August 2015 and I  do  not
       repeat it save as necessary below.

    3. The Appellant's appeal was  allowed  by  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Suffield-Thompson in  a  decision  promulgated  on  18  March  2015.
       Permission to appeal that decision was granted to the Respondent  by
       First-Tier Tribunal Judge Chohan on 1 June 2015.   In  the  decision
       promulgated on 27 August 2015, the Tribunal found that the  decision
       of First-Tier Tribunal judge Suffield-Thompson contained a  material
       error of law and we therefore set it aside.  The matter  comes  back
       before me in order to re-make the decision.

    Submissions


    4. Ms Charlton indicated at the start of the hearing that the facts  of
       the Appellant's case had not changed since the  hearing  before  the
       First-Tier Tribunal.  She relied on the oral evidence as recorded in
       the First-Tier Tribunal decision (which was not disputed) and on the
       Appellant's written statement and other documents in the Appellant's
       bundle which were before the  First-Tier  Tribunal.   She  indicated
       that although the Appellant  and  her  step-daughter  Ms  Kerr  were
       present in court she did not intend to call either of them  to  give
       oral evidence.  The Appellant was content to limit  the  hearing  to
       submissions on the evidence already produced.


    5. Mr Jarvis and Ms Charlton both submitted skeleton arguments for  the
       hearing.  I  indicated  at  the  outset  that  the  authority  which
       appeared to me to be most relevant to this  case  was  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department v SS (Congo) and  others  [2015]  EWCA
       Civ 387 ("SS") on which Mr Jarvis relied in his  skeleton  argument.
       I also directed the parties  to  the  case  of  Singh  and  Singh  v
       Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  630
       ("Singh [2015]") as relevant to the potential issue which arises  in
       this case in relation to the existence of family life.

    6. Ms Charlton made clear that the Appellant's case was  limited  to  a
       claim outside the Rules  based  on  compelling  circumstances.   The
       Appellant came to the UK as a domestic worker and had leave on  that
       basis.  She instructed her representative to make an application for
       further leave and was unaware that she had been  refused  leave  and
       was in the UK unlawfully.  Ms  Charlton  fairly  accepted  that  the
       evidence showed that the Appellant  discovered  that  she  had  been
       refused leave in 2004 but she was told by her representative that he
       had lodged an appeal and she thought that her case was  still  under
       appeal.  The Appellant made a complaint about her representative  in
       2010.  I permitted Ms Charlton to adduce a bundle  of  documents  in
       relation to this issue at the hearing  with  no  objection  from  Mr
       Jarvis as it seemed to me that this  formed  a  large  part  of  the
       Appellant's case and the  Tribunal  needed  full  information.   The
       documents indicate that the  Appellant  was  unable  to  obtain  any
       satisfaction in relation to her complaint as the representative  was
       not a solicitor and  was  at  the  relevant  time  running  his  own
       business and not part of  a  firm.   Her  file  had  therefore  been
       closed.  On its own, Ms Charlton accepted that this factor could not
       render removal disproportionate but when placed in the balance  with
       the other factors and  weighed  against  the  public  interest,  she
       submitted that it might tip the balance.


    7. In relation to family life based upon extended family relationships,
       Ms Charlton relied on Abbasi and another (visits-bereavement-Article
       8)  [2015] UKUT 00463 (IAC) whilst accepting that it  related  to  a
       very different factual context.  Ms Charlton relied on the extent of
       the Appellant's ties with Mr Phillips'  children  and  grandchildren
       particularly Ms Kerr and her children with whom the Appellant had  a
       deep loving relationship.  Ms Charlton submitted that removal of the
       Appellant would be a disproportionate  interference  also  with  the
       rights of those  children  and  grandchildren.   In  response  to  a
       question  from  me,  Ms  Charlton  obtained  instructions  that  the
       grandchildren are no longer minors.  Ms Kerr's children for whom the
       Appellant cared when they were aged thirteen and fourteen years  are
       now aged  twenty-two  and  twenty-four.   The  two  children  of  Ms
       Garnish, the other of Mr Phillips' daughters who provided  a  letter
       of support are  now  aged  eighteen  and  twenty-three.   Whilst  Ms
       Charlton  accepted  that  the  Appellant  no  longer  lives  in  the
       immediate vicinity of Mr Phillips' children and grandchildren,  this
       is not  a  great  distance  (they  live  in  Hertfordshire  and  the
       Appellant lives in Middlesex).  Ms Charlton noted also the  evidence
       that the Appellant is part of Mr Phillips' family and is an integral
       part of their "get- togethers".  Removal of the Appellant would have
       a disproportionate impact also on them.


    8. Ms Charlton relied also in support of the Appellant's  case  on  the
       fact that she has educated herself at her own cost in the UK and has
       a strong social life with friends.  The Appellant works  in  the  UK
       for a care agency.   Ms  Charlton  relied  on  the  summary  of  the
       Appellant's case and evidence as recorded at [16] and  [17]  of  the
       First-Tier Tribunal decision of 18 March 2015 and the  documents  in
       the Appellant's bundle.

    9. In terms of the public interest, Ms Charlton  fairly  accepted  that
       the  Appellant  faces  a  difficult  task  in  persuading  me   that
       interference would be disproportionate when considered  through  the
       lens of section 117B Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
       ("s117B).  She accepted that, at best, the  Appellant's  status  has
       been precarious throughout much of her stay in the UK but  asked  me
       to note the difficulties  which  the  Appellant  faced  due  to  the
       conduct  of  her  representative   to   whom   she   entrusted   the
       regularisation of her status and to adjust the  weight  accordingly.
       She accepted that the fact  the  Appellant  speaks  English  and  is
       financially independent does not reduce the weight to be accorded to
       the public interest (applying AM (S117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260
       (IAC)).  She asked me to take account of those matters, however,  as
       evidence of the Appellant's integration in the UK.


   10. Mr Jarvis relied on the test set out at [33] of SS.   It  is  common
       ground that the Appellant cannot meet the requirements of the  Rules
       in relation to Article 8  ECHR.   The  relevant  test  is  therefore
       whether there are compelling circumstances which should entitle  the
       Appellant to succeed in her claim outside the Rules.  Even if  there
       are compelling circumstances, though, those can still be  outweighed
       by the public interest and the issue for me to determine is  whether
       removal would be disproportionate.

   11. In relation to whether the case concerns private life or also family
       life, Mr Jarvis accepted that the Appellant was granted leave  based
       on family life until 2014 on the basis of her relationship  with  Mr
       Phillips.  The Appellant had clearly been through a difficult period
       due to the death of Mr Phillips but her  bereavement   unfortunately
       means that she can no longer rely on her family life with a  partner
       as a basis for further stay.  The issue is whether the ties  between
       her and Mr Phillips' children and  grandchildren  amount  to  family
       life.  He accepted that there were family ties and  those  may  have
       been stronger when Mr Phillips was alive but he submitted that those
       ties could not amount to  family  life  now.   The  Appellant  lives
       separately from Mr Phillips' family in  a  different  area  and  the
       evidence of Ms Kerr is that she sees the  Appellant  once  a  month.
       There  is  evidence  of  ties  with  Mr   Phillips'   grandchildren,
       particularly those who  the  Appellant  cared  for  when  they  were
       younger.  He referred to [21] of Singh v  Entry  Clearance  Officer,
       New Delhi [2004] EWCA Civ 1075 and the reference there to  Marckx  v
       Belgium.  Much depends on the facts.  The relationship  between  the
       Appellant and Mr Phillips' family is not a blood  relationship.   As
       at  the  date  of  the  hearing,  there  is  no  evidence  of  close
       involvement sufficient to amount to family life. Mr Jarvis  accepted
       that Singh [2015] makes the point that it may make little difference
       whether a claim is considered on the  basis  of  family  or  private
       life.


   12. Mr Jarvis submitted that the factors relied on are  generally  those
       considered within the Rules - length of residence,  working  in  the
       UK, social contacts etc.  His primary submission therefore was  that
       the appeal  should  fail  on  that  basis  as  there  are  no  other
       compelling circumstances.  However, he fairly accepted that it might
       be argued  that  the  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  Mr
       Phillips' children and grandchildren is a factor which could not  be
       considered fully within the Rules.  The same could be said  for  the
       facts relied on by the Appellant to explain her unlawful stay in the
       UK  (in  relation  to  the  conduct  of  her  representatives).   He
       submitted however that the Appellant's argument that she  should  be
       granted leave because of the conduct of her representatives and  the
       assertion that, but for that conduct, she would have met  the  Rules
       amounted to an impermissible "near  miss"  argument.   It  was  also
       speculative as whether she would have succeeded depended on  factors
       such as permitted switching between categories at the relevant time.
        For this factor to weigh in the balance, the Appellant  would  have
       to show that there is no dispute that she would have  succeeded  but
       for her representative's conduct.

   13. In relation to a claim under the Rules, the Appellant  clearly  does
       not meet paragraph 276ADE.  She has not been in the UK for 20 years.
        There are no very significant obstacles  to  her  reintegration  in
       Nigeria.  That is a very high threshold.   The  Appellant  has  some
       family left in Nigeria.   The Appellant works in the UK  and  worked
       lawfully when she first came to the UK and  since  she  was  granted
       discretionary leave in 2011.  The Respondent  accepts  that  she  is
       financially independent but that  is  not  a  factor  which  accords
       positive weight in the balance.   The same is true of her ability to
       speak English.  Mr Jarvis submitted that the Rules provide a  number
       of routes for migration as a worker  and  those  Rules  reflect  the
       Secretary of State's views as to  the  categories  of  migrant  that
       should be permitted to remain in the UK  for  work.   The  Appellant
       does not seek to suggest that she can bring herself  within  any  of
       those categories as a worker.  He submitted  therefore  that  little
       weight should be given to  her  private  life  claim  based  on  her
       employment (even though it was accepted that she  had  been  working
       lawfully in the UK based on her discretionary leave).

   14. The Rules provide for leave based on periods of  residence  and  for
       family  relationships.   The  length  of  residence  on  which   the
       Appellant relies is less than the period required by the  Rules  and
       the family relationship relied upon does not fall within the  Rules.
       Little weight should be given  to  a  private  life  formed  when  a
       person's status is unlawful or precarious (section 117B(4) and (5)).
        Even if the ties relied upon amount to  family  life,  interference
       with that family life would be limited in  circumstances  where  the
       family is separated geographically already with  the  UK  and  those
       ties could be continued by communication  from  abroad.   Mr  Jarvis
       accepted that I  should  consider  the  impact  of  removal  of  the
       Appellant on Mr Phillips' children and grandchildren  but  submitted
       that interference with their human rights would be proportionate  in
       the circumstances.  Even if  those  ties  do  amount  to  compelling
       circumstances, Mr Jarvis  submitted,  they  are  outweighed  by  the
       public interest in light of the precarious/unlawful  status  of  the
       Appellant in the UK at the time that the Appellant's  private/family
       life was formed (although he accepted per Deelah and others (section
       117B - ambit)  [2015] UKUT 00515 (IAC) that establishment of private
       and family life is a continuum and not limited to a person's  status
       when that is initially created).

    Decision and reasons

   15. As noted above, it is common ground that the Appellant  cannot  meet
       the requirements of the Immigration Rules in relation to  Article  8
       ECHR.   She does not meet the family life rules.  She has  not  been
       in the UK for 20 years.   She  retains  ties  with  Nigeria  and  Ms
       Charlton confirmed that it was not the Appellant's case  that  there
       were very significant obstacles  to  her  reintegration  in  Nigeria
       albeit she did not wish to return.   I  do  not  accept  Mr  Jarvis'
       submission that the whole of the  Appellant's  claim  is  one  which
       stands  or  falls  under  the  Rules.   At  the  very   least,   the
       relationship with Mr Phillips' children  and  grandchildren  is  not
       capable of consideration under the Rules and I also take account  of
       the Appellant's case that she is  not  to  blame  for  her  unlawful
       status in the UK throughout some of  the  period  of  her  stay.   I
       therefore go on to consider the Appellant's Article 8 claim  outside
       the Rules.


   16. Article 8 protects the right to private and family  life.   However,
       it is not an absolute right.  The  State  is  lawfully  entitled  to
       interfere with an appellant's private and family life as long as  it
       is pursuing a legitimate aim and the interference is  necessary  and
       proportionate in all the circumstances of the case.

   17. I deal first with the extent and nature of the Appellant's Article 8
       claim.  The Appellant has been in the UK  since  20  December  2000.
       Initially, she was here with  leave  as  a  domestic  servant  in  a
       private household.  She had leave in that  category  until  December
       2002.  The Appellant accepts that from then until April 2011 she had
       no leave to remain. I deal below with the reasons for  that.  On  19
       April 2011, the Appellant was  granted  three  years'  discretionary
       leave as the partner of Mr Phillips. Mr  Phillips  died  on  5  June
       2013.  The Appellant sought further leave to  remain  based  on  her
       Article 8 rights and it is the refusal of that application  in  July
       2014 which gives rise to this appeal.  On the basis of the foregoing
       chronology, the Appellant has been in the UK for a total of six  and
       a half years lawfully and eight years unlawfully.

   18. The Appellant submits that the weight to be  given  to  her  private
       life should be adjusted to reflect the fact  that  she  was  not  to
       blame for her unlawful status.  Her evidence  is  that,  in  October
       2002, she asked her representative to make a further application for
       leave as a domestic worker, apparently on  the  basis  of  being  or
       becoming a domestic worker in Mr Phillips' household.  At about that
       time, she started to study in the UK.  She  received  correspondence
       from her representative that "appeared to confirm" that he had  made
       the application on her behalf and so she waited for a decision.   In
       2004,  having   received   no   satisfactory   response   from   her
       representative, she contacted the Home Office directly and was  told
       that her application had been refused.   After  some  prevarication,
       her representative admitted that he had received the refusal letter.
        He indicated that the refusal was based on  the  application  being
       out of time.  He told the Appellant that he  was  convinced  he  had
       submitted the application in time and so had lodged an appeal.   The
       Appellant says that she was only  given  one  page  of  the  refusal
       letter and nothing in relation to her appeal.  She  did  not  change
       representatives at that time.


   19. The Appellant admits to having difficulties pursuing her studies due
       to lack of any evidence as to her immigration status.  Her  lack  of
       evidence as to her  status  came  to  the  fore  in  2009  when  the
       Appellant needed to undergo an operation.  She  contacted  the  Home
       Office again but was unable to provide them with details as she only
       had one page of the refusal letter.  The Home Office indicated  that
       it could not locate her records.  In February  2010,  the  Appellant
       finally sought advice from a solicitor  who,  having  contacted  her
       representative,  was  able  to  inform  the   Appellant   that   the
       representative had not appealed as he  considered  her  case  to  be
       unmeritorious.  Thereafter, via her solicitors, the Appellant lodged
       the application which  led  to  her  being  granted  the  period  of
       discretionary leave to which I refer above.  The bundle of documents
       relating to the Appellant's complaint about her representative bears
       out the Appellant's statement in this regard, as would  be  expected
       since of  course  the  complaint  was  not  made  until  2010.   The
       complaint has not been pursued as the Appellant's representative  is
       not a solicitor  and  the  firm  for  whom  he  now  works  was  not
       instructed in her case and could bear  no  responsibility.   At  the
       time, the representative was working for an OISC  firm  which  could
       not be investigated by the Legal Complaints Service.  The  file  has
       therefore been closed.


   20. I do not consider that the above amounts to compelling circumstances
       which require consideration outside the Rules.  Nor  do  I  consider
       that those circumstances affect the weight which I am bound to  give
       to the Appellant's private and if appropriate  family  life  on  the
       basis of her being here unlawfully.  Whilst I accept the Appellant's
       version of events, it appears  that  she  was  aware  from,  at  the
       latest, 2004 that her application had been refused.   She  was  also
       aware that her representative was not providing a good service.   It
       was clearly open to her at that time to remove her file from him and
       instruct solicitors or indeed to make a further application  herself
       or via solicitors to seek to regularise her stay, particularly since
       she had by then embarked on a course of study which might have given
       her a reason to remain.  Although the Appellant says  that  she  was
       making continued efforts to progress her case, I find that  she  was
       not taking all the steps she could have done to regularise her  stay
       and must have been aware during the period from at least 2004  until
       2011 that she had no basis of stay.

   21.  I turn to consider the other elements of  the  Appellant's  private
       life  relied  upon.   The  Appellant  has  undergone  a  number   of
       educational courses, apparently at her own expense.  She  now  works
       as a carer.  She lives with her aunt who has provided  a  letter  in
       support of her case.  There are also a number of  other  letters  of
       support from friends attesting to the fact  that  the  Appellant  is
       hard-working, pays her taxes and  is  self-sufficient  and  makes  a
       contribution to society.  She has no criminal  convictions.  She  is
       involved in charitable causes and is active in her local church. The
       Appellant says in her statement that she has an extensive network of
       friends. The  Appellant  notes  that  she  suffers  from  a  medical
       condition which necessitated an operation in 2009 since when she has
       been on medication and subject to periodic check ups.  There  is  no
       other evidence as to this condition or the treatment  which  she  is
       undergoing.  It is not said that treatment for her condition is  not
       available in Nigeria.

   22. The Appellant relies also on the ties  which  she  retains  with  Mr
       Phillips' children and grandchildren.  The oral evidence of Ms Kerr,
       Mr  Phillips'  daughter,  before  the  First-Tier   Tribunal   bears
       repetition.  She indicated that the Appellant is part  of  a  large,
       very  close   family   consisting   of   five   children,   thirteen
       grandchildren and two great grandchildren.   Ms  Kerr  and  her  two
       daughters moved in with the Appellant and Mr Phillips  in  2004  and
       the Appellant cared for  Ms  Kerr's  children  as  Mr  Phillips  was
       disabled.  One of the children suffered from epilepsy and  ADHD  and
       the Appellant was the only person who Ms Kerr would  trust  to  give
       medication to that child.  As to the current situation, as noted  at
       [7] above, both children are now  adults.   Ms  Kerr  gave  evidence
       that, due to the nature of the Appellant's employment, they now  see
       each other only about once a month.  She does though record that she
       and the other family members would be devastated  if  the  Appellant
       were removed.

   23. The Appellant's own evidence as to the  relationship  is  relatively
       brief.  She speaks in her statement of the strong  relationship  she
       has with Mr Phillips' children and grandchildren  and  records  that
       they are supportive of her.  That is repeated in the record  of  her
       oral evidence before the First-Tier Tribunal but no particulars  are
       given. Ms Kerr in  her  letter  of  support  speaks  warmly  of  the
       Appellant and regards her as a stepmother.  Ms Garnish who is one of
       Mr  Phillips'  other  daughters  talks  of  the  support  which  the
       Appellant gave to her father but there is little or no  evidence  of
       the relationship between Ms Garnish and  the  Appellant.   There  is
       limited other evidence and no statement or letter  of  support  from
       the other children or grandchildren.

   24. I readily accept that if Mr Phillips were still alive the fact  that
       the Appellant was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with  him
       would have led to the grant of a  further  period  of  discretionary
       leave and ultimately probably settlement.  I am sympathetic  to  the
       predicament in which the Appellant finds herself and for  her  loss.
       However, based on the  evidence  as  to  the  relationship  with  Mr
       Phillips' family following his death, I am unable to find that there
       exists the closeness of relationship which could  amount  to  family
       life.  As recognised in  Singh  [2015],  whether  relationships  are
       categorised as family life may not matter as in any event they  form
       part of a person's private life.  The extent and  closeness  of  the
       relationship whether categorised as private or family life  is  what
       ultimately matters. In this case, there is  limited  evidence  about
       the nature and extent of the relationship.

   25. Although not referred to  in  Ms  Charlton's  skeleton  argument  or
       submissions,  the  Appellant  has  also  provided  evidence  in  her
       statement and in oral evidence to the First-Tier Tribunal about  the
       circumstances she would face in Nigeria and that is  mentioned  also
       in some of the letters in support of her case in evidence  including
       from one of her sisters who now  lives  in  Canada.    Both  of  the
       Appellant's parents who lived in Nigeria are now deceased.  She  has
       at least one sibling (a brother) in Nigeria.  She would not face any
       language difficulties but points out that she would  have  no  home,
       job or friends there, having been in the UK  for  nearly  15  years.
       Nigeria has changed a lot in that time.  She has though returned  to
       Nigeria twice during the period she has been in the UK,  in  October
       2013 and for six weeks in January 2014 when her mother passed  away.



   26. It is accepted by Ms Charlton that the Appellant does not  meet  the
       Rules and does not assert that these are very significant  obstacles
       but they are matters which I should and do take  into  account  when
       considering the proportionality  of  removal.   I  accept  that  the
       Appellant will face some difficulties in reintegrating in what  will
       now be an unfamiliar country.  However, she did not come to  the  UK
       until she was twenty-eight years old and  has  returned  to  Nigeria
       twice for short visits.  She also has at least one family member who
       still lives there who can no doubt offer her some assistance however
       limited should she need it. The Appellant is an educated lady in her
       early forties who has shown the resourcefulness and determination to
       make a life for herself, study and find work in the UK when she came
       here apparently with nothing and no-one  to  assist  her.   She  can
       maintain relationships with her friends and Mr Phillips'  family  in
       the UK via modern means of communications and  visits  and  will  no
       doubt establish a new network  of  friends  as  she  apparently  had
       before she came to the UK.  In light of the foregoing, I find that I
       can give limited weight to those difficulties.

   27. I turn then  to  consider  the  proportionality  of  removal  taking
       account of all of the above matters.  I do  not  set  out  the  five
       stage test in Razgar.  There is no issue concerning  the  engagement
       of and interference with the Appellant's Article 8  rights  and  the
       Respondent is clearly entitled by law to remove the Appellant.   The
       only issue is therefore one of proportionality.

   28. In relation to proportionality, I am required to have regard to  the
       factors set out in  section  117B.   The  maintenance  of  effective
       immigration control is in the public interest.   I  am  required  to
       give little weight to the Appellant's private life  whether  on  the
       basis that this  was  formed  whilst  she  was  here  unlawfully  or
       precariously.  As noted at [22] to [24] above,  I  accept  that  the
       Appellant continues to have ties to Mr Phillips' family but based on
       the evidence before me those are not so close as to amount to family
       life and I have taken those into account as part of the  Appellant's
       private life.  For the  reasons  given  at  [20]  above,  I  do  not
       consider that the matters on which the Appellant  relies  to  excuse
       the unlawfulness of her status throughout much of her stay impact on
       the weight which I should give her private  life.   The  Appellant's
       private life  has  been  formed  when  her  immigration  status  was
       precarious insofar as it was not unlawful and I  am  therefore  only
       able to give it little weight in any event.


   29. I recognise that removal  of  the  Appellant  would  impact  on  the
       members of Mr Phillips' family.  However, there is limited  evidence
       from those family members with the exception of Ms Kerr as  to  that
       impact and on that basis I am unable to find that the  impact  would
       be disproportionate  when  balanced  against  the  public  interest.
       There is no evidence relating  to  the  effect  of  removal  on  any
       children within the family who may be affected by the decision.


   30. I have taken into  account  all  the  factors  relied  upon  by  the
       Appellant in support of her private life claim as set out at [6]  to
       [8] and [17] to [24] above. I  have  also  taken  into  account  the
       difficulties which the  Appellant  is  likely  to  face  in  Nigeria
       following removal as set out at [25] to [26]  above.  However,  when
       balanced  against  the  public  interest  in  removal  due  to   the
       Appellant's unlawful and precarious status throughout  her  time  in
       the UK, I conclude that removal of the Appellant would not amount to
       a disproportionate interference with her Article 8 ECHR rights.







   DECISION

I dismiss the appeal.  The Appellant does not meet the Immigration Rules  in
relation to Article 8 ECHR and I dismiss the appeal on human rights  grounds
outside the Rules.

Signed           [pic]            Date 25 September 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
