
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
IA/31566/2015

                                                 IA/31578/2015

                                                 IA/31575/2015

                                                 IA/31573/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |        Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 May 2017                         |        On 25 May 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                             olubukola soremekun
                             muyideen soremekun
                       oluwamuyiwa jeremiah SOREMEKUN
                       moyinoluwa elizabeth soremekun
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms A Sobande of O A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellants against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Paul)  dismissing  their  appeal  against   the
    respondent's decision of 19 August 2015 refusing them further leave  to
    remain.

Background

2.   The appellants are all citizens of Nigeria.  The first appellant  ("the
    appellant") was born on 19 January 1973 and is married  to  the  second
    appellant born on 4 January 1979.  The appellant entered the  UK  as  a
    visitor in 2005 and the second appellant joined her in 2006.  According
    to his witness statement he last entered the UK as a  visitor  in  2008
    after being granted leave in that capacity.  The  third  appellant  was
    born in the UK on 21 July 2007 and the  fourth  appellant  on  21  July
    2010.  Subsequently, a further child has been born on  20  March  2015.
    In December 2009 the appellant applied for leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds with the third appellant as her dependent  child.   That
    application was refused.  It appears that further representations  were
    made as a further refusal letter was sent to the appellants on 23 March
    2011 which decision was the subject of  an  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appeal was heard on 23  May  2011  and  dismissed  in  a
    decision issued on 15 June 2011.  Permission to appeal was  refused  by
    both the First-tier and the Upper Tribunal and on 4 October 2011  their
    appeal rights were exhausted.

3.   On 28 March 2012 the appellant made a further application for leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds for herself, her  husband  and  her  two
    children.  Her application was refused on 14 June 2013.  An application
    for judicial review was lodged on 4 March 2015 and  following  an  oral
    permission hearing on 10 June 2015 the  respondent  conceded  that  the
    decision should be reconsidered and the decision the  subject  of  this
    appeal was issued on 19 August 2015.  The respondent was not  satisfied
    that the appellant could meet the requirements of the Rules in relation
    to either family or private life.  She  went  on  to  consider  whether
    there were  exceptional  circumstances  warranting  a  grant  of  leave
    outside the Rules.  For the reasons set out in the decision letter, the
    respondent decided that there were no exceptional circumstances and the
    application was refused.

The Hearing Before the First-tier Tribunal

4.   The appellants appealed against this  decision  and  their  appeal  was
    heard on 11 October 2016 by the First-tier Tribunal.  The judge pointed
    out that the appeal  arose  out  of  an  application  that  was  lodged
    approximately eight months after the previous decision and  raised  the
    issue of whether there were any new circumstances  save  for  the  fact
    that the application was  now  being  considered  under  the  Rules  as
    amended in 2012  such  as  to  amount  to  distinguishing  facts.   The
    appellants' representative said that the new grounds were that  another
    child had been born on 20 March2015 and the oldest child had  now  been
    in the country for nine years and therefore qualified under  the  Rules
    and that would obviously assist the appeals of the  co-appellants.   It
    was further submitted that due to the period of time that had lapsed  a
    fresh assessment under s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration
    Act 2009 had to be made about the best interests of the children.

5.   The judge pointed out that the application could not succeed under  the
    Rules in relation to family life as the appellants could not  meet  the
    eligibility requirements and therefore para EX1  did  not  fall  to  be
    considered.  They could not bring themselves within the  provisions  of
    para 276ADE(1) as they had not been in the UK for a  sufficiently  long
    period.  The third appellant who was 4 when the  application  was  made
    could not come within the provisions  of  para  276ADE(1)(iv),  as  the
    relevant periods of time were calculated with time  ending  immediately
    before the date of the application.

6.   The judge found that the appellant could not succeed  under  the  Rules
    and in [15] went on to say:

         "... in my view,  there  is  nothing  in  this  case  invoking  the
         principles of SS (Congo) and Sunassee that showed there was any gap
         between the Rules and the  appellants'  circumstances  such  as  to
         justify a consideration of Article 8 under  the  Razgar  test.   In
         relation to Section 55,  again  this  is  no  answer  to  say  that
         'because the children have been here for five years since the  last
         application' that somehow strengthens their case for being  allowed
         to remain here."

6.   The judge said that there was in his view absolutely no  merit  in  the
    appeal.  He then said at [18]:

         "I have also had regard to Section  117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  as
         amended.  The public interest does not require a  person's  removal
         when a person has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
         qualifying child, and it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         child to leave the UK.  A qualifying child means a  person  who  is
         under the age of 18 and has lived in the UK for a continuous period
         of seven years or more.  Under this particular provision  it  could
         be argued that the oldest child now has been  in  the  country  for
         more than seven years.  However, for exactly the same reasons that,
         on  any  Section  55  assessment,  it  would  not   be   considered
         detrimental for this child to leave to go to Nigeria, so  it  would
         also be reasonable to expect this child to leave the  UK  with  his
         family, to return to Nigeria."


    The appeal was therefore dismissed.

The Grounds and Submissions

7.   In the grounds of appeal it  is  argued  that  the  relevant  date  for
    assessing the appeal was the date  of  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal when the third appellant was 9.  The judge had erred by  using
    the judgment in 2011 when considering the appeal.  It is further argued
    that the judge did not allow the appellants  to  give  evidence  or  to
    allow them to comment on matters that he was minded  to  weigh  against
    them; he erred in his determination by failing properly to  assess  the
    best interests of the children as a primary consideration,  failing  to
    take into account the guidance in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705  or
    of the guidance in the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania)  v  Secretary  of
    State [2010] UKSC 4 and he failed to carry out the scrupulous  analysis
    required by JO and Others (Section 55 duty) [2014] UKUT 517 by  failing
    to carry out a careful examination  of  all  relevant  information  and
    factors when assessing the best interests of the children.

8.   Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
    following reasons:

         "It is arguable that the judge should have made a  full  assessment
         of the position of the best interests of the  children  as  at  the
         date of hearing rather than rely on the earlier decision, which was
         over five years old, in the light of the passage of time since that
         decision."

9.   At the hearing before me Ms Sobande said  that  no  evidence  had  been
    heard by the judge.  He had been wrong to rely on the previous decision
    without properly considering the current position in  relation  to  the
    children's best interests.   She  submitted  that  the  judge  had  not
    carried out a proper assessment when considering article 8.

10.  Ms Ahmad did not seek to resist the appeal conceding that  it  appeared
    from [15] that the judge did not carry out an assessment under  Article
    8 because he took the view that there was no gap between the Rules  and
    the appellant's circumstances and although at [18] he had accepted that
    it could be argued that the oldest child fell within the provisions  of
    s.117B(6), he had not carried out an adequate assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the children.

Consideration of Whether the First-tier Tribunal Erred in Law

11.  I accept that Ms Ahmad's concession is  correctly  made  and  that  the
    judge erred in law such that the decision should be set aside.  In  the
    grounds it is argued that the judge did not  allow  the  appellants  to
    give evidence or to comment on matters  that  he  was  minded  to  hold
    against them and further argue that he acted contrary to the principles
    of natural justice.  If allegations such as this are to be made in  the
    grounds they must be supported by evidence and not based on  assertions
    alone. There is no evidence to support these grounds and I reject them.



12.  However, I am satisfied that the judge erred in law by failing to  give
    proper consideration to the position under article 8.  In [15] he  said
    that there was nothing to show that there is any gap between the  Rules
    and the appellants' circumstances to justify a consideration of article
    8 under the test in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  I  am  not  satisfied  that
    that was the correct approach in the light  of  the  judgments  of  the
    Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v Secretary of  State  [2016]  UKSC  60  at
    paras 51-3 and MM (Lebanon) and others v Secretary of State [2017] UKSC
    10 at para 57. The failure to meet the requirements of the  Rules  will
    be an important factor in considering article 8 but that  factor  alone
    cannot be determinative.  The judge further  erred  when  he  commented
    that when considering the best interests of  the  children  it  was  no
    answer to say that because the children have been here for  five  years
    since the last application that somehow  strengthened  their  case  for
    being allowed to remain.  Length of residence is clearly  relevant  and
    whilst not determinative must be taken into account: see para 46 of  MA
    (Pakistan).

13.  It is correct that when considering the position under  para  276ADE(1)
    length of residence is assessed up to the date of the  application  and
    the third appellant's residence of over seven years could not bring him
    within the relevant provisions.  However, when considering the position
    under article 8 it is clear that s.117B(6) requires a consideration  of
    the position at the date of  the  hearing.   By  that  time  the  third
    appellant had been in the UK for more than seven years and as  set  out
    in MA (Pakistan) a child's residence of over 7 years is significant and
    must be given due weight as must the best  interests  of  the  children
    generally but it does not follow that their best  interests  cannot  be
    outweighed by other relevant factors including in  particular  in  this
    case the fact that the appellants' residence has been precarious  since
    the limited leave granted to the first and second appellants expired.

14.  In summary, I am satisfied that the judge erred  by  failing  to  carry
    out a proper assessment of the position  in  relation  to  private  and
    family life under article 8 and whether removal would be  proportionate
    to a legitimate aim.  That required an assessment of the  current  best
    interests of the children together with all other relevant factors  and
    particularly those required to be taken into account in paras 117A  and
    B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.

15.  Both parties accepted that the proper course as article 8 had not  been
    considered was for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    for reconsideration by way of a  full  re-hearing  before  a  different
    judge.

Decision

16.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the  decision  is  set  aside.
    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House for a
    full re-hearing by a different judge.




Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 22 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

