
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/31280/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd May 2017                        |      On 16th May 2017              |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR AHMED MEGHERBI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Officer Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, I shall refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.
    The Appellant's appeal, against the refusal  of  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right of  residence  under  Regulation  8(5)  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 [EEA Regulations],  was  allowed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge P S Aujla in a decision dated 19th  September
    2016.

2.   The Secretary of State appealed on the ground that the judge had  erred
    in law in allowing the appeal under the EEA Regulations when the matter
    should  have  been  referred  back  to  the  Secretary  of  State   for
    reconsideration under Regulation  17(4).   The  judge  was  limited  to
    allowing the appeal insofar as the decision was not in accordance  with
    the law.
3.    Permission  to  appeal  was  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hollingworth on 25th January 2017 on the ground that the judge  had  no
    jurisdiction to hear an appeal pursuant to  Regulation  8  of  the  EEA
    Regulations.

4.   The application for permission was renewed to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    the ground that the decision of  Judge  Hollingworth  was  inconsistent
    with the cover sheet and permission should be granted  given  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Rimington  on
    17th March 2017. It was arguable that the judge erred in  his  approach
    to the law both in accepting jurisdiction in relation  to  an  extended
    family member under  the  EEA  Regulations  and,  having  done  so,  in
    allowing the appeal outright.

6.   The Appellant did not attend and I did not  hear  submissions  from  Ms
    Isherwood.  It is clear from the decision  of  Sala  (EFM's:  Right  of
    appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411(IAC) that there is no right of  appeal  under
    Regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations.  Accordingly, the judge  erred  in
    law in allowing the appeal under Regulation 7 which was not  applicable
    in this case.  The judge had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

7.   Accordingly, I allow the Respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  and
    I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla dated  19th
    September 2016. I remake it as  follows:   The  Appellant's  appeal  is
    dismissed  for  want  of  jurisdiction  under  the  Immigration   (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.

8.   I note that there was no challenge to  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    Appellant was in a durable relationship with an  EEA  national  and  Ms
    Isherwood informed me that in cases such as this it was usual  for  the
    Secretary of State to reconsider the decision.  It may well be that  is
    the course adopted by the Appellant and the reason  why  he  failed  to
    attend the appeal hearing.


Notice of Decision

The Respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

The Appellant's appeal against the refusal of a  residence  card  under  the
Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 15th May 2017

J Frances

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

