

                                    [pic]
ST
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31527/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Listed at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11th  November 2014                        |On 14th November 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Harries


                                   Between

                             MR MUHAMMAD HUSSAIN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: MA Consultants (London)
For the Respondent:  Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The appellant was born on 8th  September  1980  and  is  a  citizen  of
     Pakistan. He was granted permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
     against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan (the  Judge)
     who, in a determination promulgated on 19th  May  2014,  dismissed  his
     appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse his  application  to
     vary leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  his
     relationship with a British citizen and to remove him from  the  UK  to
     Pakistan by way of directions under section 47 of the 2006 Act.


  2. After an initial hearing before me on 3rd September 2014 I  found  that
     the Judge had made a material  error  of  law  in  the  making  of  the
     decision in the First-tier Tribunal and I set aside that decision.  The
     matter is listed before me today for a hearing to remake the  decision.
     Neither  the  appellant  nor  his  representative  appeared  but  in  a
     facsimile letter received in the Upper Tribunal today M  A  Consultants
     acting for the appellant stated as follows:


         "We have been informed by our client that he wishes for his  appeal
         to be withdrawn as he is leaving the UK voluntarily.


         We therefore request if you could kindly consider this as withdrawn
         and update your records accordingly."

  3. There is no provision for a party to withdraw  its  appeal  before  the
     Upper Tribunal.  However, Rule 17  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
     Tribunal) Rules 2008 provides for a party to withdraw its case, or  any
     part of it, before the Upper Tribunal with the consent of the  Tribunal
     as follows:


         Withdrawal(a)
         17.-(1) Subject to paragraph (2), a party may give notice of the
         withdrawal of  its case, or any
         part of it-


             a) [ ] by sending or delivering to the Upper Tribunal a
                written notice of withdrawal; or


             (b) orally at a hearing.


         (2) Notice of withdrawal will not take effect unless the Upper
         Tribunal consents to the
         withdrawal except in relation to an application for permission  to
         appeal.


  4. The written notice from MA Consultants serves, in accordance with  Rule
     17(1)(a), as notice of withdrawal of the case before the Upper Tribunal
     and takes effect when the Upper Tribunal gives  consent  in  accordance
     with Rule 17(2). The Upper Tribunal hereby consents to  the  withdrawal
     of the appellant's case and decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  now
     stands unchallenged so that the appeal before the Upper Tribunal  falls
     to be dismissed.

                            SUMMARY OF DECISIONS


  5. The appeal before the Upper Tribunal is dismissed and the  decision  of
     the First-tier Tribunal therefore stands.


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity order made pursuant  to  rule
    Rule 13 of the Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.



Signed: J M Harries
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date:  13th November 2014
