
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/31825/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 August 2016                            |On 19 August 2016             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MO
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Greenwood, counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Amin  promulgated  on  25  March  2015,  in  which  she   allowed   the
    respondent's appeal against a decision to refuse him leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom on Article 8 ECHR grounds, both within  and  outside
    the Immigration Rules.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler on
    28 May 2015.

Anonymity

 3. A direction has been made previously to protect the  interests  of  the
    respondent's child and we direct that this continue.

Background

 4. The respondent is a national of Nigeria, born on [ ] 1994.  He  entered
    the United Kingdom during 2003, aged 8 in order to  join  his  parents,
    who were only very recently  granted  leave  to  remain  along  with  a
    younger brother, E.  The respondent and an elder brother AO, who has an
    outstanding appeal (IA/30792/2014) were  left  in  the  care  of  their
    paternal grandmother in Nigeria from 1999 until they came to the United
    Kingdom. A further brother, P, was deported from the United Kingdom  in
    2012. A series of applications for leave to remain  were  made  on  the
    respondent's behalf, culminating in the latest,  made  on  27  November
    2012, the  refusal  of  which  is  the  subject  of  his  appeal.  That
    application  was  made  on  the  basis  that  the  respondent  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) of the  Rules.   The  respondent
    has been convicted of a number of criminal offences.  The  respondent's
    child, T, was born in the United Kingdom on 30 October  2010.  T  is  a
    British citizen. The respondent is now separated from T's mother.

 5. The Secretary of State refused the said application on  24  July  2014,
    concluding that the respondent's presence in the United Kingdom was not
    conducive to the public good; the respondent was identified as a  high-
    harm individual under Operation Nexus and  he  failed  to  satisfy  the
    suitability requirements of Appendix FM.

 6.  The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Amin allowed the appeal under the Immigration
    Rules, finding that the respondent met  the  suitability  requirements.
    She also allowed the appeal under Article 8 ECHR, outside the Rules, on
    the basis of the respondent's family life with his child and that there
    were very significant obstacles to his integration into Nigeria.

The grounds of appeal

 8. There were four main grounds of appeal originally.

 9. Firstly, it was argued that the judge erred  in  assessing  the  appeal
    under the incorrect Immigration Rule; she had considered S-LTR 1.4  and
    1.5 only, whereas it was said that she ought to have  considered  S-LTR
    1.5 and 1.6.

10. Secondly, it was said that the judge failed to give reasons or adequate
    reasons for finding that the respondent was not a  persistent  offender
    and that his removal would not be conducive to the public good.

11. Ground three asserted that an  Article  8  assessment  should  only  be
    carried out when there  are  compelling  circumstances  not  recognised
    under the Rules.

12. The fourth ground argued that the judge failed to give adequate reasons
    regarding the respondent's relationship with his child or why it  would
    not be reasonable for the child to leave the United Kingdom  or  unduly
    harsh on the child if the appellant was removed.

13. Permission to appeal was granted on the first ground,  however  it  was
    said that all grounds may be argued.

14. Those representing the respondent served a response under  Rule  24  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  The  Secretary  of
    State's appeal was opposed.  It was argued that the judge  referred  to
    the correct suitability requirement but that if she erred  it  was  not
    material in the light of her findings, in brief,  that  the  respondent
    was a reformed character. Ground two was  described  as  consisting  of
    arguments which were made before the judge and which were found  to  be
    unpersuasive. Similarly ground four. With regard to ground  three,  the
    judge had followed the correct approach and  there  was  no  additional
    threshold to be crossed prior to considering Article 8 ECHR outside the
    Immigration Rules.

15. At a hearing on 15 September 2015, the Secretary of State put forward a
    further ground of challenge relating to the  judge's  approach  to  the
    serious harm test in S-LTR1.5.  These  proceedings  were  adjourned  in
    order for an application to be made to amend the grounds of appeal.

16. On 12 November 2015, directions were given for this appeal to be  heard
    with that of his brother AO, whose appeal was also allowed by a  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  It  was  agreed  that  material  common  to  both
    respondents would be shared. The matter was, subsequently, set down for
    a hearing on 16  December  2015.  That  hearing  proceeded  as  a  case
    management hearing only because the Secretary  of  State's  application
    for permission to appeal had yet to be resolved.

17. The Secretary of State's skeleton argument  contended  that  the  judge
    misunderstood the proper approach to the question of serious  harm  for
    the purpose of the Rules and section 117C(2)(c)(ii) and had  failed  to
    provide lawful reasoning as to why the harassment  offence,  for  which
    the appellant had been imprisoned for 9 months, did not  cause  serious
    harm.

18. On 6 May 2016, Upper Tribunal Judge Southern extended  time  to  appeal
    and granted  permission,  considering  the  additional  point  "plainly
    arguable."



The hearing

19. Mr Jarvis relied on a further skeleton argument, in which  he  arranged
    the previous 5 grounds into 8 grounds as well as raising an  additional
    point regarding  the  duty  of  candour  upon  litigants  in  statutory
    appeals.

20.  With  regard  the  candour  point,  Mr  Jarvis  advised  us  that  the
    respondent's brother AO was in attendance at his appeal hearing but did
    not give evidence. At that time AO had won his appeal and it  had  been
    promulgated. Owing to the  negative findings regarding the  credibility
    of the claims about the lack of family in Nigeria, he  argued  that  it
    was the duty of the respondent to produce AO's decision and reasons  to
    Judge Amin.

21. Mr Jarvis stated that he did not pursue ground 4, which related to  the
    respondent's  relationship  with  his  child.  He  confirmed  that  the
    Secretary  of  State  accepted  that  the  respondent  had  a   genuine
    relationship with his child despite the geographical  distance  between
    them.

22. Mr Jarvis began his submissions on the additional  ground,  upon  which
    permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Southern.  He  drew  our
    attention to the respondent's police national computer record,  showing
    a conviction for harassing a 15 year-old  girl  and  a  sentence  of  9
    months.  It was for this reason that the respondent  did  not,  in  his
    view, meet  the  suitability  criteria.  He  argued  that  the  judge's
    findings as  to  serious  harm  were  limited.  Under  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions, it was a matter for the Secretary of State to
    decide if serious harm was caused. It was difficult to discern why  the
    judge found  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  unlawful
    regarding the issue of serious harm. She had said that  the  respondent
    was not a persistent offender and had conflated this issue with serious
    harm. He argued that it was plainly a serious matter to  warrant  a  9-
    month sentence. Nonetheless, Mr Jarvis accepted that there was no error
    in  the  judge's  finding  regarding  whether  the  respondent  was   a
    persistent offender and she was entitled to give what weight she wished
    as to whether he had turned his life around.

23. Mr Jarvis drew our attention to the  judge's  failure  to  address  the
    remainder of Appendix FM and EX.1(a) in particular,  having  found  the
    suitability requirements  of  the  Rules  were  met;  instead  she  had
    proceeded to consider matters outside the Rules.

24. Returning to those of the original  grounds  which  were  still  relied
    upon, Mr Jarvis emphasised that the judge had not considered S-LTR  1.6
    at all; that her approach to Article 8 outside the Rules was flawed and
    the judge erred in her findings for not considering that the respondent
    could be lawfully separated from his child in view of the fact that  he
    was already enjoying family life from a distance.

25. With regard to the judge's finding that  there  were  very  significant
    obstacles to the respondent reintegrating in  Nigeria,  this  ought  to
    have been addressed during her consideration  under  the  Rules  rather
    than during her proportionality assessment. The findings of  the  judge
    in AO's case were relevant to this, in that AO and his family had  lied
    about the presence of family in Nigeria.

26. Finally, Mr Jarvis argued that the judge was obliged  to  apply  s.117B
    (6) given that there is  a  qualifying  child,  however  there  was  no
    reference to this sub-section nor description of it.

27. Ms Greenwood emphasised that the application made by the respondent was
    under paragraph 276ADE (1) (v), in that he  was  at  the  time  of  the
    application aged over 18 years old and under 25 years and had spent  at
    least half of his life living continuously in the  UK.  That  had  been
    accepted by the respondent at paragraph 22 of the Secretary of  State's
    decision and therefore the only issue remaining, under  the  Rules  was
    suitability. She argued that the decision letter did  not  address  any
    specific offending which was said  to  have  caused  serious  harm.  In
    addition, at the hearing the judge's attention was  not  drawn  to  any
    offending or behaviour alleged to cause serious harm. She  acknowledged
    that the judge had neglected to mention  S-LTR  1.6,  however  she  had
    these requirements in mind, referred to them in her decision  and  made
    relevant findings. In terms of  the  respondent's  conduct,  the  judge
    found that he had turned his  life  around.  In  relation  to  original
    ground 2, Ms Greenwood did not labour the persistent offender point  in
    view of Mr Jarvis' concession.

28. With regard to the third ground, Ms Greenwood argued  that  the  appeal
    was allowed under  the  Rules  and  accordingly  the  judge's  findings
    outside the Rules even if erroneous were  immaterial.  She  advised  us
    that it had been argued that the respondent would meet  the  rules  for
    leave to remain as a  parent  which  would  also  be  affected  by  the
    suitability requirements. Given the judge's finding that the respondent
    had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his child,  EX.1(a)  was
    relevant as he had no leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.  She
    suggested that this might have been why the judge considered whether it
    was reasonable for the child to  leave  the  UK  in  her  consideration
    outside the Rules.

29.  Ms Greenwood confirmed that the judge was not required  to  find  that
    there were very significant obstacles as the application was  based  on
    age and residence only, however this issue  informed  her  findings  on
    proportionality as she found that the respondent had no-one in Nigeria.
    The judge's ignorance of AO's case did not impact on whether there  was
    an error of law.

30. With regard to the duty of candour, Ms Greenwood argued that  this  did
    not extend to appellants. She made the  point  that  the  Secretary  of
    State was the respondent in both appeals, whereas neither brother was a
    party to the other's hearing. Alternatively, if the duty of candour was
    breached, the only overlapping findings  related  to  the  respondent's
    family in Nigeria which were immaterial to the outcome of the appeal.

31. Ms Greenwood argued that the judge made findings  that  the  respondent
    had a relationship with a British child and that it was not  reasonable
    for this child to leave to the United  Kingdom.  She  reached  reasoned
    conclusions and had  section  117B  been  considered,  she  would  have
    concluded public interest did not require his removal.

32. With regard to the additional ground, Ms Greenwood advised us that  the
    evidence before the judge was  an  emailed  note  of  the  respondent's
    counsel in the criminal case. Essentially, after hearing evidence  from
    complainant, the judge raised the issue of a compromised plea to only 1
    charge of harassment, over a period of 10 days, to which the respondent
    entered a guilty plea and following which  he  was  sentenced  to  time
    served. She argued that it would be wrong to base findings  of  serious
    harm on police evidence and nexus material when  the  criminal  hearing
    took a very different turn. She contended that clearly the claimant did
    not come up to proof and that Judge Amin could not  be  criticised  for
    concluding that the potential harm  was  very  different  to  what  was
    initially alleged. Nor could any sound  inference  be  drawn  from  the
    length of the sentence as it would not have been  in  the  respondent's
    interest for his counsel to seek a  suspended  or  community  sentence,
    which would have been viewed  very  differently  by  the  Secretary  of
    State. Ms Greenwood argued that there was no evidence of  harm  to  the
    victim. There were no judge's  sentencing  remarks,  no  victim  impact
    statement and the refusal letter did not point to a  specific  instance
    of serious harm. While there was not a substantial focus on  the  issue
    of serious harm in the judge's decision, this was down to the Secretary
    of State's evidence. She urged us to dismiss the appeal.

33. In response, Mr Jarvis argued that it should have  been  plain  to  the
    judge from the offences listed in the refusal letter, that the  9-month
    sentence for harassment was the most serious of offences.  It  did  not
    need to be underlined further. The Secretary of State accepted that the
    respondent fell within paragraph 276ADE(1) (v), however in his  appeal,
    the  respondent  was  relying  on  his  relationship  with  his  child,
    therefore the judge had to make lawful findings under  Appendix  FM  in
    terms of a reasonableness assessment and this was  not  done.   It  was
    unclear what journey the judge took and she lost sight as to  what  was
    applicable and the relevant tests.  Another example of the judge's loss
    of direction was her consideration of paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  outside
    the Rules when this was not the basis for application.  If  suitability
    requirements were met this would be a complete answer to the case under
    the Rules.   The judge's approach  regarding  precariousness  was  also
    incorrect. This issue was not affected by the  age  of  the  appellant.
    Finally, regardless of what occurred in court,  the  harassment  matter
    was the most serious conviction and not an allegation. It  should  have
    been the centrepiece of  the  judge's  finding  that  no  serious  harm
    caused, yet there were  no  findings  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision was unlawful or not in accordance with the  law  or  guidance.
    He argued that we had heard speculation regarding the compromise  plea,
    however it did not assist the respondent that he was prepared to accept
    a 9-month sentence for the harassment of a child. He urged  us  to  set
    aside the judge's decision.

Error of Law

34. After hearing from the parties, we reserved our decision on  the  error
    of law. Having considered the matter subsequently, we  found  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was infected by material errors  of
    law. Our reasons are as follows.

35. The first ground argued that the judge did not consider  S-LTR  1.6  of
    the Rules in reaching her decision. That paragraph reads as follows:

         S-LTR.1.6. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive
         to the public good because  their  conduct  (including  convictions
         which do not fall within paragraphs S-LTR.1.3. to 1.5.), character,
         associations, or other reasons, make it undesirable to  allow  them
         to remain in the UK.

36. The judge noted, at [65] of her decision, the submissions of  the  Home
    Office presenting officer, to the effect that the  Secretary  of  State
    was relying on S-LTR 1.5 and  1.6  of  the  Rules.  At  [95],  under  a
    subheading of "The Law" the judge  set  out  the  "particular  sections
    relied upon" by the Secretary of State as being "S-LTR  1.4  and  1.5."
    The judge proceeded to reproduce the contents of S-LTR 1.4 and 1.5.

37. Between [101] and [116] the judge set out her reasons for finding  that
    the respondent did not fall foul of the suitability requirements of the
    Rules. In those findings, there are multiple references to the  content
    of S-LTR 1.5 which reads as follows:

         S-LTR.1.5. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive
         to the public good because, in the view of the Secretary of  State,
         their offending has caused serious harm or they  are  a  persistent
         offender who shows a particular disregard for the law.

38.  At [105] the judge summarised the Secretary of State's  case,  stating
    the respondent's "profile  demonstrates  that  (h)is  presence  is  not
    conducive to the public good and his offending has caused serious  harm
    or that he is a persistent offender." These phrases are lifted from  S-
    LTR 1.5. The judge did not then summarise what the Secretary  of  State
    had to say about S-LTR 1.6. Instead she proceeded to  consider  whether
    the respondent's offending had caused serious harm or whether he was  a
    persistent offender.

39. At [115] the judge summed up her findings in the preceding  paragraphs,
    concluding that the respondent "presents a low risk of  reoffending  at
    the present time;"  that he "cannot be considered to  be  a  persistent
    offender or that he caused serious harm to any of his victims."

40. While it is fair to say that during her consideration the judge touched
    upon issues which could be said to be relevant to the content of  S-LTR
    1.6, she failed to  appropriately  direct  herself,  engage  with  that
    provision or reach a decision as to whether the respondent's character,
    associations or other reasons made  it  undesirable  to  allow  him  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.

41. The two above-mentioned provisions were the  sole  matters  before  the
    judge and she failed to address one of them entirely. This, by  itself,
    is sufficient to  justify  a  finding  of  a  material  error  of  law.
    Nonetheless, we will briefly mention the  other  grounds  still  relied
    upon by the Secretary of State.

42. The additional ground, upon which leave was granted at  a  late  stage,
    criticised the judge's approach to the  question  of  serious  harm  in
    relation to S-LTR 1.5. The offence in issue, was one of harassment of a
    15 year-old girl. The definition of serious  harm  in  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions, which we were told  were  before  the  judge,
    includes an offence which has "caused serious physical or psychological
    harm to a victim..." The material before the judge included a bundle of
    evidence produced under the auspices of Operation Nexus as  well  as  a
    statement from a police officer  which  describes  the  offence,  which
    involved repeated advances of a threatening nature via social media and
    an allegation that the respondent had approached the child  in  public,
    produced a knife  and  touched  her  in  a  sexual  manner.  While  the
    respondent was convicted only for harassment over a 10-day  period  and
    the other charges were withdrawn, it is of note that the seriousness of
    the offence meant that the starting point for the case  was  the  Crown
    Court rather than the Magistrates Court because  the  offence  included
    sexual threats towards a vulnerable person.   The  judge's  finding  at
    [110] was as follows; "I do  not  agree...that  this  offending  caused
    serious harm." That bare finding, which appeared to  be  based  on  the
    respondent's age at the time the offence took place (it is not clear to
    us if he was either 17 or 18 at  the  time  of  the  10-day  period  of
    offending to which he pleaded guilty) was insufficient given the age of
    the victim and the evidence before her, none of which she referred to.

43. The judge erred in considering and determining an issue which was never
    before her, that of whether there were very  significant  obstacles  to
    the respondent integrating into Nigeria. Not only was  this  never  the
    respondent's case, the judge did not consider this matter  as  part  of
    her consideration under the Rules but in her consideration of Article 8
    outside the Rules. At this juncture we would indicate that we were  not
    persuaded that the respondent breached any duty of candour in  relation
    to not disclosing the decision in the appeal of his brother  AO.  Given
    that he was not claiming that there were any very significant obstacles
    to his integration into Nigeria and this  was  not  the  basis  of  his
    application to the Secretary of  State,  the  decision  of  AO  was  of
    limited relevance to his appeal. It follows, that the judge's  findings
    were unnecessary and were, to some extent, unsupported by the  evidence
    before her.

44. The judge set out section 117 of the 2002 Act in full in her  decision.
    At [132] she stated that she gave weight to aspects referred to in  the
    preceding paragraph, which included the respondent's ability  to  speak
    English. That approach was disapproved, most recently,  in  Rhuppiah  v
    SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 803. There, Sales LJ  held  that  the  factors  in
    section 117B (2) and (3) were negative factors if they  were  not  met,
    but that the converse was not the case. That is, "it  does  not  follow
    that because a person is able to speak English that it is in the public
    interest that they should be given leave to enter."[61].

45. At [134] the judge concluded that the public interest did  not  require
    the respondent's removal  because  he  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his child, whom it would not be reasonable to  expect
    to leave the United Kingdom. There is no clear indication as to how she
    decided the reasonableness issue. There was no reference in the judge's
    findings on this matter to the respondent's offending, his  immigration
    status or that he was conducting his relationship with the child  at  a
    distance. That analysis was insufficient in view of what  was  held  by
    the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at [45] "In my
    judgment, if the court  should  have  regard  to  the  conduct  of  the
    applicant and any other matters relevant to the  public  interest  when
    applying the "unduly harsh" concept under section 117C(5), so should it
    when considering the question of reasonableness under section 117B(6)."

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside in its  entirety,  with
no findings preserved.

Directions

This appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  by
any judge except Judge Amin and Judge Kimnell

The appeal is to be listed at Hatton Cross with a time estimate of 4 hours.

The appeal is to be heard in the same list as the remitted appeal  of  AO  -
IA/30792/2014.


Signed:     Date: 11 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

