
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/31338/2015
     IA/31340/2015
     IA/31342/2015
     ia/31344/2015
     IA/31345/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 July 2017                               |On 27 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MUHAMMAD [A]
                                  NAZIA [A]
                                   [M H A]
                                   [M Z A]
                                    [A A]

                                                       Respondents/Claimants


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents/   Mr A Jafar, Counsel instructed by Eden Solicitors
Claimants:


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The claimants are a family of five Pakistani  nationals.   The  parents
    arrived in the United Kingdom as visitors  on  13  November  2006  with
    their 11 year old daughter (born [ ] 2014). Their 14 year old son (born
    [ ] 2001) arrived in January 2008 with his grandmother but she returned
    soon after.  The third child was born in the  United  Kingdom  on  [  ]
    2008.

2.   So far as the parents are  concerned  they  have  long  overstayed  the
    expiry  of  their  leave  and  have  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom
    notwithstanding the service of a notice of their liability to detention
    and removal served upon them in April 2009.  It  also  transpires  that
    deception was used in relation to  the  son's  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom by the use of an alias and a passport in a different name.

3.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department refused the  application
    in respect of leave to remain on the basis of private and  family  life
    in a decision of 7 September 2015.  An  appeal  against  that  decision
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver.   The  determination  was
    promulgated on 16 November 2016.

4.   Challenge is made to that determination which allowed  the  appeals  of
    the claimants by the Secretary of State.  It was noted that the  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  had  failed  to  distinguish  between  the  "best
    interests assessment" and the "reasonableness assessment"  as  required
    by a decision in MA (Pakistan).  It was also submitted that  the  judge
    failed to give due consideration to the factors set out in 117B.

5.   Permission was granted to argue the matter on that basis and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

6.   In a  fairly  brief  determination  the  Judge  identifies  EX.1  under
    Appendix FM  in  consideration  as  to  whether  or  not  it  would  be
    reasonable for the children to return.

7.   In terms of considering the best interests  of  the  children  that  is
    briefly considered applying  the  principles  in  EV  (Philippines  and
    Others) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  Paragraph 35 sets out as follows:-

         "A decision as to what is in the best interests  of  children  will
         depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length
         of time that they have been here; (c) how long they  have  been  in
         education; (d) what stage their education has reached; (d) to  what
         extent they have been become distanced with the country to which it
         is proposed they return; (e) how renewable their connection with it
         may be; (f) to what extent they will have  linguistic,  medical  or
         other difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and (g) the
         extent to which the  course  proposed  will  interfere  with  their
         family  life  or  their  rights  (if  they  have  any)  as  British
         citizens."

8.   In paragraph 14 it was noted  unsurprisingly  the  decision  in  Azimi-
    Moayed & Others (decisions affecting children; onward  appeals)  [2013]
    UKUT 197 that the starting point must be that the best interests of the
    children are to remain with their parents and went on to  say  that  in
    that connection it is necessary to consider that one  of  the  children
    was aged 2 at the time of arrival in the United  Kingdom  and  one  was
    born here and had never lived in Pakistan.  It was said that neither of
    them can have any experience of life in Pakistan.

9.   In paragraphs 15 the judge set out certain factors which would lead  to
    the conclusion that it was in their best interests  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Reference is then  made  to  the  public  interest  as
    defined in Section 117B.  It was said that no  evidence  was  heard  or
    questions asked as to the financial circumstances of the family and any
    burden on the state but concluded that the interests  of  the  children
    had to take precedence.

10.  Mr Jafar, in his helpful submissions,  invites  me  to  find  that  the
    judge has considered all matters properly such that his conclusions are
    not to be challenged.

11.  With respect to Mr Jafar I disagree.

12.  The approach to be taken to  reasonableness,  particularly  within  the
    structure of 117B is set out and defined by the Court of Appeal  in  MA
    (Pakistan & Others) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

13.  Section 117B(6) provides that the public interest does not require  the
    person's  removal  where  a  person  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship  with  a  qualifying  child  and  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

14.  This is a freestanding provision requires the decision maker to  decide
    first of all what are the best  interests  of  the  children,  secondly
    consider the reasonableness of any proposed return.  It was  recognised
    by the court in the judgment at paragraph 47 that, even  accepting  the
    focus upon the child, it would not follow that leave  must  be  granted
    whenever the child's best interests are in favour of  remaining.   Even
    where the child's best interests are  to  stay  it  may  still  not  be
    unreasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  go.    In   considering   the
    reasonableness test it is necessary to pay regard to the  wider  public
    interest, which includes the factors set out in 117B namely the  burden
    on taxpayers; integration  into  society;  immigration  status  of  the
    parents and the full context in which the matter arises.

15.  I do not find  that  the  judge  has  directed  his  attention  to  the
    relevant considerations nor applied them  the  degree  of  detail  that
    might reasonably be expected.

16.  In terms of the wider immigration history it has been indicated  it  is
    not simply that the parents have been long-time  overstayers  but  they
    employed deception  in  bringing  their  eldest  child  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  In terms of their integration into society it is to be  noted
    that their income is that from friends,  with  little  indication  that
    either parent is working. Indeed in terms of the application  that  was
    made, the section on accommodation and  finances,  was  not  completed,
    other than indicating that the family was living  in  two  rooms  of  a
    shared house owned by a friend.  There is little analysis conducted  as
    to the nature of the education enjoyed by the children  otherwise  than
    some letters speaking as to their progress at school.   There  is  very
    little careful consideration, as I so find, as to what quality of  life
    they may expect if  returned  to  Pakistan.   In  terms  of  linguistic
    difficulties the older son of course spent most of his life in Pakistan
    and it is not unreasonable to expect younger children to  pick  up  the
    language.  Clearly the elder child has been brought up substantially by
    the grandparents who remain in Pakistan and so there  is  clearly  some
    support.  I find that the examination as  to  the  best  interests  let
    alone  reasonableness  of  return  was  superficial  in  the   extreme.
    Contrary to what was stated by the judge at paragraph 15, evidence  was
    adduced as to the limited financial situation of the family  and  their
    accommodation.

17.  In support of  his  submissions,  Mr  Jafar  seeks  to  rely  upon  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in AM (Pakistan and Others) [2017] EWCA
    Civ 180.  He invites me to find that the circumstances of the family in
    that case are not dissimilar from  the  circumstances  in  the  current
    appeal.  The parents were  overstayers  but  their  two  children  were
    qualifying children.  As  in  the  current  case  the  judge  cited  EV
    (Philippines and Others).  What perhaps has been  overlooked  in  those
    submissions, is that although the circumstances may have been  similar,
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge had come to the conclusion, that although
    the  best  interests  of  the  children  were  to  remain  it  was  not
    unreasonable to expect them to return.  That was a  decision  that  was
    disagreed with by the Upper Tribunal but the Court of Appeal said  that
    the Upper Tribunal was incorrect in the approach taken and  upheld  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Thus it is not  a  decision  on  its  facts
    which is supportive of what Mr Jafar contends.

18.  I find that there has been inadequate consideration as to  the  element
    of reasonableness, indeed as I have indicated  a  somewhat  superficial
    consideration of all relevant matters.  I find there to be an error  of
    law such that the decision shall be set  aside.   Clearly  findings  of
    fact will need to be made again and a proper consideration conducted as
    to all elements in favour of the  children  remaining  and  those  that
    support their leaving.

19.  In accordance therefore with the Senior President's Practice  Direction
    this matter will be remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
    hearing.  No finding of facts to be preserved.



Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is  allowed  to  the  extent  that  the
decision of the First tier tribunal is set aside to be remade.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed            [pic]                      Date 26 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD











