
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/31858/2014
     IA/31868/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th June 2015                    |On 6th July 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR ABU-AL FERDOUS (1)
                           mrs nabega durdhana (2)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr M Islam, Legal Representative of London Law
Associates


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State but I  will  refer  to  the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellants are both citizens of Bangladesh.   The  first  appellant
    was born on 23rd March 1987 and the second  appellant,  his  wife,  was
    born on 18th June 1991.  The first appellant previously had leave as  a
    Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant and his wife as  his  dependant  which
    expired on 23rd May 2014.  They then made applications to remain  as  a
    Tier 1 (General) Student and dependant respectively.  On 27th July 2014
    these applications were refused on the basis that the  first  appellant
    could not meet the maintenance requirements as he had  submitted  false
    documents.  On 2nd February 2015  the  appeal  of  the  appellants  was
    allowed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Wylie on the basis that she
    found that the documents had  not  been  shown  to  be  false  and  did
    disclose sufficient funds to satisfy the Immigration  Rules.   On  24th
    March 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Robinson granted permission
    to appeal. The matter comes before me to determine whether  the  First-
    tier Tribunal erred in law.

Grounds of Appeal

 3. The Secretary of State submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred
    in law as reliance had been placed, at paragraphs  14  and  15  of  the
    decision, on the  Home  Office  verification  report  being  unreliable
    because a different bank account number had been  checked  to  the  one
    that the appellant had put forward in support of his application.  This
    was a mistake by the judge as the different reference number related to
    the DC reference which was an integral tracking  identity  code  number
    and did not mean that the verification checks had taken  place  against
    the wrong bank account number.  In the circumstances it was argued  the
    First-tier Tribunal had wrongly discounted evidence which showed on the
    balance of probabilities that the documents were false.

Submissions

 4. Mr Islam for the appellants submitted that whilst Judge Wylie may  have
    become confused about that issue outlined above there were other issues
    which indicated the verification report was not reliable which had been
    identified by Judge  Wylie,  namely  that  the  emails  from  the  bank
    indicated that the appellants' account number related to a Md Abu Jafor
    Khan whereas on the verification report  itself  it  indicated  that  a
    report in the name of Abu Zafar does exist.  Further, the appellant had
    got a letter from AB Bank  dated  12th  January  2015  which  had  been
    submitted in accordance with directions to the First-tier Tribunal  and
    this letter stated that no enquiries had been made with the bank  about
    Mr Abu Zafar's bank statement and solvency certificate  and  that  they
    would not have given information without  the  client's  authority  and
    there was no authority from the client with  them  to  do  this.   This
    document were submitted and received by the Tribunal at Hatton Cross on
    21st January 2015, and Ms Savage also confirmed that it was part of the
    documentation held by the Secretary of State at  the  time  of  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions

 5. I am not satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal has materially erred in
    law.  Whilst paragraphs 14  and  15  of  the  decision  do  indicate  a
    confusion over integral tracking ID numbers and  bank  account  numbers
    ultimately the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal did not show  on
    the balance of probabilities that the appellants fell to be refused  on
    the basis of having submitted false documents.

 6. The respondent had not sought or produced any evidence that the  letter
    of 12th January 2015 from AB Bank was not a  genuine  document  despite
    this document having been provided to her in  a  timely  fashion.  This
    letter is on headed paper; signed from a named manager at  Board  Bazar
    Branch of the AB Bank Limited. It states explicitly that enquiries were
    not received regarding the bank statement and solvency  certificate  of
    Mr Abu  Zafar  and  that  information  was  not  provided  about  these
    documents to the British High Commission or  any  other  authority.  It
    also confirms that the account is genuine and the  amount  held  within
    it. This documents throws considerable doubt on the emails relied  upon
    by the respondent which do  state  that  the  account  regarding  which
    documents were not issued was that of Md Abu Jafor Khan. A  fact  which
    is not apparently  acknowledged  or  dealt  with  in  any  way  in  the
    verification report of the Visa Support Assistant relied  upon  by  the
    respondent who indicates the name of the account is  Abu  Zafar.   When
    all the evidence is examined together it did not and does not  show  on
    the balance of probabilities  that  the  bank  statement  and  solvency
    certificate of Mr Abu Zafar are false documents, and  thus  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not err in law when allowing the appellants'  appeal.



Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any material error on a point of law.

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal is upheld.



Signed   Date 6th July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

