
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31819/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 2 June 2015                       |On 8 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                         KHAWAJA TARIQ MEHMOOD WANI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Nasim of Counsel instructed by Mayfair
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, applied on 15 February  2012  for
    leave to remain in the UK.  His application  was  refused  on  19  June
    2013.  His ensuing appeal was  heard  on  24  February  2014  by  Judge
    Gillespie, sitting at Hatton Cross.  Both parties were represented, the
    Appellant by Mr Nasim.  In a determination of 20 February,  promulgated
    on 24 February, 2014, Judge Gillespie allowed the appeal to the  extent
    of remitting it to the Respondent for further consideration pending the
    outcome of the application by the Appellant's wife for indefinite leave
    to remain in the UK.  Two days later, on 26  February  2014,  this  was
    granted to her.  The Appellant's case was reconsidered and refused in a
    decision of 1 August 2014.

2.   The Appellant's ensuing second appeal was heard on 27 January by  Judge
    Kelly,  again  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross.   Again  both  parties  were
    represented, the Appellant by Mr Nasim.  In a decision of  30  January,
    promulgated on 4 February, 2015, the appeal was allowed to the  limited
    extent that the decision was not in accordance with  the  law  and  was
    remitted to the Respondent for a lawful decision.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted to the Respondent on 20 April 2015  by
    Judge Lambert in the following terms:

         "1.  The Respondent  seeks  permission  to  appeal,  out  of  time,
             against a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Kelly)
             who, in a decision  promulgated  on  allowed  the  Appellant's
             appeal against the Secretary of State decision to refuse leave
             to remain on Article 8 grounds.

         2.   The Respondent puts forward delayed service  of  the  decision
             and lack of resources as  reasons  for  the  late  appeal  and
             argues lack of prejudice to the Appellant  given  the  judge's
             decision to remit for a lawful decision.

         3.   The issue giving rise to the remittal was the fact  that  this
             was an application made before the  introduction  of  Appendix
             FM, but had been decided  by  the  Respondent  under  the  new
             rules.  The judge relied on Edgehill, recording  that  counsel
             for  the  Respondent  had  no  submissions   challenging   its
             applicability.

         4.   The grounds argue the Court of Appeal  decision  in  Singh  to
             mean the judge's approach to be unarguably wrong.  Although it
             is not clear to me whether Singh had been promulgated  at  the
             date  of  the  Judge's  decision  and  it  certainly  was  not
             mentioned or relied upon by Counsel for the Respondent at  the
             hearing on 27 January, having regard to  the  latter  decision
             there  is  an  arguable  error  of  law   disclosed   by   the
             application."

4.   Mr & Mrs Wani attended the error of law hearing, which  took  the  form
    of submissions, which I have taken  into  account,  together  with  the
    permission application.  I reserved my determination.

Determination

5.   Judge Kelly  decided  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the  then  legal
    authority of Edgehill [2014] EWCA Civ 402 and Haleemudeen  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 558.  In that light she held that, as the  Appellant's  application
    had been made on 15 February 2012, and  so  before  9  July  2012  when
    Appendix FM and Paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  came  into
    force, the Respondent had been wrong to determine  the  application  by
    reference to those provisions.

6.   Inexplicably, the power of prophecy deserted all of  those  present  at
    the hearing.  Singh & Khalid v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  74,  subsequently
    promulgated, qualified the previous authorities  by  holding  that  the
    window of time during which claims based on  private  and  family  life
    made before 9 July 2012 were to  be  considered  without  reference  to
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE had opened on that date and closed  on
    6 September 2012.  Both decisions made in relation to the Appellant, on
    19 June 2013 and 1 August 2014, were made after that time.  It followed
    that the Respondent had been correct in basing the decision upon  those
    provisions.

7.   For this reason, both representatives  at  the  error  of  law  hearing
    agreed that the decision of Judge Kelly  was  based  upon  a  material,
    albeit legally retroactive and wholly  unknowable,  error  of  law  and
    could not stand.  I so find, and accordingly set the decision aside.

8.   The decision must therefore be made again.  The  question  which  arose
    at the error of law hearing is by whom.  For the  Appellant,  Mr  Nasim
    invited me to remit it to the Respondent on the basis that the decision
    of the Respondent was not in accordance with the  law.   Alternatively,
    he asked me to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  substantive
    hearing on the basis that no findings of fact had been made.   For  the
    Respondent, Mr Avery asked me to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.

9.   In support of his submission, Mr Nasim submitted that the  decision  of
    the Respondent had not sufficiently considered the complex  immigration
    history  of  the  Appellant  and  his   wife,   including   the   first
    determination of Judge Gillespie.  Nor, he said,  had  it  sufficiently
    reflected the criteria for exceptional circumstances in Section 9.2  of
    the Immigration Directorate Instruction on Family  Migration.   I  have
    concluded that,  whilst  this  submission  is  arguable,  it  does  not
    establish  that  the  decision  of  the  Respondent,  which  did   give
    consideration to the immigration history of the Appellant and his  wife
    and to exceptional circumstances, was  so  inadequate  as  to  allow  a
    conclusion that it was not in accordance with the  law.   These  issues
    can and will be addressed by the Tribunal when it considers the  appeal
    again on its merits.

10.  Since no findings of fact have  been  made,  I  remit  the  appeal  for
    hearing by the First-tier Tribunal,  by  any  judge  other  than  Judge
    Gillespie or Judge Kelly.

Notice of Decision

11.  The original decision contained an error of law, albeit  a  retroactive
    one of which the judge could not have known.   I  accordingly  set  the
    decision aside.

12.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  full  hearing
    before any judge other than Judge M Gillespie or Judge A Kelly.

13.  No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Dated: 3 June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis
