
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31894/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 July 2017                           |On 29 November 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                          Onyebuchi Sabastine Onah
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Nicholas, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria,  born  in  1972.   He  made  an
    application for  a  residence  card  as  confirmation  of  a  right  of
    residence as the spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights  in
    the UK.  His partner is a French citizen.

 2. The respondent refused the application in a decision dated 27  February
    2015.  The respondent's decision was to the effect  that  the  marriage
    was one of convenience, and that in any event it  was  not  a  marriage
    that was legally valid  in  Nigerian  law.   Furthermore,  insufficient
    evidence had been provided to establish  that  the  appellant  and  the
    person said to be his partner are in a durable relationship.

 3. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's  decision  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill ("the  FtJ")  on  9  November  2016.
    Relying on the decision of the Upper Tribunal in TA and Others  (Kareem
    explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC) (but see  also  Kareem  (Proxy
    marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC)) and Sala (EFMs: Right  of
    Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC), he dismissed the appeal.

 4. In relation to the decision in  Kareem  he  found  that  there  was  no
    evidence that the French authorities had accepted the appellant's proxy
    marriage as a lawful marriage.  In relation to Sala he found  that  the
    appellant had no right of appeal as an extended family member.

    The Grounds and Submissions

 5. I summarise the grounds of appeal, as initially  advanced,  upon  which
    permission was refused, and in terms of the renewed  grounds.   I  take
    the two as a composite whole.  The initial grounds contend that the FtJ
    failed  to  take  into  account  the  extent   of   the   documentation
    establishing that the parties were in a relationship akin to  marriage.
    Documents, it is said, cover a period from 2013 to 2016.

 6. It is argued that in TA & Others the Upper Tribunal had decided that it
    was imperative to look at the question of a durable relationship in the
    absence of evidence that a marriage was accepted in the relevant Member
    State.

 7. It is further argued that the FtJ was wrong to fail to have  regard  to
    the Article 8 rights of the appellant and his spouse.

 8. In the renewed grounds the decision in Awuku v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 178 was relied on in terms  of  its
    having overruled Kareem. The renewed grounds further contend that  with
    reference to the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016
    (sic), the appellant is entitled to a residence card as a person who is
    in a durable relationship and is therefore an extended  family  member.
    It is argued that he was entitled to a right of appeal on that basis.

 9. The submissions on behalf of the appellant were, it  has  to  be  said,
    rather wider ranging than the matters advanced in the grounds.  It  was
    conceded that the appellant had no  entitlement  to  have  his  or  his
    partner's Article 8 rights considered, in the light of the decision  in
    Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals; human rights)  [2015]  UKUT  00466
    (IAC).  That was a proper concession  to  be  made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.

10. It was then submitted that, contrary to the 'rule 24'  response,  there
    was evidence before the Home Office in relation to the validity of  the
    marriage in Nigerian law.  On the other  hand,  it  did  at  one  stage
    appear to be accepted by Ms Nicholas that such evidence was not  before
    the FtJ.

11. There was then reference to a document entitled 'Grounds for Permission
    to Appeal and Further Submissions', dated 19 July 2017, although it was
    not a document that had been provided to the respondent, Mr Jarvis  not
    having seen it, and nor was it provided to me.

12. However, after the hearing had concluded that document was  brought  to
    me in the afternoon.  It has a date stamp of receipt of 19  July  2017.
    There is a fax date of 18 July 2017 at 16:28, although it is not  clear
    whether that is the date upon which it was provided  to  the  Tribunal.
    In any event, it was not provided in a timely  fashion.   Nevertheless,
    at this point I shall summarise its contents.

13. It refers to the decision in Awuku.  It then states that  an  affidavit
    and a customary marriage certificate in relation to  this  appeal,  was
    prima facie evidence that the marriage was performed in accordance with
    Nigerian law.  It is asserted that the respondent had not provided  any
    evidence to the contrary.

14. It next states that the appellant  instructed  that  the  marriage  was
    celebrated by proxy in Anambra State in Nigeria and purports  to  refer
    to an "enclosed" customary marriage affidavit and certificate issued in
    Nigeria (no such document is provided with  the  written  submissions).
    It is asserted that all necessary rights were performed  in  accordance
    with native law and custom.

15. The written submissions advance  further  arguments  in  terms  of  the
    validity of the marriage according to Nigerian law, again referring  to
    an affidavit and  its  contents,  and  recites  various  provisions  of
    Nigerian law.  Those further submissions then  reproduce  verbatim  the
    original grounds upon which permission to appeal was sought.

16. Returning to the oral submissions before me, it was contended that  the
    certificate of the registration  of  the  marriage  in  Nigeria  was  a
    document that the Home Office had in its possession.  It would  appear,
    although it was not clear, that it was being asserted that this  was  a
    document that the Home Office previously had  had  in  its  possession,
    some time prior to the application for a residence card, or if not,  at
    least at the date of the decision in any event.

17. It was submitted  that  if  the  FtJ  had  received  the  affidavit  of
    marriage, the certificate of marriage would also have been received  by
    him as it is on the back of the affidavit.  It was contended  that  the
    solicitors  for  the  appellant  had  asked  for  the  return  of   the
    certificate, although no letter to that effect was able to be produced.
     In fact, it is not the case that the certificate of  marriage  was  in
    the bundle produced before the FtJ.

18. There was then an assertion, on the appellant's  instructions,  to  the
    effect that the Home Office bundle was apparently  sent  to  the  wrong
    address, again there being nothing to support that contention.  It  was
    submitted that the respondent's conclusion that the marriage was not  a
    genuine one was belied by the appellant's witness statement.

19. On behalf of the respondent, Mr  Jarvis  pointed  out  that  the  issue
    raised in the grounds of appeal was  not  about  the  validity  of  the
    marriage in Nigerian law but about the  FtJ's  failure  to  assess  the
    relationship as being one akin to marriage.  The appellant had no right
    of appeal on that issue, following the decision in Sala.

20. In any event, it is clear  from  the  respondent's  decision  that  the
    appellant's partner had played no part in the process leading up to the
    respondent's assessment of the relationship, as set out in the decision
    letter.  Furthermore, as is apparent from [13] of  the  FtJ's  decision
    the appellant's partner did not attend the hearing.   Although  it  was
    said that she was  unwell,  no  medical  evidence  was  provided.   The
    evidence before the FtJ  did  not  establish  that  this  was  a  valid
    marriage, it was argued.

21. It was submitted that now on behalf of the appellant it was  sought  to
    argue points not raised in the grounds, in terms of the validity of the
    marriage.  Whilst it was conceded on behalf of the respondent that  the
    FtJ had erred in law in terms of his application  of  the  decision  in
    Kareem that error of law was not material, it was submitted.

22. In reply, Ms Nicholas suggested that although the  respondent  referred
    to the fact  that  there  had  been  a  non-attendance  at  a  marriage
    interview, that was caused by  the  invitation  to  the  interview  not
    having been delivered.  However, documents in  that  respect  were  not
    produced at the hearing before me.   It  was  then  conceded  that  the
    arguments on behalf of the appellant were constrained  by  the  matters
    raised in the grounds of appeal.

23. It was next  asserted  that  in  Awuku,  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    "pledged" that any case which was refused on the basis of Kareem  would
    be reviewed, and there would be an invitation for a resubmission of the
    application.  This appeal however, was already pending at the time  and
    therefore the appellant's solicitors only had the choice of withdrawing
    the appeal, it was said.

24. When I inquired as to where it was said in Awuku that the Secretary  of
    State had agreed to reconsider all such cases, I was referred to  Awuku
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 1303 (that
    decision being an earlier part of  the  proceedings  in  the  Court  of
    Appeal reported under a different citation),  in  particular  at  [10].
    However, that is not what is said at [10] of that decision.  Mr  Jarvis
    indicated that he was not aware  of  any  instructions  to  the  effect
    advanced on behalf of the appellant.  Ms Nicholas then  suggested  that
    it may be that that commitment by the Secretary of State  might  be  in
    some other publication.

25. After the hearing before me, the Court of Appeal in Khan v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 found that Sala  was
    wrongly decided. In the circumstances, I considered it  appropriate  to
    allow the parties the opportunity to make further  submissions  on  the
    Sala issue, and issued directions to the parties on  10  November  2017
    giving them 14 days to make submissions should they  so  wish,  limited
    solely to the Sala point. I  indicated  that  at  the  expiry  of  that
    period, whether or not further submissions had been filed and served, a
    decision on the appeal would be made without further reference  to  the
    parties.

26. On 23 November written submissions  were  received  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, but none on behalf of the respondent.

27. In my directions sent on 10 November I directed that the submissions be
    "limited solely to the Sala point" (emphasised in the directions by the
    underlining). Despite that, of the five pages of  submissions,  only  7
    short paragraphs relate to the Sala point and the judgment in Khan. The
    remainder of the submissions reproduce documents already provided,  for
    example the grounds of appeal, and attach the affidavit of marriage  to
    which I have already referred, and the certificate of  registration  of
    marriage to which I have also referred.

28. It is hard to understand why the submissions made  in  response  to  my
    directions failed to comply with those directions. It is impossible  to
    see what part of my directions was not clear in terms  of  the  limited
    scope of any further submissions. I confine myself to considering  only
    that part of the submissions which complies  with  my  directions.  Put
    simply, it is contended that in the light of Khan, the appellant had  a
    right of appeal as an extended family member.

    Conclusions

29. It is true that the FtJ erred in law in his  reliance  on  Kareem,  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal.  That decision has been  overturned  by
    the Court of Appeal in Awuku, and although Awuku had not  been  decided
    at the time of the appeal before the FtJ, the Court of Appeal  decision
    states the law as it has always been.  Insofar as the FtJ relied on the
    decision in Kareem in terms of  the  significance  of  there  being  no
    evidence that the French authorities had accepted the proxy marriage as
    valid in Nigeria, he erred in law.

30. However, that error of law is not material to the question  of  whether
    the marriage is valid, and would not have caused me to  set  aside  the
    FtJ's decision. The grounds of appeal do not include  any  argument  in
    relation to the validity of the marriage in Nigerian law.  That is  not
    a matter raised in the initial  grounds  or  in  the  renewed  grounds.
    Insofar as the matter was raised at the hearing and in the document  of
    further submissions to  which  I  have  referred,  provided  after  the
    hearing, those are not matters that are the subject of the grounds upon
    which permission was sought or granted.

31. Furthermore, the submissions on behalf of the appellant  before  me  do
    not establish that there  was  evidence  before  the  FtJ  proving  the
    validity of the marriage.   It  is  evident  that  the  certificate  of
    marriage was not in the bundle of documents before the  FtJ.   Whatever
    may  be  said  about  what  documents  were  or  were  not  before  the
    respondent, it was for the appellant to put evidence before the FtJ  to
    prove the validity of the marriage in Nigerian law.  As I say  however,
    in any event this was not a matter that was the subject of  grounds  of
    appeal upon which permission was granted.

32. Having said all that, it is the case that the FtJ erred in law  in  his
    reliance on the decision in  Kareem.  He  also  erred  in  law  in  his
    reliance on Sala in the  light  of  Khan.  The  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant is in a durable relationship and is thus an  extended  family
    member is a matter that requires to be determined. The error of law  in
    relation to whether the appellant has a right of appeal as an  extended
    family member is reason enough to set aside the FtJ's decision.

33. Although I have commented on what was and what was not the  subject  of
    the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  (i.e.  not  the  issue  of
    validity of the marriage in Nigerian law), that  was  not  in  fact  an
    issue that was determined by the FtJ. Given that the  decision  of  the
    FtJ is set aside, it is a matter that may have to be determined.  There
    are no preserved findings by the FtJ in  that  respect;  there  are  no
    findings at all on it. There is no basis therefore, for  any  direction
    limiting the scope of the further hearing.

34. In the  circumstances,  taking  into  account  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2, it is appropriate for  the  appeal
    to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  consideration  of  all
    matters  relating  to  the  application  for  a   residence   card   as
    confirmation of a right of residence as the spouse of an EEA  national,
    in the light of the law  as  it  is  now  understood  to  be.  For  the
    avoidance of doubt, that includes the issue  of  the  validity  of  the
    marriage under Nigerian law, and the issue of whether the appellant  is
    an extended family member by reason of being in a durable relationship.

    Decision

35. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and its decision is therefore set aside.  The  appeal
    is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo,  with  no
    findings of fact  preserved,  before  a  judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cockrill.


Upper   Tribunal   Judge   Kopieczek                                   dated
    28/11/17



