
[pic]
IAC-AH-LR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31774/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd August 2015                   |On 17th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          Mr chinenye james obioha
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Islam (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge N M K Lawrence, promulgated on 12th February  2015,  following  a
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 30th January 2015.   In  the  determination,
    the judge dismissed the appeal of Chinenye James Obioha.  The Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male.  He is a citizen of Nigeria.  He was  born  on
    19th March 1978.  He applied on 3rd June 2014 for a permanent residence
    card under Regulation 15 of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.  The basis of his claim is his relationship with  his
    claimed spouse, namely, Mrs Caroline Cairns, who is an Irish  national,
    and who claims to be exercising treaty rights in  the  UK.   The  judge
    observed that, "in support of the application  the  Appellant  provided
    Mrs Cairns' payslips from 2009 to 2011.  On the evidence submitted, the
    Respondent was not satisfied  that  Mrs  Cairns  is  exercising  treaty
    rights in the UK.  The application was refused" (at paragraph 1).

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that his sponsoring wife, Mrs  Cairns,  is  no
    longer working in the UK.  It is said that, "she is  an  alcoholic  and
    has been granted Personal Indemnity Payment since September 2013  until
    5th November 2019.  She also suffers from depression". (See paragraph 5
    of the determination).  This has naturally  meant  that  she  has  been
    unable to work continuously since coming to the UK.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had expressed regard to Regulation 5 of the 2006  Regulations
    and quoted it by observing that, as far as the Appellant was concerned,
    "she has ceased activity in the UK as a  worker,  'as  a  result  of  a
    permanent incapacity to work and either  ...  she  resided  in  the  UK
    continuously for more than  two  years  prior  to  termination  or  the
    incapacity is the result of an accident at work ...'" (see paragraph  5
    of the determination).

 5. Before the judge, the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  Mr  Grennan,
    submitted that

         "... alcoholism is self-induced and cannot  amount  to  incapacity.
         ... even if it does  amount  to  incapacity  for  the  purposes  of
         Regulation 5, the second point raised by Mr Grennan is  that  there
         is no evidence that incapacity due to  alcoholism  is  'permanent'.
         Similarly, there is no  evidence  before  me  that  the  depression
         suffered by Mrs Cairns is  permanent."  (See  paragraph  6  of  the
         determination).

 6. The judge went on to hold  that  in  the  instant  case,  "Mrs  Cairns'
    termination of work is due to her alcoholism and not due to  any  work-
    related accident".  He explained that she had been in the UK  for  more
    than two years.  The judge had before him  medical  evidence  from  the
    East London NHS Foundation Trust that Mrs Cairns was being treated  for
    depression and alcoholism.

 7. The judge went on to note, that, "however, there is nothing to indicate
    that either condition is  'permanent  '.   Consequently,  I  find  that
    Regulation 5 of the 2006 (sic) is not engaged" (see paragraph 7).   The
    appeal was dismissed.



Grounds of Application

 8. The Grounds of Appeal state  that  the  judge  erred  fundamentally  in
    failing to have regard to  Regulation  6(2)  of  the  2006  Regulations
    because if it was  the  case  that  the  Appellant's  spouse  was  only
    temporarily incapacitated then under that provision  the  appeal  could
    have been allowed.  This was important because the Appellant's case was
    that his EEA national had been exercising treaty rights as a  qualified
    wife from 2009 to 2011 for a full two years.  She had only ceased  work
    due to anxiety and depression, and partly alcoholism.  During this time
    she had remained a qualified person and was in receipt of benefit.

 9. On 23rd June 2015, permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that, whilst it was open to the  judge  to  reach
    the conclusion that the Appellant could not demonstrate  the  permanent
    incapacity of his spouse, the issue in relation as to whether  she  had
    ceased work as a result of temporary incapacity to  work,  and  whether
    there was a break in the continuity of residence, was an issue that was
    not dealt with and it was one that was required to be resolved  on  the
    evidence, both documentary and oral.

10. On 1st July 2015, a Rule 24 response  was  entered  by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State on the basis that the Record of  Proceedings  needed
    to be analysed because this would show  whether  the  EEA  Sponsor  had
    ceased work as a result of temporary incapacity  to  work  and  whether
    there was  a  break  in  the  continuity  of  residence.   The  judge's
    determination was silent on this issue.  Reference was made also to the
    case of FMB (EEA reg 6(2)(a) -  "temporarily  unable  to  work"  Uganda
    [2010] UKUT 447.

Submissions

11. In his submissions before me Mr  Islam,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, submitted that since the judge had plainly accepted  himself
    that, "similarly, there is no evidence before me  that  the  depression
    suffered  by  Mrs  Cairns  is  permanent"  (see  paragraph  6  of   the
    determination), this must mean that her depression was  temporary.   If
    so, then Regulation 6(2) plainly applied.   If  it  applied,  then  the
    appeal stood to be allowed.  The judge had erred in  failing  to  allow
    the appeal.  In fact, the judge had  failed  in  not  even  considering
    Regulation 6.

12. For his part, Mr Bramble submitted that, whilst it  was  accepted  that
    the  determination  was  poorly  crafted,  it  was  important  to  give
    consideration as  to  whether  the  Appellant's  sponsoring  wife,  Mrs
    Cairns, had actually been working as an EEA national  as  required  for
    the purposes of the Regulations, because without that being made clear,
    no question would arise as to whether the Sponsor was incapacitated  on
    a only temporary, as opposed to  a  permanent,  basis.   Unfortunately,
    submitted Mr Bramble, he did not have the previous Presenting Officer's
    notes, and the bundle did not make this clear.  Mr Islam interrupted to
    say that he also was unable to help in this respect.

13. Second, submitted Mr Bramble, one had to consider whether  Counsel  for
    the  Appellant  actually  did  present  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    employment history of the sponsoring spouse.  If this evidence was  not
    presented, then again there was no question as to the capacity in which
    the Sponsor was unwell, whether temporary or permanent.

Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge involved  a
    making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA  [2007]
    such that I should set aside the decision and remake the decision  (see
    Section 12(2) of TCEA [2007]).  My reasons are as follows.

15. First, the Appellant's bundle shows (at  page  51)  that  the  evidence
    before the  judge  included  three  P60s  for  2010,  2011,  and  2013.
    Furthermore, there were wage slips between 27th December 2008 and  19th
    September 2011.  Indeed, the judge at the outset makes  it  clear  that
    the evidence relied upon by Mrs Cairns included payslips from  2009  to
    2011 (see paragraph 11).

16. Second, this therefore raises the question as to whether the spouse was
    permanently incapacitated.  The  judge  observed  that,  "there  is  no
    evidence before me that  the  depression  suffered  by  Mrs  Cairns  is
    permanent" (paragraph 6).  If  this  is  the  case,  then  the  natural
    inference is that the depression was temporary.

17. There is a distinction between a worker who is  temporarily  unable  to
    work as a result of illness or accident, and  remains  a  worker  under
    Regulation 6(2)(a), and a worker who has  ceased  activity  because  of
    permanent incapacity to work in terms of Regulation 5(3)(a).  A  worker
    who is temporarily unable to work  remains  a  qualified  person  under
    Regulation 6.

18. However, a person who terminates his activity as a worker as  a  result
    of permanent incapacity  to  work  is  not  a  qualified  person  under
    Regulation 6.  Such a person may be a worker who  has  ceased  activity
    under Regulation 5(3)  provided  the  conditions  in  that  regard  are
    satisfied.  If those conditions are satisfied then the worker  who  has
    ceased activity will require  a  permanent  right  of  residence  under
    Regulation 15(1)(c).

19.  The  judge  in  the  circumstances,   should   have   given   specific
    consideration to Regulation 6, which describes a "qualified person"  as
    a "worker".  Under Regulation 6(2)(a) the person "is temporarily unable
    to work as a result of an illness or accident" is still a worker.

20. In the case of FMB (EEA reg 6(2)(a) -  "temporarily  unable  to  work")
    Uganda [2010] UKUT 447, the Tribunal made it clear that,

         "... we consider that there is considerable merit in  the  argument
         advanced on behalf of the claimant as to the meaning  of  the  word
         'temporary' and 'permanent',  in  the  sense  that  if  a  person's
         inability or  incapacity  is  not  permanent,  then  it  should  be
         regarded as temporary" (see paragraph 23).

    The judge's failure to consider this  incapacity  as  temporary  is  an
    error of law because it would have gone directly to the application  of
    Regulation 6(2).

Remaking the Decision

21. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for  the  following  reasons.   Given
    what I have said above, namely, the existence of  evidence  before  the
    judge in the Appellant's bundle, it is clear that Regulation 6(2) ought
    to have been considered and that the  Appellant  stood  the  chance  of
    being described as a  "worker".   There  is  evidence  before  me  now,
    indeed, in the latest bundle of the Appellant  dated  28th  July  2015,
    that shows that there is  an  offer  of  employment  from  "Safer  Care
    Community Services" dated 1st June 2015, whereby the Sponsor is to work
    as a care assistant on a zero contract basis, and this evidence has  to
    be taken in conjunction with the evidence already before the First-tier
    Tribunal, namely, of a period of work amounting to more than two  years
    since 2008, by the  sponsoring  wife  in  this  case.   The  Appellant,
    accordingly, succeeds in this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is  allowed.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    12th August 2015

