
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31898/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd  May 2017                     |On 24th May 2017                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                            Hamilton Flex Chiwaya
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Preston, solicitor, ILAC
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Spencer
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 1st August 2016.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Malawi born on  6th  November  1994.   He
    came to the UK on 2nd October 2010 with entry  clearance  to  join  his
    father who is a member of the British Army, with leave to remain as his
    father's dependant until 2015.

 3. He and his sister, who came with him, made an in time application   for
    further leave to remain.   Whilst  his  sister  was  granted  leave  to
    November 2019, the appellant was refused on the grounds that he did not
    meet the requirements for leave with respect to family or private  life
    in the UK, because his presence here was not conducive  to  the  public
    good;  his convictions made it undesirable to grant  leave  to  remain.
    He therefore failed to meet the requirements of paragraph S-LTR.1.6.

 4. He appealed to an immigration judge.

 5. The judge set out the evidence.  The appellant  was  diagnosed  as  HIV
    positive in 2010 and receives  medical  treatment  for  HIV.   He  also
    suffers from depression.

 6. With respect to the appellant's convictions he wrote as follows:

         "I accept that the criminal convictions relate to offences that are
         of a more minor nature.  However I find that there  are  a  lot  of
         offences.  They span over a four year period  and  it  is  apparent
         that the  appellant  has  repeatedly  committed  exactly  the  same
         offences on occasions (e.g. shoplifting and driving whilst over the
         prescribed limit).  This shows that unfortunately the non-custodial
         sentences  or  the  custodial  sentences   have   not   worked   in
         rehabilitating him.   I  find  that  the  appellant  has  committed
         offences that could create a danger and/or risk to the public  e.g.
         driving whilst over the prescribed limit and shoplifting."

 7. The judge noted that two of the offences were committed  a  few  months
    before the hearing which indicated to him that the appellant was  still
    not abiding by the law.  The judge considered the  five  step  approach
    outlined by Lord Bingham in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 and  concluded
    that the interference with the family's  right  to  respect  for  their
    family life by the removal was proportionate to the  legitimate  public
    end sought to be achieved.  On that basis he dismissed the appeal.

 8. It was at this point that the appellant, who was not represented at the
    hearing before the  judge,  engaged  his  present  representatives  who
    drafted the application for permission to appeal.

 9. The grounds cite paragraph 276AA which set  out  the  requirements  for
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK as the child of a parent,  parents
    or a relative present and settled in the UK or being granted settlement
    on the same occasion in accordance with paragraphs 276E to 276Q or of a
    member of HM Forces  who  is  exempt  from  immigration  control  under
    Section 8(4)(a) of the Immigration Act  1971  and  has  at  least  five
    years' continuous service.  The appellant had accrued five years' leave
    and was therefore entitled to indefinite leave to remain as  the  child
    of a member of HM Forces who is exempt from immigration control or  who
    has five years' service.  It was argued that the Immigration Judge  had
    failed to adequately assess the appeal  on  its  facts  and  failed  to
    conduct an adequate Article 8 assessment.

10. Permission to appeal was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Adio who said that since the appellant was over 18 at the time he  made
    his application he could not have succeeded under the Rules  quoted  in
    the application for permission to appeal.

11. Upon renewal it was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy.

The Hearing

12. Mrs Preston relied  on  her  grounds  and  on  papargraph  50(a)  which
    requires that, upon an application for indefinite leave, limited  leave
    must be granted to the child of a member of HM Forces who falls  to  be
    refused by virtue only of failing to meet the suitability  requirements
    of the Rules.

13. The suitability grounds are set out  at  paragraphs  8  and  9  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  They set out the circumstances  where  applications
    will be refused on grounds of suitability and include cases such as the
    appellant who has a large number of convictions from 2012 to  2016  for
    theft and kindred offences and other miscellaneous offences  for  which
    he received a large number of non-custodial sentences.  On one occasion
    he served a sentence of six weeks out of a fifteen  week  sentence  for
    theft at a young offenders' institution in 2014.  She did not  seek  to
    argue  that  the  appellant   could  not  properly  be  regarded  as  a
    persistent offender who has shown a particular disregard for the law.

14. Mr Diwncyz agreed with the First-tier Judge who had originally  refused
    permission to appeal and submitted that the phrase:

         "Limited leave to remain as a child of a member of HM Forces."

    Should be construed as to mean a minor, and therefore the judge's  lack
    of reference to that Rule was immaterial since it could not assist  the
    appellant.

Consideration of whether there is a material error of law.

15. Paragraph 49 of the Immigration Rules states as follows:
         "49. Indefinite leave to remain as the child  of  a  member  of  HM
             Forces will be granted to an applicant  who  has  or  has  had
             leave to enter or remain under paragraph  43  or  47  of  this
             Appendix or paragraph 276AH of these Rules and who:
             (a)  was either:
                  (i)  under 18 years of age at the date of application; or
                  (ii) aged 18 or over at the date of  application  and  who
                      was last granted leave under paragraphs 43 or  47  of
                      the Appendix or paragraph 276AH of these Rules;
             (b)  is not married or in a civil partnership;
             (c)  has not formed an independent family unit;
             (d)  is not leading an independent life;
             (e)  is in the UK;
             (f)  has made a valid  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
                  remain as the child of a member of HM Forces;
             (g)  is not in breach of immigration laws, except that,  where
                  paragraph 39E of these Rules applies, any  current  period
                  of overstaying will be disregarded;
             (h)  is the child of:
                  (i)  a foreign or Commonwealth citizen who  is  a  serving
                      member of HM Forces who has completed at  least  five
                      years' reckonable service; or
                  (ii) a person who has been granted, or is being granted at
                      the same time as the applicant, indefinite  leave  to
                      enter or remain under paragraph  13  or  16  of  this
                      Appendix or paragraphs 276E to Q of these Rules; or
                  (iii)    a member of HM Forces who is a British Citizen;
                      (i)  meets one of the following criteria:
                           (i)  the applicant's other parent must:
                               (aa) also come within paragraph 49(h); or
                               (bb) have been granted indefinite  leave  to
                                   enter or remain under paragraph 25 or 31
                                   of this Appendix or  paragraph  276S  or
                                   276V of these Rules; or
                               (cc) be being granted  indefinite  leave  to
                                   enter or remain under paragraph 25 or 31
                                   of this Appendix or  paragraph  276S  or
                                   276V of these Rules at the same time  as
                                   the applicant; or
                               (dd) have died; or
                           (ii) the parent under paragraph  49(h)  has  sole
                               responsibility    for    the     applicant's
                               upbringing or the applicant  normally  lives
                               with this parent and not their other parent;
                               or
                           (iii)    there are serious and compelling  family
                               or  other  considerations  which  make   the
                               applicant's   exclusion    from    the    UK
                               undesirable and suitable  arrangements  have
                               been made for their care;
                  (j)  does not  fall  to  be  refused  on  the  grounds  of
                      suitability under paragraphs 8 or 9;
                  (k)   meets  the  general  eligibility   requirements   in
                      paragraph 42;
                  (l)  where the applicant is 18 or  over,  can  demonstrate
                      sufficient knowledge  of  the  English  language  and
                      about  life  in  the  UK,  in  accordance  with   the
                      requirements of Appendix KoLL to these Rules;
                  (m)  will be accommodated  adequately  by  the  parent  or
                      parents the  applicant  is  seeking  to  remain  with
                      without recourse to  public  funds  in  accommodation
                      which the parent or parents the applicant is  seeking
                      to join, own or occupy exclusively; and
                  (n)  will  be  maintained  adequately  by  the  parent  or
                      parents the applicant is  seeking  to  join,  without
                      recourse to public funds.
         50.  Limited leave to remain as a child of a member  of  HM  Forces
             for a period of 30 months and subject to  a  condition  of  no
             recourse to public funds will be granted:
             (a)  where an applicant fails to  meet  the  requirements  for
                  indefinite leave to remain in paragraph 49 by reason  only
                  of failing to  satisfy  the  suitability  requirements  in
                  paragraph 8 or 9 in respect of a grant of indefinite leave
                  to remain (but not a grant of limited leave to remain); or


             (b)  where an applicant fails to  meet  the  requirements  for
                  indefinite leave to remain by reason only  of  failing  to
                  meet the requirements in paragraph 49(l); or c) by  reason
                  only of failing to  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
                  49(h)(i) or (ii), provided that  the  applicant's  sponsor
                  has been granted leave to enter or remain under  paragraph
                  15 or 19 of this Appendix."

16. I conclude that the reference to child in paragraph 50 means the son or
    daughter of a member of HM Forces and not a minor as  suggested  by  Mr
    Diwncyz.

17. First, if the Rules had intended that the provision should  only  refer
    to minors they would have said so. Second, the paragraph  to  which  it
    refers plainly is concerned with both children of serving members of HM
    Forces who are under 18 and those who are over 18. Paragraph 50  refers
    to  the  inability  of  an  applicant  to  meet  the  requirements  for
    indefinite leave to remain in Paragraph 49.   Paragraph  49  refers  to
    applicants who are both under the age  of  18  years  at  the  date  of
    application and those who are 18 or over  who  had  last  been  granted
    leave under paragraph 43 or 47, as in this case.

18. The appellant did not make  an  application  under  paragraph  49,  for
    indefinite leave to remain.  Had he done so, it would  appear  that  he
    would have met all of the requirements of that paragraph save  for  the
    suitability requirements.

19. On the findings of the Immigration Judge, none of which are  challenged
    by the respondent, he is still  living  with  his  father,  stepmother,
    sister and stepbrother and is not  leading  an  independent  life.  His
    mother died in 2004. The judge  said  in  terms  that  the  appellant's
    father  had  financially  and  emotionally  supported  him  during  his
    lifetime.  He was initially granted leave to remain under paragraph  43
    as the child of a member  of  HM  Forces.   According  to  his  witness
    statement his father has been a serving member of the British Army  for
    seven years. The judge accepted that the appellant could speak English.



20. The sole reason why the appellant  would  have  been  refused,  had  he
    applied for indefinite leave, would have been on  suitability  grounds.
    According to Rule 50, in these circumstances, limited leave  to  remain
    will be granted for a period of 30 months subject to a condition of  no
    recourse to public funds.

21. I have great sympathy with the Immigration Judge.  These Rules were not
    brought to his attention by the appellant who was not advised of  their
    existence by his previous representatives.  Neither, it has to be said,
    did the respondent realise that they were potentially  applicable  when
    the appellant made his application for further leave to remain.

22. Nevertheless the fact that the appellant should have been  given  leave
    for a period of 30 months had both he and the respondent realised  that
    paragraphs 49 and 50 applied, is  plainly  relevant  to  the  issue  of
    proportionality.

23. Accordingly, the judge erred in law, and his decision is set aside.

Findings and Conclusions

24. The judge concluded that the appellant could not meet the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules which he was  considering  but  accepted  that
    there were compelling circumstances in this case so  as  to  require  a
    consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules. His  assessment  has  not
    been challenged.

25. It is quite plain from the determination that the judge  accepted  that
    there was family life in this case.  The unchallenged evidence is  that
    the appellant has always lived with his father except for a  period  of
    time when his father obtained accommodation for him for six months at a
    friend's house in Birmingham.  The appellant is unwell, suffering  from
    HIV and from depression.   There  is  therefore  clearly  a  degree  of
    dependency here which amounts to more than the normal emotional ties.

26.  The  appellant  has  distant  relatives  in  Malawi,  his  father  has
    associates there and will be able to assist him financially. He will be
    able to receive the correct medical  treatment  there.   Those  factors
    favour his removal. However, the fact that the appellant satisfies  the
    requirements of paragraph 50, is also highly relevant to  the  question
    of whether it would be proportionate for him  to  be  removed.   Indeed
    paragraph 50 envisages these precise  circumstances,  namely  where  an
    appellant would normally be refused  on  suitability  grounds  but  who
    would otherwise have been granted indefinite leave to remain. It states
    in mandatory terms that leave  will  be  grantedfor   a  period  of  30
    months.

27. That firmly tilts the scales in his favour.

28. In conclusion, the appellant has successfully navigated through to  the
    issue of proportionality,  having  both  established  that  there  were
    compelling circumstances in his case such as to require  an  assessment
    of Article 8 outside the  Rules.  Having  established  that  he  enjoys
    family life in the UK deserving of respect, the fact that he meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 50 renders it disproportionate for him to  be
    removed.

Notice of Decision

29. The original judge erred in law.  His decision is  set  aside.   It  is
    remade as follows.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed with respect to
    the Immigration Rules.  It is allowed with respect to Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date 23 May 2017
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

