
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/31001/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 12th February 2018                      |On 22nd February 2018          |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                RIZWAN ASLAM
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma of Counsel instructed by Sky Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 18th January 1986. He
       arrived in the UK in 2010 as a Tier 4 student migrant. He had  leave
       in that capacity until 14th May 2015. On 4th June  2015  he  applied
       for leave to remain outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which  was
       varied on 24th August 2015  to  an  application  to  remain  as  the
       partner of a British citizen who had two British citizen children by
       a previous relationship,  and  thus  it  became  an  application  on
       Article 8 ECHR grounds. This human rights application was refused by
       the respondent on 2nd September 2015. The appellant's appeal against
       the decision was dismissed on all  grounds  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge A W Khan in a determination promulgated on the  17th  February
       2017. By this stage the appellant and his partner also had a further
       British citizen child of their own who was four months  old  at  the
       date of hearing.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Southern on
       the 17th October 2017 on basis that it was arguable that the  First-
       tier judge had erred in law in failing to  apply  s.117B(6)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  or  to  adequately
       reason the decision under this provision.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law and Remaking

    4. Mr Sharma argued that the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  law  in
       not allowing the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds in accordance with
       s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as  at
       paragraph 28 of the decision there was a finding that it  would  not
       be reasonable to expect any of the children to go  to  Pakistan.  It
       was unclear whether the First-tier Tribunal  had  decided  that  the
       appellant had a  parental  relationship  with  the  two  older  step
       children, as the finding was that he had "a relationship" with them,
       see paragraph 21, but it was clearly accepted that he had a parental
       relationship with his own child. This should  have  meant  that  the
       appellant succeeded under  paragraph  s.117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act,
       however  the   First-tier   Tribunal   brought   irrelevantly   into
       consideration whether the appellant might succeed in a future  entry
       clearance application, at paragraph 28 of  the  decision,  asserting
       without evidence  this  would  only  take   about  three  months  to
       complete. This finding, regarding the period of  processing  of  any
       application, was also in any case inconsistent with the  finding  at
       paragraph 24 of the decision that the appellant  would  not  qualify
       for entry clearance  to  return  at  all  as  his  partner  was  not
       currently earning sufficiently  for  him  to  meet  the  Immigration
       Rules.  Mr Sharma therefore argued that I should remake  the  appeal
       allowing it as on the findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
       meant that this appellant was entitled to succeed in his  Article  8
       ECHR appeal, with reference to s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act,  as  there
       was no public interest in his removal.

    5. Mr Bramble accepted that this outcome would be in accordance with
       what was set out in the respondent's own policy as recorded at
       paragraph 7 of SF and Others (Guidance, Post-2014 Act) Albania
       [2017] UKUT 120:

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or primary carer of a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age of
         that child. This reflects the European Court of Justice Judgment in
         Zambrano.

         Where a decision to refuse the application would require a parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the EU, the case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that parent
         or primary carer.

         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the UK with
         the child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence of a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight as to justify separation, if the child could
         otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer in
         the UK or in the EU."

    6. Mr Bramble accepted that the respondent had not pursued any issues
       of a poor immigration history with respect to this appellant and
       this was not a case where there was criminality, and thus given
       there was clearly a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
       between the appellant and his biological British citizen child the
       position of the respondent was that it would not be reasonable to
       expect the child to leave the UK. In these circumstances there was
       nothing more that he could add by way of submissions.

Conclusions - Error of Law and Remaking

    7. For the reasons set out in Mr Sharma's  submissions  the  First-tier
       Tribunal erred in the application of s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act. Once
       the First-tier Tribunal had found that the appellant had  a  genuine
       and subsisting parental relationship with a  British  citizen  child
       and it was not reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK  then
       the appeal should have been allowed on Article  8  ECHR  grounds  as
       there was no public interest in the appellant's removal.

    8. I remake the appeal by allowing it for the following  reasons.  Both
       parties accept that the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
       parental relationship with his biological British citizen  child.  I
       apply the guidance as set out in the Court of Appeal decision in  MA
       (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and the respondent's policy as
       set out in SF (Albania) whereby the reasonableness of requiring this
       qualifying child to leave does include all  aspects  of  the  public
       interest, albeit that generally that  it  will  be  unreasonable  to
       require a British child to leave the UK absent criminality or  other
       weighty considerations. I find that there are no substantial  issues
       affecting the public interest in this case such as criminality,  and
       it has not been argued by the respondent that the  appellant  has  a
       poor immigration history nor is there any evidence  before  me  that
       this is the case.  The finding that it would not  be  reasonable  to
       expect this child to leave the UK made by the First-tier Tribunal at
       paragraph 28 is therefore correct, and leads to the conclusion  that
       there is  no  public  interest  in  the  appellant's  removal  under
       s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act, and that the appeal should be allowed  as
       the appellant's removal is a disproportionate interference with  his
       right to respect to family life with his child.

          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
      appeal.

   3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it  on  human  rights
      grounds.


Signed:      Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:   19th  February
2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

