
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31229/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th September 2014                          |On 18th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                        Miss Andrea Annette Fletcher
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. The Appellant was not in attendance  at  the  hearing  before  me.  The
    solicitors representing her wrote in to tell me that the Appellant  had
    told them she would not be attending. No explanation is  provided.  The
    solicitors in the same letter tell me that that although they are still
    representing the Appellant they too would not be in attendance,  having
    received specific instructions from the Appellant not  to  attend.   No
    explanation is provided.  I am invited to deal with the appeal "on  the
    papers".

 2. The matter has been listed for an oral  hearing  and  the  Respondent's
    representative is present.    In light of that letter  I  am  satisfied
    that it is appropriate  for  me  to  proceed  in  the  absence  of  the
    Appellant and her representatives.

 3. The Appellant appeals with permission a decision of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Pygott promulgated on 4th July 2014 in which the judge  dismissed
    this Appellant's citizen's appeal brought against an  EEA  decision  of
    the Respondent  dated  11th  July  2013  to  refuse  her  a  derivative
    residence card as the primary carer of her British son  with  reference
    to Regulation 15 of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

 4. The Grounds of Appeal were that the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account correspondence received from Social Services and  further  that
    the decision was perverse in  the  context  of  the  finding  that  the
    Appellant was the primary carer of a  British  child.   Permission  was
    granted in connection  with  the  arguable  inconsistency  between  the
    judge's finding of the Appellant being the primary carer of  a  5  year
    old child and the finding that nonetheless the removal of the Appellant
    would not substantially interfere with the child's ability to  exercise
    treaty rights.

 5. The Appellant is not assisted by her absence and  the  absence  of  her
    representatives here today who might otherwise expand or  enlarge  upon
    the grounds and provide argument in support of their contention.  There
    is a world of difference between grounds being found  arguable  at  the
    permission stage and the argument in fact being made and  found  to  be
    persuasive.

 6. The argument in the grounds is that the judge's finding that the  child
    of the Appellant would be able to  rely  on  alternative  care  in  the
    United Kingdom in order to exercise his substantive treaty  rights  and
    to be able to exercise them  fully  and  properly  without  significant
    detriment is speculative in the absence of evidence of the availability
    of such care.

 7. In the response to the grant of permission the  Respondent  points  out
    that there is an order of the family court granting joint residence  to
    both parents in this case as well as a prohibited  steps  order  having
    been obtained by the father, as well as  the  evidence  of  the  social
    worker was that contact remained. In that context the findings that the
    father was suitable and able to provide care is not speculative.

 8. The Appellant's version of events, in the grounds of  the  application,
    is that in fact the father had little to do with the child.

 9. The evidence provided by the Appellant was obviously incomplete in that
    the order of 2010 refers to subsequent hearings the outcome of which is
    not disclosed. However  the  social  work  evidence  reveals  that  the
    child's father remains interested  and  involved  with  the  child  and
    although obtained for  the  proceedings,  did  not  does  disclose  any
    difficulties or concerns about  the  father.  The  judge  had  evidence
    before him in the context of  the  court  orders  which  supported  the
    conclusion as to the availability of suitable care from the father.

10. The finding cannot be said to  be  perverse  as  being  unsupported  by
    evidence so as to be speculative. Nor, in light of the EEA  regulations
    affording primary carer status even where care is joint, can it be said
    that the findings is internally incoherent.

11. In conclusion my decision  is  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is not vitiated by material legal error requiring  me  to  set
    the decision aside and to remake it.  The decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing the Appellant's appeal stands.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

