
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31878/2015
                                                               ia/31879/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 November 2016                          |On 7 December 2016            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             harpreet kaur batra
                                Mandeep Singh
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Singh, of Osmans Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the appeal by the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
      (hereinafter the Appellant) against a decision by Judge of the  First-
      tier Tribunal Frankish who, on 15 April 2016,  allowed  to  a  limited
      extent the appeal of Mrs Harpreet Kaur Batra (the Respondent) and  her
      dependent partner against a decision of the  Appellant  to  refuse  an
      application for Further Leave to Remain (FLR)  as  a  Tier  4  Student
      which was made on 14 September 2015.

Background

2.   The Respondent and her partner first entered the UK  in  2009  pursuant
    to entry clearances issued as a Tier 4 (General) Student and dependant.
    That leave was valid  until  29  November  2011.   The  Respondent  was
    granted FLR valid until 30 September  2012.   That  leave  however  was
    curtailed in June 2012 so that  it  expired  on  26  August  2012.  The
    Respondent then made an in-time application on 20 July  2012  for  FLR.
    This was based on her acceptance  for  studies  at  St  Albans  College
    Limited. When she made her application she had been issued with  a  CAS
    (Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies) that was valid at the time.

3.   This application was refused and an appeal initiated but the  Appellant
    reconsidered  the  application  and  made  her  decision  refusing  the
    application on 14  September  2015.   The  basis  for  the  Appellant's
    refusal of the application for FLR was two-fold. Firstly, the Appellant
    refused the application under  paragraph  322(1A)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules on the basis that the principal Respondent had used a false TOEIC
    certificate obtained from ETS, an organisation who provided  facilities
    for the testing  of  English.   According  to  the  Appellant  ETS  had
    provided information to her that a proxy tester had taken the test  for
    the Respondent. The refusal  letter  made  specific  reference  to  the
    college where the test was  taken  and  the  particular  date  and  the
    certificate  number  relating  to  the  test.  ETS   had   used   voice
    verification software and concluded  that  the  Respondent's  test  was
    invalid due the presence of a proxy tester.

4.   The Appellant also refused the application on the basis that there  was
    no valid CAS.  When the sponsor register was checked  on  14  September
    2015 St Albans College was not listed. As a result the  Respondent  was
    not awarded 30 points and could not meet the requirements for FLR as  a
    Tier 4 Student.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

5.   The judge heard the Respondent's appeal on 13 April 2016. There was  no
    appearance by the Appellant.  The  Respondent  provided  a  lengthy  an
    bundle of documents.  In a brief decision the judge noted that  he  had
    been provided with a copy of SM and Qadir and Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department (ETS - evidence - burden of  proof)  [2016]  UKIAT.
    This is a reference to a decision that was not, at that date  reported.
    It was a case heard by a panel of  the  Upper  Tribunal  including  the
    President of the Upper Tribunal and dealt  in  great  detail  with  the
    generic evidence that was relied on by the Appellant in ETS cases. This
    decision was later  reported  with  the  citation  -  SM  and  Qadir  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden  of
    Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC).

6.   The judge, at paragraph 8, accepted that the copy he had been  provided
    had not yet been formally promulgated.  It  had  however  come  to  the
    attention of the Respondent's representative and the judge did rely  on
    the Presidential decision.

7.   At paragraph 9, having considered the copy of Qadir that  he  had  been
    provided the judge, stated:

         "I have no difficulty in accepting that the [Respondent] is one  of
         the untainted  applicants.  The  [Respondent]  has  a  plethora  of
         unchallenged IELTS English language test certificates starting with
         the one she took in India on 18 August 2008.  Since then her  score
         have  been  relatively  consistent  although  her  spoken   element
         demonstrates the improvement one would expect."

8.   The judge found that  the  Appellant  failed  to  discharge  the  legal
    burden of proving that a proxy tester had been  used.  The  judge  then
    went on to find that the Appellant's decision was, in effect,  'not  in
    accordance with  the  law'  (although  the  judge  does  not  use  that
    particular  term)  because  the  CAS  that  had  been  awarded  to  the
    Respondent, which was valid at the time  of  the  application,  was  no
    longer valid and because the Respondent had not been provided with  any
    opportunity, following the decision in  Patel  (revocation  of  sponsor
    licence - fairness) India [2011] UKUT 211 (IAC),  to  obtain  entry  to
    another college.

The Grounds of Appeal and the grant of permission

9.   The Appellant,  aggrieved  with  the  decision,  sought  permission  to
    appeal. No issue was taken  with  the  second  aspect  of  the  judge's
    conclusion (his decision that the decision was not in  accordance  with
    the law because of procedural unfairness). It was  contended  that  the
    judge  failed  to  follow  paragraph  11  of  the  Practice  Directions
    appertaining to the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal and  the  Upper  Tribunal,  which  concerns  the  citation  of
    unreported cases.

10.  It was submitted that the  Tribunal  failed  to  acknowledge  that  the
    Presidential decision upon which it relied was unreported and  that  no
    permission was given for the unreported version,  which  had  not  been
    formally promulgated, to be adduced.  This  was  said  to  be  material
    because, had it  been  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the decision was unreported, it did not follow  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal would have granted permission for it to  be  cited.
    By the date of the promulgation on the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    SM and Qadir was still not promulgated and was only promulgated  on  21
    April 2016.  It was submitted that, in any event, SM and Qadir was  not
    declaratory of the law and that, and  I  find  this  somewhat  hard  to
    follow, the Upper Tribunal decision had 'no retrospective effect'.

11.  It was further argued that if the Respondent wished to  rely  upon  the
    unreported decision of SM  and  Qadir  the  Appellant  should  then  be
    afforded the opportunity of relying upon a report by  Professor  French
    that was attached to the grounds French which was said to supersede the
    report of Dr Harrison relied on by the President in SM and Qadir.

Discussion

12.  I accept that the judge erred in law. Regardless of the fact  that  the
    unreported case presented to him was  one  of  a  panel  including  the
    President, it nevertheless remained unreported and therefore subject to
    the Practice Directions. No application was made by the  representative
    to cite the unreported decision and no consideration was given  by  the
    First-tier Judge to the relevant Practice Direction.

13.  I am not however satisfied that this error is material.   There  is  no
    suggestion  that  the  unreported  decision  relied  on  by  the  judge
    materially differed in any way from the version of SM  and  Qadir  that
    was eventually reported. Had the judge considered the reported  version
    he would, in my judgement, inevitably have  reached  exactly  the  same
    conclusion.

14.  Although brief, the consideration given by the judge in paragraph 9  of
    his decision adequately demonstrated the reasons why he found that  the
    evidence produced by the Respondent, which was specific and  particular
    to her, was sufficient to prevent the Appellant from  discharging  both
    the evidential and legal burden.

15.  The grounds of appeal contend that the Respondent ought  to  have  been
    given the opportunity to rely upon a report from  Professor  French.  I
    find this entirely misguided. This report by Professor French  was  not
    before the judge when his decision was made.  The  content  of  SM  and
    Qadir, including the President's  assessment  of  the  quality  of  the
    Respondent's evidence, was before the judge.

16.  As the grounds do not take any issue with  the  basis  upon  which  the
    judge allowed the appeal on the  limited  basis  that  it  was  not  in
    accordance with the law and requiring the Secretary of  State  to  give
    the applicant an opportunity of producing the relevant CAS I find  that
    the grounds of appeal are not made out and the initial decision stands.



Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State for the Home Department's appeal is dismissed.
The Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance  with  the  law  and
Mrs Batra's application remains outstanding, awaiting a lawful  decision  by
the Secretary of State.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum               06 December 2016
