
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31101/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On the 21st August 2014                         |On 28th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                               SARABJEET SINGH
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss D M Persaud, Counsel, instructed by Hartley
Bain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by Sarabjeet Singh who had applied for leave to
    remain in the UK on the basis of fourteen years long residence on the
    basis of the Immigration Rules as they stood at the date of the 8th
    July 2012, his application having been made before that date and
    therefore being entitled to have his case considered under the old
    Rules rather than under Appendix FM  or paragraph 276ADE both of which
    case into force on the 9th July 2012.  His appeal was heard by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Cohen at Hatton Cross on 19 February 2014 and
    dismissed in a determination promulgated on the 28th February 2014.

 2. Following that determination Grounds of Appeal were lodged which
    alleged that the Judge had conducted the hearing unfairly, that he had
    misdirected himself in law with regard to documentary evidence, that he
    had failed to set out his reasons in relation to many additional
    discrepancies and that was unfair because it meant that the Appellant
    did not know the basis of the decision against him; he had been unfair
    with regard to the Appellant's English language ability and that he had
    failed to take into account the Appellant's own evidence that he had
    spent seventeen years living and working within and amongst the Punjabi
    community.

 3. It was further suggested that under the article 8 aspect he had had not
    dealt adequately paragraph 276ADE. He had stated erroneously that there
    were ties with India and had not dealt properly with article 8.

 4. For the reasons I now give I find that the determination does not
    contain any errors, that the manner of the conduct of the hearing was
    not flawed, that the Appellant had a fair hearing and that the
    determination which was made contained reasons which were clearly open
    to the Judge.

 5. Dealing first with the allegation of unfairness, the statement of the
    Appellant's representative, Mohsin Aslam, is dated the 7th March of
    this yeasr.  He noted that at the beginning of the hearing Judge Cohen
    addressed the Appellant but during that introduction stated that he did
    not agree with the representative's skeleton argument and that in his
    view documentary evidence was of the utmost importance and the absence
    of evidence could not satisfy him that the Appellant had been in the
    UK.

 6. The lawyer's views were that the comments were wholly inappropriate and
    visibly upset the Appellant and in the course of the hearing the Judge
    interrupted examination-in-chief in cross-examination and was
    aggressive in his tone and manner.  There is no evidence from the
    lawyer or from the Appellant that the Appellant was unable to say
    anything in evidence that he had wished to say or that his evidence was
    different from the evidence that he had intended to give.  I note that
    he has been represented throughout by lawyers who had had ample time to
    prepare  his case not only by obtaining his witness statement that also
    supporting documentary evidence and supporting evidence from witnesses
    who may have known the Appellant and might be able to provide
    information with regard to the time that he had had in the UK.

 7. The Judge replied, and I have a note dated the 22nd July 2014.   He
    noted that there had been in fact no complaint about his behaviour to
    the Resident Judge at Hatton Cross and it follows obviously therefore
    no application to the First-tier that the hearing should simply be
    reheard by somebody else.  He confirms that he had stated to the
    Appellant and the representative that in long residence cases
    documentation was of great importance as one would expect someone who
    had resided in the UK for fourteen years to have gathered significant
    documentation during that time,  although I recognise that for someone
    residing in the UK legally documentation may be more difficult to
    produce.  He addressed both the Appellant and the representatives.
    Obviously if there was a disagreement then that would lead to an
    appeal.

 8. This is an area where the complaints apply the other way.  It has been
    a ground of appeal before the Upper Tribunal, not in this case, I note,
    that Judges did not indicate what was on their mind and so findings
    made against an Appellant were unfair because the Appellant did not
    know the case that he was being expected to put. Equally Judges are
    entitled to intervene in questioning where an Appellant is either not
    answering questions or further information is required, or where the
    questioning is itself inadequate and the Judge requires a particular
    point to be clarified.

 9. The Judge's view was that the Appellant was frequently evasive and in
    the determination described the attitude of one witness as being
    belligerent.  Those are observations that a Judge is entitled to make
    and is also entitled to apply when assessing the weight to be given to
    the evidence that he has heard.

10. The complaint is that the Appellant was unsettled.  It does not show
    that he could not put his case or that he did not put his case and it
    does not show that the Judge had prejudged the issues in question.
    Accordingly that complaint has no merit and I have no hesitation in
    rejecting it.

11. The Appellant gave evidence in Punjabi although he has an ESOL English
    language certificate and the Judge sought his own assessment.  That is
    not in fact inherently unfair.  For somebody who claims to have lived
    in the UK for many many years, seventeen years now if true, and claims
    to have no cultural ties whatsoever with  his country of origin.  His
    language ability is fundamental.  Had that been the only reason in the
    case then perhaps this might have been different but it was a part of
    the evidence that the Judge was entitled to take into account and did.



12. The Appellant's evidence was that he had been in the UK for seventeen
    years but it required support.  It is obvious from paragraphs 19
    onwards where the Judge reminded himself that the burden was on the
    Appellant that the Appellant's credibility was rejected.  Paragraph 22
    gives a good example of discrepancies that the Judge found and I quote
    from the middle of that paragraph

    "The Appellant claimed that he lived in the extension and did not know
    who lived in the mail house despite having claimed to have lived there
    for five years which I find to be implausible.  The Appellant claimed
    that two of the witness's children were married and he had not seen
    them attending university during the time he was at the witness's house
    whereas the witness indicated that one of his children were married and
    the other two attending university whilst the Appellant was living with
     him.  The Appellant stated that he never lived with the witness's
    children with the witness indicated that his children would  come home
    during university vacations."

13. There is no suggestion that that record of the evidence is inaccurate.
    It is a clear discrepancy which the Judge was entitled to take into
    account and the Judge was entitled to say as he went on

    "There were multiple other discrepancies in the evidence of the witness
    and the Appellant and in the light of the same I find that the
    Appellant and witness are other than witnesses of truth."

14. In paragraph 23  he went on to record the witness's claimed ability to
    remember the exact date in 1997 that the Appellant started to reside
    with him and when challenged about other dates became "quite
    belligerent".

15. The Judge was entitled to reject their evidence.  The fact that there
    were clear differences between with they had said was something that
    the Judge had to consider and either to reconcile, to either give
    reasons for finding it to be not important or to find that it
    undermined the evidence. He might have added, and I note now, that
    there is no evidence from the Gudwarah or anybody else who came into
    contact with the Appellant at that time.

16. Returning to the complaint again, it is suggested that the Immigration
    Judge had failed to deal with paragraph 276ADE but the fact is that the
    Appellant, whatever his family ties may be, has retained cultural ties
    with India.  He speaks Punjabi, it is clearly his preferred language.
    He was highly active, if the evidence were to be believed, in the
    Gudwarah and he mixes mainly with people from that cultural background.
     Accordingly it could not have been concluded that he has no ties
    culturally with the country to which he would have to go if he left the
    UK.

17. Having rejected his evidence with regard to the time that he has spent
    in the UK the Judge would be entitled to find that the Appellant was
    not credible with regard to the contact that he has with his family.
    As regards the time that he has spent in the UK, in paragraphs 20 and
    21 the Judge said this:

    "20. The Appellant claims to have come to the UK in 1997.  There is no
    evidence to substantiate this claim. The earliest documentary evidence
    produce by the Appellant  is from 2005."

     I pause to add there that that is a follow up appointment for a
    hospital visit.

     "I find that if the Appellant had come to the UK in 1997 as claimed by
    him that there would be some documentary evidence to support this claim
    prior to 2005.  I find that fact that there is not to be indicative of
    the fact that the Appellant  simply did not come to the UK in 19907 as
    claimed by him."

    21.  The Appellant, as indicated above, has produced one document
    relating to 2005, being a medical report.  There is no further evidence
    until 2008.  I am not satisfied based upon this document alone that the
    Appellant was continuously resident in the UK between 2005 and 2008
    particularly  noting his ability to enter the country without
    detection."

18. The burden was on the Appellant, that is a simple finding that he had
    not discharged the burden against him.  The Home Office have no record
    of his leaving the UK.  If he can enter the UK without detection it may
    well be that he can leave but the fact is no findings were necessary
    other than to find that the Appellant had not discharged the burden of
    proof.

19. The Judge went on with regard to the length of time that the Appellant
    had been  in the UK to note in paragraph 25 that:

    "The Appellant claims to have resided with other people and made
    friends since 2002 and yet none of the Appellant's friends attended
    court, prepared a witness statement or even wrote a letter of support
    of the Appellant's appeal and noting this in the light of my findings
    herein I find this to be further indicative of the fact that the
    Appellant has not resided in the UK since 1997 as claimed by him."

20. These were all findings that were open to the Judge who clearly
    considered the evidence overall.  He did not place undue weight on any
    one aspect over any other. He did not need to set out each and every
    discrepancy.  He has set out sufficient in the paragraphs I have
    referred to and was entitled to note that there were others.  It would
    be a tedious exercise if the Judge were to go through by rote each and
    every part of the evidence and then set out each and every discrepancy.
     He has to give sufficient reasons and in this determination the Judge
    did.

21. The Appellant's article 8 position, under paragraph 400 of the
    Immigration Rules, had to be decided against the Rules as they now
    stand.  With a finding that he had only been in the UK continuously
    from 2008 onwards the Appellant came nowhere near the new twenty year
    rule.  He could not produce evidence that he had lost ties and indeed
    the manner of his giving evidence clearly showed that he retains ties
    culturally to India.

22. The determination in conclusion contains no errors of law.  These were
    findings that the Judge was clearly entitled to make. They are properly
    made out, properly reasoned and supported by the evidence that was
    present and buttressed by the evidence that a Judge might have expected
    to have received but was not provided.

23. For all those reasons there is no error of law in this determination
    and the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen of the 28th
    February 2014 stands.



Signed                              Date 28th August 2014




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes


