

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/31709/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25th May 2017                         |  On 31st May 2017                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Adnan Younas
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lingam promulgated on  26  October  2016,  in  which  Mr
    Younas' appeal against the  decision  to  refuse  his  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis  of  long  residence  dated  10
    September 2015, was allowed.  For ease  I  continue  to  refer  to  the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, with Mr Younas  as
    the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born  on  26  June  1984,  who
    first entered the United Kingdom in 2004 with leave to enter and remain
    as a student.  The Appellant's leave to remain as such was extended for
    further periods up to 30 October 2014, albeit his leave to  remain  was
    curtailed to end on 28 July 2014.  On 8 August 2014, the Appellant made
    a further application for leave to remain as a Tier  4  student,  which
    was varied on 9 September 2014 to  be  an  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain on the basis of  10  years'  lawful  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 3. The Respondent refused the  application  on  10  September  2015  under
    paragraphs 276B(ii) and 322(2) of the Immigration Rules  on  the  basis
    that the Appellant had, in an earlier application for leave  to  remain
    as a student, submitted an English language test certificate  from  ETS
    which was false.  The  Respondent  referred  to  the  Appellant's  test
    scores having been cancelled by ETS and in reliance on generic  witness
    evidence about  such  fraudulent  tests  and  was  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant's certificate was fraudulently obtained and that he had  used
    deception in his application.  The Appellant's presence in  the  United
    Kingdom was not therefore considered conducive to the public  good  and
    it was undesirable to allow him to remain in the  United  Kingdom.   It
    was however accepted that for the purposes of paragraph 276B(i) of  the
    Immigration Rules, that the Appellant had resided continuously lawfully
    in the United Kingdom since 29 August 2004.

 4. Separately, the Respondent considered the Appellant's circumstances  on
    the basis of his private and family life established in United Kingdom.
     There was no suggestion that the Appellant had any family life in  the
    United Kingdom and leave to remain on the basis  of  private  life  was
    refused under paragraph 276ADE on the basis that  the  Appellant  would
    not face any very significant obstacles to his reintegration on  return
    to Pakistan.  There were no exceptional circumstances found to  warrant
    a grant of leave to remain outside of the Immigration Rules.

 5.  Judge  Lingam  allowed  the  appeal  on  26  October  2016  under  the
    Immigration Rules finding that the Respondent had  not  discharged  the
    legal burden of proof falling  on  her  that  the  Appellant  had  used
    deception in the previous application.  As such, the  refusal  was  not
    sustainable  under  paragraph  322(2)  or  paragraph  267B(ii)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Having regard to the public interest there were  no
    reasons adverse to the Appellant who  had  had  lawful  presence  since
    2004, had been following legitimate activity in the United Kingdom, had
    developed strong connections  in  the  United  Kingdom  from  his  long
    residence, was integrated in society, financially  self-sufficient  and
    had no law record or adverse history with the authorities.

The appeal

 6. The Appellant appeals on a single ground of appeal that the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons for the findings  made,  which
    were broken down into four specific complaints.  First,  no  sufficient
    reasons were given as to why the Appellant's  evidence  amounted  to  a
    plausible innocent explanation in  relation  to  his  English  language
    test.  Secondly, there was an over reliance on the Appellant's  English
    language ability contrary to the Upper Tribunal's findings in MA (ETS -
    TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 00450 (IAC) and a failure to  consider  that
    there were many reasons why a  person  may  use  a  proxy  test  taker.
    Thirdly, that the First-tier Tribunal had failed  to  engage  with  the
    expert report of Prof French submitted by the Respondent, which  should
    have been given greater weight than that of the evidence of Dr Harrison
    because  it  was  more  up-to-date,   included   additional   technical
    information not available for the  previous  report  and  because  Prof
    French was more senior.  Finally, the First-tier Tribunal  relied  upon
    an  unreported  determination  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  contrary   to
    paragraph 11 of the Practice Directions.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Parks on 21 April 2017 on all
    grounds, with an extension of time  also  been  granted  for  the  late
    application for permission to appeal.

 8. At the hearing, the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  relied  on  the
    written grounds of appeal with an  emphasis  on  the  failure  to  give
    reasons, particularly on  the  issue  of  whether  the  Respondent  had
    satisfied the burden of proof.  It had been specifically  held  in  the
    cases of SM & Qadir v Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS -
    Evidence -  Burden  of  Proof)  [2016]  UKUT  00229  (IAC),  Shehzad  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 615  and  MA
    that  the  generic  evidence  relied  upon  by  the  Respondent   about
    invalidity of  ETS  tests  was  sufficient  to  discharge  the  initial
    evidential burden on the Respondent in cases such as the  present  one.
    The burden of proof is then on the Appellant  to  provide  an  innocent
    explanation which meets the minimum level of plausibility and  only  if
    that is done does the burden revert back to the Respondent for  her  to
    establish, on the balance of probabilities, that the Appellant's  prima
    facie innocent explanation is to be rejected.

 9. It was submitted in the present case that the Appellant had  failed  to
    give such an innocent explanation and that judge Lingam had placed  too
    much weight on the Appellant's English language ability at the  hearing
    before her without consideration of any of  the  other  reasons  why  a
    proxy test taker may be used.  It was notable in this case  that  there
    was no evidence supporting the Appellant's  explanation,  for  example,
    nothing from ETS or from the college where the test was  said  to  have
    been taken.

10. Separately, it was an error of law for Judge Lingam not to engage  with
    the report of Prof French, dismissing it on the basis that he  had  not
    attended as a witness to give live evidence, in circumstances where  it
    was impractical for him to be expected to do  so  in  every  First-tier
    Tribunal appeal.  There were in any event other reasons why that report
    should have been given more weight.

11. In response, Counsel for the  Appellant  submitted  that  Judge  Lingam
    properly applied the process set out in Shen  (Paper  Appeals:  Proving
    Dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 236 (IAC), firstly by considering  whether  the
    Respondent  had  met  the  initial  evidential  burden,   secondly   by
    considering whether the Appellant had  given  an  innocent  explanation
    with the minimum level of plausibility and finally considering  whether
    the Respondent had  discharged  legal  burden  of  proof  to  establish
    deception in this case.  Findings were made in paragraph 29 onwards  of
    the  decision  as  to  the  Appellant's  educational  background,   his
    interviews in English in connection with immigration matters in the pas
    and, qualifications obtained in the English language which consistently
    showed his ability (even though some post-dated the test which had been
    validated in this case).  It was clear that Judge Lingam did  not  rely
    solely on the  Appellant's  English  language  ability  at  the  appeal
    hearing but found for a number of reasons that he had no reason to  use
    a proxy test taker or cheat in this  case.   The  Appellant's  detailed
    evidence of taking his test and collecting the results was set out  and
    accepted, which was an innocent explanation and a  sufficient  one  for
    the burden of proof to revert back to the Respondent.

12. With regard to the report of Prof French,  that  was  provided  to  the
    Appellant only shortly before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  with
    little opportunity  given  for  the  Appellant  to  consider  it.   The
    Respondent was not represented  at  that  hearing  and  there  were  no
    submissions from form her about  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the
    report, nor whether it provided a sufficient basis to depart  from  the
    findings in the reported decision of SM &  Qadir.   In  any  event,  in
    paragraph 26 of the  decision,  reasons  were  given  as  to  why  Prof
    French's report was not given significant weight, which  included  that
    not all of the question and responses which are relevant  to  the  port
    had been made available which meant that  it  lacked  context  and  the
    report itself showed that there was still  a  false  positive  rate  in
    cases,  albeit  a  smaller  percentage  than  thought  by  Dr  Harrison
    previously.   Whether  or  not  it  would  be  impracticable  for   the
    Respondent to make Prof  French  available  in  every  appeal  tribunal
    hearing in which his report was relied  upon,  that  was  a  matter  of
    choice for the Respondent.  If an expert provides evidence that  is  to
    be assessed in court, that witness should be made available for  cross-
    examination and in the absence of that  process  it  is  difficult  for
    greater weight to be attached to the evidence.

13. Finally, in relation  to  the  unreported  decision,  contrary  to  the
    grounds of appeal that the First-tier Tribunal had relied upon  it,  it
    is clear from the decision that it was not treated as binding and  that
    in  any  event  Judge  Lingam  had  come  to   the   same   conclusions
    independently of it.

Findings and reasons

14. I do not find any material error of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision in this appeal for the reasons set out  below.   Although  the
    three stages for the burden of proof set out in Shen were not expressly
    set  out  Judge  Lingam,  it  is  clear  from  the  structure  of   her
    determination that that process was followed.  In paragraphs 20  to  25
    and 28 of the  decision,  Judge  Lingam  deals  with  the  Respondent's
    generic evidence and that specific to the Appellant in which  his  test
    scores were invalidated, making reference  to  the  findings  in  SM  &
    Qadir.  Although it is not expressly found that the Respondent had  met
    the initial evidential burden with this evidence, it is clear that that
    was accepted by reference to the case law relied upon and  because  the
    decision went on to consider the explanation given by the Appellant.

15. The Appellant's explanation  and  findings  that  it  was  a  plausible
    innocent one, are  set out in paragraphs 29 to 31.  The reasons include
    his educational background, consistent  English  language  ability  and
    qualifications as well as his evidence as to taking the test itself and
    collecting the results.  The Appellant's evidence in  that  regard  was
    unchallenged by the Respondent, who was not represented at the  hearing
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Contrary   to   the   Respondent's
    submissions, it is clear from the range of reasons given that there was
    not sole reliance on the Appellant's English language  ability  at  the
    hearing but  that  his  consistent  ability  was  demonstrated  through
    interviews and qualifications before as well as after  the  2012  test.
    These were just one part of the consideration as to whether an innocent
    explanation had been given.  There is nothing contrary and the findings
    by Judge Lingam to those in MA that there are a range of reasons why an
    individual may use a proxy test taker.

16. On any legitimate view, the explanation given by this Appellant in  the
    context of his background  was  an  innocent  explanation  meeting  the
    minimum level of plausibility such that the burden of proof reverted to
    the Respondent.  This is dealt with  in  paragraph  32  to  35  of  the
    decision with an express finding that the legal burden of proof falling
    on the Respondent has not been discharged for the same reasons set  out
    by the Upper Tribunal in SM & Qadir.

17. Judge lingam set out her findings on  the  report  of  Prof  French  in
    paragraph 26 and 27 of the decision, noting that it  remained  accepted
    by Prof French that there were falso positives in the assessment of the
    ETS tests but at a lower rate than previously  thought.   The  evidence
    had not been tested in court and there were no submissions  as  to  why
    the report should be given greater  weight  than  the  findings  in  Dr
    Harrison's report which had been  tested  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    These are sustainable, lawful reasons for finding that  the  report  of
    Prof French did  not  affect  the  conclusions  reached  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in SM & Qadir which were relied upon in  the  present  appeal.
    Given the acceptance by Prof French of false positives, it is difficult
    to see how ultimately his evidence could have done  so  even  if  given
    greater weight, as it is clear  that  there  will  be  cases  where  an
    individual's test results have been invalidated wrongly.

18. The final burden of proof on the Respondent  is  to  establish  on  the
    balance of probabilities  that  an  appellant's  prima  facie  innocent
    explanation is to be rejected.  It is clear that Prof  French's  report
    was not specific to this Appellant and could give no rational basis  on
    which is innocent explanation could be rejected.  There was no  further
    evidence from the Respondent specific to this  Appellant  to  discharge
    the burden of proof in this case and  there  is  no  error  of  law  in
    relying on the findings in SM & Qadir to the effect  that  the  generic
    evidence was  not  sufficient  for  that  purpose  either.   For  these
    reasons, there were  no  material  errors  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision in finding that the Appellant had given an innocent
    explanation and the Respondent had not discharged the legal  burden  of
    proving deception in this case.

19. Finally, there is nothing in the point about reliance on an  unreported
    determination in the final ground of appeal.  It is clear on  the  face
    of the decision that Judge Lingam did not consider it binding nor  rely
    on it, but instead expressly stated that she independently  arrived  at
    the same view.  Not only is the ground not made out on the face of  the
    decision itself, in light of  the  above  it  could  not  have  been  a
    material error of law in any event.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such is not necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

The decision to allow the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]                  Date         26th May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


