
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31206/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2017                            |On 18 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Meah Md Omar Faruq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Aslam of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. I shall refer to the Secretary of  State  as  such
    throughout and to Mr Faruq as the claimant to avoid confusion.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 27  January  1985.   He
    came to the United Kingdom on 9 February 2009 with leave as  a  student
    valid until 1 April 2012.  He subsequently applied for an extension  of
    leave in 2012 which was granted to 11 April 2014.  On 24  January  2014
    he applied for further Tier 4 Student leave.  The  Secretary  of  State
    refused his application on the basis that the results  of  the  English
    language test that he had undertaken  on  21  February  2012  had  been
    obtained fraudulently.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal


 3. The claimant appealed against the Secretary of State's decision to  the
    First-tier Tribunal. In a decision promulgated on 14 March 2017  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge M R Oliver  allowed  the  claimant's  appeal.   The
    First-tier Tribunal found that the claimant did not employ fraud.

 4. The Secretary of State applied for permission  to  appeal  against  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision and  on  20  September  2017  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Doyle granted permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 5. The grounds of appeal are  that  the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasoning as  to  how  the  claimant  had  addressed  the  respondent's
    allegation of fraud with a  plausible,  innocent  explanation.   It  is
    asserted that the judge  relied  on  the  claimant's  English  language
    ability.  As such the Tribunal was satisfied that it  was  entitled  to
    take this into account in determining whether the claimant had met  the
    evidential burden in this case.  The judge placed weight  on  the  fact
    that the claimant  was  able  to  recall  details  of  the  examination
    process, however, this does not mean that the claimant personally  took
    the test.  Reference is made to the BBC Panorama programme which showed
    students standing next to terminals while proxy test  takers  took  the
    test for them.  The judge does not refer to having seen  this  evidence
    which was provided on DVD to every hearing  centre  and  therefore  the
    judge may not be aware of the methods used which would not preclude the
    candidates  from  having  travelled  to  the  test  centre  and  having
    knowledge of the procedures and content of the test itself even  though
    they had not taken it personally.

 6. It is asserted that the First-tier Tribunal  has  materially  erred  by
    failing to give adequate reasons for holding that a person  who  speaks
    English would have no reason to secure a test certificate by deception.
     Reliance is placed on the case of MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT
    00450 ('MA'), in particular paragraph 57.  The fact that a  person  can
    speak English  and  has  passed  various  tests  in  English  does  not
    determine the issue.  As found in MA there  may  be  many  reasons  why
    persons proficient in English may engage in TOEIC fraud including  lack
    of confidence, fear  of  failure,  lack  of  time  and  commitment  and
    contempt for the immigration system.  The evidential burden  fell  upon
    the claimant to offer an innocent explanation which he  has  failed  to
    do.

 7. In oral submissions Mr Mills  submitted  that  the  judge  allowed  the
    appeal purely on the basis that the claimant could  speak  English  and
    had passed  several  tests  and  exams  in  English.   He  referred  to
    paragraph 5 of the decision where the judge  specifically  states  that
    the law is settled.  However, it is clear that the Secretary  of  State
    since the case was set out i.e. SM and Qadir v SSHD (ETS -  Evidence  -
    ETS - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229, SSHD v Shahzad Chaudhury [2016]
    EWCA Civ 615, MA (ETS TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 450 and  MA   has  now
    developed further evidence in support of its  position.   He  submitted
    that the judge's reasoning was entirely based  on  the  fact  that  the
    claimant spoke English fluently and does  not  take  into  account  the
    powerful evidence of the Secretary of State regarding the invalid tests
    and the use of a proxy.  No account has been taken of paragraph  57  of
    MA where the court set out that even though an claimant speaks  English
    there may be evidence that he did not take the test and that  he  might
    have cheated even though he is able to speak English.

 8. Mr Aslam submitted that the judge has correctly set out the steps  that
    need to be taken in paragraph 5 of the decision and correctly says that
    the Secretary of State has discharged the evidential burden and that it
    is for the claimant to give an innocent explanation.   The  judge  does
    demonstrate that he looked at and considered the innocent  explanation.
    At paragraph 2 the judge refers to the claimant's witness statement and
    records why he took the TOEIC test.  At paragraph 3 the  judge  records
    the evidence of the IELTS test and why he no longer retains that  test.
    He described the evidence of the claimant regarding attendance  at  the
    centre.  In paragraph 7 of the decision he  submitted  that  the  first
    sentence is referring to the innocent explanation set out by the  judge
    at paragraphs 2 and 3.  The second sentence of that  paragraph  repeats
    the evidence set out in paragraph 3 regarding  the  IELTS  certificate.
    He submitted these were positive findings and that  the  judge  clearly
    accepted his explanation that he had taken the  test.  The  judge  took
    into account was the fact that he took the test in 2014 and  that  this
    was not disputed.  The judge clearly had no difficulty in understanding
    the claimant during the hearing.  On the basis of the four parts of the
    innocent explanation the claimant had satisfied the legal burden.   The
    Secretary of State's assertion that the sole basis that the appeal  was
    allowed was that the claimant can  speak  English  is  incorrect.   The
    judge took into account the claimant's witness statement where  he  set
    out in detail why he took the test at this centre and how much he  paid
    etc.  The reference to the BBC Panorama programme is  not  relevant  as
    that only goes to the evidential burden and the judge  found  that  the
    Secretary of State had satisfied the evidential burden.

 9. In reply Mr Mills submitted that nothing else was  taken  into  account
    other than the ability to speak English in paragraph 7.



Discussion

10. The judge in this case correctly  set  out  at  paragraph  5  that  the
    Secretary of State must satisfy an evidential burden showing sufficient
    evidence of a reasonable suspicion of deception and then it is for  the
    claimant to satisfy the legal burden of showing that deception was  not
    used.  The judge found that the Secretary of State  had  satisfied  the
    evidential burden by submitting the finding that his test results  from
    21 February 2012 had been found to be  invalid  using  the  methodology
    outlined in the various witness statements submitted by the respondent.
     The judge correctly identified the relevant question which  is  -  has
    the claimant satisfied the  judge  that  he  genuinely  took  the  test
    himself rather than using a proxy taker?

11. The judge did set out at  paragraphs  2  and  3  the  evidence  of  the
    claimant including his description of the day of the examination but no
    analysis of that evidence or specific findings are made.  At  no  point
    does the judge make a finding on the essential issue that  he  had  set
    out which is whether the  claimant  genuinely  took  the  test  himself
    rather than using a proxy taker.  The findings that the judge made  are
    set out in one paragraph - 7:

         "7.  Apart  from  this  allegation  against  him,  the  appellant's
             immigration and education history has been wholly  meritorious
             and successful.  The  appellant's  representative  overstepped
             his role by asserting that  the  British  High  Commission  in
             Bangladesh supplied the only IELTS testing, an assertion which
             I nevertheless find to be plausible.  No suggestion  has  been
             made that  the  creditable  5.5  score  he  achieved  on  that
             occasion before coming in 2009 was not a genuine reflection of
             his English speaking abilities at that early  stage.   In  the
             United Kingdom he has taken a number of courses, all taught in
             English, and has passed them  all.   His  exposure  to  fluent
             English and his likely consequent improvement in  English  has
             been demonstrated by the subsequent  IELTS  test  he  took  in
             2014.  The results for his questionable test are in line  with
             his demonstrated abilities.  I had no difficulty understanding
             the appellant and he was able to respond promptly to  all  the
             questions he was asked during the  hearing.   He  cannot  have
             felt that  he  had  any  need  to  use  fraud  to  obtain  the
             certificate.  I find that he did not employ fraud."

12. The judge has not addressed the issues  set  out  in  MA  and  has  not
    considered that  despite  the  proficiency  in  English  a  person  may
    nevertheless may engage in TOEIC fraud. As set out in MA there  may  be
    many reasons, despite English proficiency, why a person might engage in
    TOEIC fraud:

         (57) Second, we acknowledge the suggestion that the  Appellant  had
         no reason to engage in the deception which we  have  found  proven.
         However, this has not deflected us in any  way  from  reaching  our
         main findings and conclusions. In the abstract, of course, there is
         a range of reasons why persons proficient in English may engage  in
         TOEIC fraud. These include,  inexhaustively,  lack  of  confidence,
         fear of failure, lack of time and commitment and contempt  for  the
         immigration system. These  reasons  could  conceivably  overlap  in
         individual cases and there is  scope  for  other  explanations  for
         deceitful conduct in this sphere. We are not required to  make  the
         further finding of why the Appellant engaged in  deception  and  to
         this we add that this issue was not explored during the hearing. We
         resist any temptation to speculate about this discrete matter.

13. The judge has not undertaken an analysis of  the  appellant's  evidence
    against the background of the information provided by the Secretary  of
    State including the evidence of the BBC Panorama programme.  The  judge
    appears to have relied solely on the fact that because the claimant was
    proficient in the English language and had passed an  IELTS  test  that
    the  claimant  could  have  no  reason  to  use  fraud  to  obtain  the
    certificate. The judge  has  failed  to  consider  that  there  may  be
    reasons, despite proficiency in English, to use a proxy.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law such that it should be set aside pursuant to  section  12(2)(a)  of
    the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

15. I considered whether or not I could  re-make  the  decision  myself.  I
    considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings. I
    am satisfied that the nature and extent of judicial fact  finding  that
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such, having regard to the overriding objective, that it is appropriate
    to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

16. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case to be heard at
    the First-tier Tribunal  at Taylor House before any judge   other  than
    Judge M R Oliver  pursuant to section  12(2)(b)  and  12(3)(a)  of  the
    TCEA. A new hearing will be fixed at the next available date.

17. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed. The  case  is  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal for a de-novo hearing before any  judge  other  than
Judge M R Oliver.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 16/1/18

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

