
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31622/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 September 2014                          |On 2 October 2014            |


                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ROBERTSON


                                   Between
                               QAISER RASHEED
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Bhachu, Counsel, instructed by JM Wilson,
                    Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Immigration History

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan, whose date of birth is  18
    September 1989. His appeal against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent,
    dated 10 July 2013, to refuse his application for leave  to  remain  on
    the basis of his private and family life was  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Narayan, the reasons for which are contained within  his
    determination dated 18 November 2013.

 2. The Appellant came to the UK on 31 January 2011 on a student visa  with
    leave to remain until 27 March 2012. He was granted  further  leave  to
    remain as a student until 30 June 2013 and  made  his  application  for
    leave to remain on the basis of his private and family life on  4  June
    2013. He married Miss Waller (the Sponsor) on 11 March 2013 [89].  Miss
    Waller has six children; the Appellant is not their  biological  father
    but it was claimed before  Judge  Narayan  that  the  Appellant  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with the Sponsor and her  children,
    that he was part of the family unit and interacted with them on  a  day
    to day basis.

 3. The Judge found that the  relationship  between  the  Sponsor  and  the
    Appellant was not genuine and subsisting [101]. He dismissed the appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and found that there was no need  to  apply
    Article 8 directly because arguably good grounds for so doing were  not
    established. He relied on Gulshan (Article 8  -  new  rules  -  correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).

 4. In the grounds of application, in essence, it is stated  on  behalf  of
    the Appellant that the Judge erred in failing to consider the rights of
    the Appellant's children under Article 8 and effectively deprived  them
    of the right to have their best interests assessed under S  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. It is submitted that  it
    is a '"perversity to rely on Nagre and Gulshan "good reasons" to  avoid
    a substantive Article 8 analysis" where the evidence  of  the  children
    and Miss Waller has been accepted.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein, who
    stated that "The principal finding of fact made by the judge  was  that
    he did not find that there was a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    between the appellant and the sponsor and gave a number of reasons  for
    reaching that view. However, it is arguable that the findings  made  do
    not sit well with other findings made in relation to  the  evidence  of
    the children and no consideration was given to their interests."


 6. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response in which it is  submitted  that
    the Judge directed himself appropriately, that he took into account the
    evidence of the Appellant and her children and that  there  was  "...no
    error in his handling of this evidence on the basis that he effectively
    considers that children (sic) and the  appellant's  partner  have  been
    duped (paragraph 105)".

Submissions

 7. Miss Bhachu amplified the grounds  of  application,  stating  that  the
    salient points were that the children were present to give evidence but
    were not cross-examined [81], their evidence was accepted  in  relation
    to their interactions with the Appellant [81], that they  did  not  see
    their fathers [27], they had a good  relationship  with  the  Appellant
    [37], the Appellant had been living within the  family  unit  since  25
    March 2013 [90] and therefore would have been living with the children.
    She submitted that  at  paragraph  [99]  the  Judge  made  inconsistent
    findings because he accepted  the  evidence  of  Miss  Waller  and  the
    children and found that they viewed the  relationship  as  genuine  but
    decided at [105] that the relationship was not genuine.

 8. She further submitted that the Judge then failed to consider  the  best
    interests of the children under  s  55,  which  had  to  be  considered
    regardless of whether an Article 8 assessment was conducted,  and  that
    ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4  and  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) applied.  She
    also submitted that s 117(b)(6) of the Immigration Act 2014, which came
    into force on 28 July 2014, required the best interests of the children
    to be taken into account in  an  assessment  of  proportionality  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

 9. Mr Mills submitted  that  the  presenting  officer  at  the  first-tier
    Tribunal hearing did not  cross-examine  the  children,  there  was  no
    dispute as to their evidence, but a failure to cross-examine could  not
    be taken as an acceptance that what was  said  in  their  evidence  was
    true. He pointed out that the presenting  officer  had  submitted  that
    there were two views that could be taken  of  the  evidence;  that  is,
    either the Appellant and the Sponsor are friends who are trying to help
    each other out or that the Sponsor is genuine and the Appellant is  not
    [50].  The Judge took the view that the Appellant was not  genuine  and
    was duping the Sponsor. As the relationship with  the  Sponsor  is  not
    genuine, the relationship with the Sponsor's children  is  not  genuine
    either; there was no  basis  for  drawing  a  distinction  between  the
    relationship between the Appellant and the Sponsor  and  the  Appellant
    and the Sponsor's children.  If  the  Judge  had  considered  the  best
    interests of the children expressly, what was to be said  but  that  it
    was not in their best interests? That is the finding the Judge made.

10. Mr Mills also submitted that the Judge considered Article 8 at  [97]  -
    [104];   the   Appellant    could    not    meet    the    Rules    and
    compelling/exceptional circumstances must be  established  to  consider
    the application outside the rules. The Judge had in mind  the  children
    of the Appellant and did not accept that those amounted  to  compelling
    circumstances. He submitted that even if the Judge had expressly stated
    that he had considered the best interests of the children, it would not
    have made a material difference to the outcome.

11. In relation to paragraph 117(b)(6) of the 2014 Act, Mr Mills  submitted
    that this came into force on 28 July 2014 but the  decision  was  dated
    February 2013 and the provisions of that Act did  not  apply  unless  I
    found that there was a material error of law, in which case they  would
    be relevant to any future decision.

12. In reply, Miss Bhachu submitted that the Respondent's position is based
    on speculation; the Judge did not state that the  relationship  between
    the Appellant and the Sponsor' children was not genuine.  Referring  to
    the evidence before the Judge, Miss Bhachu submitted that the Judge  in
    fact found the opposite, that is, that there was  a  bond  between  the
    Sponsor's children and the Appellant, and  if  an  error  of  law  were
    found, this would materially affect the s 55 assessment.

Decision and reasons

13. Much of the basis of the Judge's decision hangs on his primary findings
    as to the nature of the relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor and the credibility of the  Appellant.  There  was  no  dispute
    before  me  as  to  the  finding  made  by  the  Judge  regarding   the
    relationship between the Appellant and the Sponsor; no submissions were
    made in relation to this in either the grounds of application or in the
    submissions before me. For the avoidance of doubt, the Judge's  finding
    that their relationship was not genuine was based on  his  findings  at
    [85] - [90]. These findings were reasonably open to him on the evidence
    before him.  The  Judge,  throughout  his  determination,  made  strong
    adverse credibility findings against the Appellant. He found  that  the
    Appellant was "prepared to give evidence which he  thinks  will  assist
    him regardless of whether it be true or not" [87] and "To give evidence
    which he thinks will assist him claim  (sic)  to  stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom regardless of whether  it  be  true  or  not"  [88].   In  this
    context, the Judge found that the Sponsor considered  the  relationship
    to be genuine but the Appellant was not genuine. See also [95 and  99].
    In the context of the findings on credibility,  it  can  be  seen  that
    there were specific issues in relation to which  the  evidence  of  the
    Sponsor was also not accepted by the Judge [89].

14. The Judge was well aware  of  the  evidence  of  the  Sponsor  and  her
    children as to the Appellant's interactions  with  the  children.  This
    evidence was accepted by the Judge.  Miss  Bhachu  submitted  that  the
    Judge should have put more weight on this evidence. However, the matter
    of weight is for the Judge. At no point does the Judge  find  that  the
    relationship between  the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor's  children  is
    genuine or that there was a bond between the Sponsor's children and the
    Appellant, despite his having accepted the evidence of the Sponsor  and
    her children at as to their interactions with the Appellant [81] and it
    would be difficult to see  how  he  could  find  that  the  Appellant's
    relationship with the children was genuine and subsisting  in  view  of
    his findings on the credibility of the Appellant.  The  fact  that  the
    children provided witness statements regarding their relationship  with
    the  Appellant,  which  was  indicative  of  how  they   viewed   their
    relationship with him, did not mean that the  Appellant  was  with  the
    family and interacted with the children for any reason  other  than  to
    further his application for leave to  remain  in  the  context  of  the
    Judge's findings on credibility.

15. As to the need to consider the best interests of the children  under  s
    55 as a standalone issue, the failure by the Judge to  expressly  refer
    to s 55 is not an error of law (AJ  (India)  v  SSHD  [2011]  EWCA  Civ
    1191). The thoughts and wishes of the children were expressed in  their
    statements, as were details of their interactions with him.  The  Judge
    accepted their evidence; he had regard to it. The weight he  placed  on
    their evidence, in the context  of  the  credibility  findings,  was  a
    matter for him. He found that the nature of their relationship with the
    Appellant was insufficient to engage Article 8, bearing  in  mind  that
    they had lived for many years without the Appellant, as a  family  unit
    with their mother and there was no evidence before the Judge that their
    physical and moral integrity would be compromised if the Appellant were
    required to leave the UK. Whilst the Judge could  have  structured  his
    determination better, from the findings made by him it can be  inferred
    that it is not in the best interests of children for someone  to  enter
    into a relationship with them simply  to  further  an  application  for
    leave to remain.  I  find  that  that  no  material  error  of  law  is
    disclosed.

16. Finally, as to the submission that the Judge could not use  Gulshan  to
    avoid the need to carry out an Article 8 assessment, whilst  there  are
    structural difficulties with the determination, these do not impact  on
    the outcome of the case. The need to consider family relationships  not
    sufficiently recognised under the Immigration Rules would only arise if
    the relationships  were  genuine  on  the  part  of  all  parties.  The
    Appellant's lack of credibility precluded the need to consider  Article
    8 on the basis of family life because it was not engaged on  the  basis
    of family life with the Sponsor and her children. As to  private  life,
    the Appellant was in the UK as a student and was at all times in the UK
    on a temporary basis. A  private  life  built  in  these  circumstances
    cannot result in a successful Article 8 claim (Patel [2013] UKSC 72 and
    Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC)). His bid to stay  in
    the UK by entering into a relationship to secure  this  aim  could  not
    strengthen an Article 8 claim.  He no longer had leave to remain  under
    the Immigration Rules  and  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  him  from
    resuming his private  life  in  Pakistan.  Article  8  was  simply  not
    engaged.

Decision


17. The decision of Judge Narayan discloses no material errors of  law  and
    his decision must therefore stand.


Anonymity

18. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  No
    request has been made for an anonymity order and pursuant to Rule 14 of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I find no reason  to
    make an order.






Signed                                  Date


M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT


     In light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee award
(Rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
2005 and section 12(4) (a) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note: Fee Awards in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011). As the appeal has been dismissed,
Judge Narayan's fee award is confirmed.




Signed                          Dated

M Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
