
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31822/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 13 August 2015                     |                   On 19 August 2015  |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr Randolph Adjei Donkor
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In Person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The  appellant  in  this  case  is  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the
    respondent  is  Mr  Randolph  Adjei  Donkor.   I  shall  refer  to  the
    respondent as the appellant as he was before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    He is a citizen of Ghana and his date of birth is 10  April  1974.   He
    has three family members who are dependent on  his  appeal.   They  are
    also citizens of Ghana.  They are his partner, Juliana Asare  (date  of
    birth 28 February 1981) and their two children, Nicholas Adjei (date of
    birth 26 March 2006) and Stephen Adjei (date of birth 10 August  2009).
    Both children were born here and have lived here all their lives.

2.   The appellant made an application for leave to remain  in  the  UK  and
    that application was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision of
    24 July 2014.  The appellant appealed and his appeal was allowed  under
    Article 8 by Designated Judge Taylor in a decision that was promulgated
    on 12  January  2015.     Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  to  the
    Secretary of State on 20 February 2015.

3.   The appellant came to the UK initially as  a  student  on  4  September
    2002. He made a number of successful applications for  leave  following
    this until 31 July 2009.  His last application for leave to remain as a
    student in 2009 was refused and his appeal was dismissed  by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Beech and he became appeal rights exhausted  on
    21 July 2010.  The appellant's partner, Juliana Asare, came to  the  UK
    on 7 December 2001 as a visitor.  She has since overstayed.

4.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  heard  evidence  from  Mr  Sammy  Duah,  the
    appellant and Ms Juliana Asare and he accepted the evidence finding the
    appellant and the witnesses to be credible.

5.   The first ground of appeal maintains that the judge failed to  properly
    apply  the  guidance  in  Devaseelan  (Second  Appeals  -  ECHR  -Extra
    Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka [2002] UKAIT 00702 relating to a previous
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Beech in 2009.  Judge Taylor
    made  credibility  findings  at  paragraphs  29,  30  and  31  of   the
    determination.  In relation  to  the  Devaseelan  point  he  stated  as
    follows at paragraph 31:

         "I  have  also  taken  note,  as  a   starting   point   (following
         Devaseelan), of the decision of Immigration Judge Beech promulgated
         on 11 December 2009 when he dismissed the  appellant's  claims  for
         further leave to remain as a student and in respect of  Article  8.
         But Judge Beech's  dismissal  of  human  rights  was  cursory  and,
         indeed, at paragraph 22 of his determination he stated that  'human
         rights were not raised by the appellant'.  This present case  being
         based entirely on human rights issues I am satisfied that I do  not
         need to consider that aspect  of  Judge  Beech's  decision.   Judge
         Beech based his decision on the technical evidence that was  before
         him in relation to the student leave application and I am satisfied
         that there is nothing of substance in that decision  which,  today,
         needs even to be taken as a starting point."

6.   From the Record of Proceedings it is clear that the Presenting  Officer
    before Judge Taylor raised Devaseelan and submitted that it applied  in
    this case because the appellant had not raised Human  Rights  based  on
    family life before Judge Beech in 2009 whilst his evidence before Judge
    Taylor was that in 2009 he was  enjoying  family  life  here  with  his
    partner and at least their eldest child.

7.   Judge Beech's decision was based on a technicality.  She did  not  make
    any adverse credibility findings.  In fact she accepted the appellant's
    evidence but he was not able to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  then
    Immigration Rules relating to students. The fact is  that  that  appeal
    before Judge Beech was under the Immigration Rules, as they then  were,
    relating to students. There was no obligation on the appellant at  that
    time to raise  an  Article  8  claim.   I  do  not  consider  that  the
    Devaseelan principle  bites  here  because  the  appellant's  wife  and
    children were not relevant to the issues before the Judge  Beech.    In
    any event, the evidence that the appellant and his partner are together
    and that they have two children together and as such they are a  family
    unit was at no time challenged by the Secretary of State at the hearing
    before Judge Taylor.  The issue is what weight Judge Taylor should have
    placed on the fact that the appellant did not appeal  on  Human  Rights
    grounds in 2009.  It is clear from the determination that  he  did  not
    consider that the matter was significant and he gave  adequate  reasons
    explaining why he accepted the appellant's evidence.  In any event, the
    appeal was allowed on the basis of the appellant's eldest child and  in
    my view did not turn wholly on credibility. There is no merit in ground
    1.

8.   I will turn now to ground 2.  The judge allowed the appellant's  appeal
    under Article 8. The  judge  concluded  that  appellant's  eldest  son,
    Nicholas, who was aged 8 at the  hearing  before  the  judge,  met  the
    requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  (1)  (iv)  because  it  would   be
    unreasonable to expect him to leave the UK  (see  [35]).  There  is  no
    specific challenge to this finding in the grounds.  The child  was  not
    an appellant, but the judge's decision to allow their  father's  appeal
    under article 8, must be considered in the context of the fact that his
    removal would result in removal of the whole family, and in regards  to
    Nicholas, this would be contrary to the Secretary of State's own rules.



9.     The  grounds  challenge  the  judge's   findings   in   relation   to
    reasonableness in the context of section 117B (6) of the 2002 Act.   It
    is the same test as that in  267ADE  (1)  (iv)  and  had  already  been
    answered in relation to the eldest child. The issue is whether  or  not
    the question was answered by the judge in the proper context of whether
    it would be  reasonable  to  expect  Nicholas  to  follow  his  parents
    (because they had no right to remain to their country of origin (see AM
    (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260  (IAC).  The  judge  properly  directed
    himself in relation to section 117B of the 2002 at paragraph 38  and  I
    am satisfied that he  properly  factored  it  into  the  assessment  of
    reasonableness and proportionality. He  focused  primarily  on  section
    117B (6), but as reasonableness in this context  was  determinative  of
    the appeal, he cannot be criticised for this.

10.      Seven years is a significant period of time as  recognised  in  the
    Immigration Rules, case law and now primary legislation. The judge gave
    adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  removal  of  Nicholas  would  be
    unreasonable and I refer specifically to paragraph 39 (iv),  (v),  (vi)
    and (vii).  The judge found that Nicholas  had  a  private  life  which
    extended outside his immediate family unit and removal of both children
    from school would disrupt their lives with potentially serious  adverse
    affect.  These findings are not challenged in the  grounds  which  were
    not expanded upon by Mr Walker.

11.    I accept that the decision  is  generous  and  it  is  possible  that
    another judge may have lawfully concluded that removal of both children
    would be reasonable; nevertheless, it was open to Judge Taylor to allow
    the appeal on the evidence before him.  He made adequate findings which
    are grounded in the evidence.  The grounds  amount  to  a  disagreement
    with these findings and do not disclose an error of law.



Notice of Decision

For the above reasons the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed  and
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 14 August 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

