
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31025/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 1st June, 2017 and               |On 10th July 2017                       |
|Sent to Promulgation                |                                        |
|On 10th June 2017                   |                                        |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                              mr thomas adomako
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss J Bond of Counsel instructed by Irving & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Ghana, who was born  on  25th  February,
    1966 and who first arrived in the United Kingdom as a  visitor  on  7th
    December, 1991.  He made a claim for asylum which was  refused  and  in
    2003 he made  a  further  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  long
    residence grounds.  The respondent appears to  have  acknowledged  this
    application  on  30th  June,  2003,  but  made  no  decision  on   that
    application.

2.   The appellant then made a further application for leave  to  remain  on
    15th May, 2012, but this application was refused on 23rd January, 2014,
    with no right  of  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State  indicated  that
    documents submitted by the appellant did not cover the period from 1999
    to 2004 and  the  respondent  was  not  therefore  satisfied  that  the
    appellant met the requirements of paragraph  276A4  with  reference  to
    paragraph 276A1 and 276B(i)(b) of Statement of Changes  in  Immigration
    Rules, HC 395, as amended ("immigration rules").

3.   The  appellant  instructed  solicitors  to  write  pre-action  judicial
    review protocol letters to the respondent and on 30th September,  2014,
    the Secretary of State again refused the  appellant's  application  and
    indicated that the appellant had no right  of  appeal.   The  appellant
    commenced judicial  review  proceedings,  but  those  proceedings  were
    settled by agreement on the Secretary of State agreeing to make a fresh
    decision within three months.  A  further  decision  was  made  on  8th
    September, 2015, but unfortunately that  too  refused  the  appellant's
    application and the appellant gave Notice of Appeal.

4.   The appellant's grounds were that the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules and that he  had
    met the requirements of paragraph 276B of the immigration rules  as  he
    had accrued fourteen years' unlawful residence in the  United  Kingdom.
    They also asserted that the  appellant's  Article  8  rights  would  be
    breached, given the length of time that he  had  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

5.   The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Gribble
    at  Birmingham  on  25th  July,  2016.   At   paragraph   21   of   her
    determination, the judge said this:-

     "The appellant  has  no  right  of  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules are met.  His right of appeal
         is solely on the ground that the decision breaches his rights under
         the Human Rights Act.  I am satisfied that his  long  residence  in
         the  UK  provides  a   sufficiently   compelling   or   exceptional
         circumstance to warrant consideration of the case directly  through
         the test laid down in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27."

6.    Having  considered  the  appellant's  Article  8  rights,  the   judge
    concluded that the public interest in maintaining effective immigration
    control, weighty as it was, was outweighed by factors in favour of  the
    appellant and  that  the  decision  of  the  respondent  was  therefore
    disproportionate.  The judge allowed the appellant's  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds finding that  the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(iii) of the immigration rules.

7.   The appellant sought and obtained permission to  appeal.   In  granting
    permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Joanna McWilliam said this:-

     "It is arguable that the appellant made an application under the  Rules
         before July 2012.  If that is the case, it  is  arguable  that  the
         appeal should have been considered under  para  276B(i)(b)  of  the
         Rules; see Home Office guidance relied on by  the  appellant  dated
         August 2015.  The parties will need  to  address  the  Tribunal  in
         respect of Khalid and Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74."

8.   At the hearing  before  me,  Miss  Bond  made  extensive  and  eloquent
    submissions.  Counsel kindly provided me with a copy of  the  decisions
    in Edgehill & Anor v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 204, although she did not actually refer me to that  decision,
    and she also provided me with a copy  of  the  decision  in  Singh  and
    Khalid v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 74.



9.   Counsel told me that the appellant relied  on  Chapter  8  Transitional
    Provisions  Guidance  published  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  in
    particular on paragraph 9.2.3.  She also relied on Transitional  Appeal
    Guidance issued by the Secretary of State and provided me with  copies.
    By way of clarification Miss Bond agreed that the appeal before me was,
    as the judge had indicated, in respect  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision of 8th September, 2015 but, she added, there should also  have
    been a right of appeal in favour of the appellant against  the  earlier
    decisions of the Secretary of  State,  namely  the  decisions  of  30th
    September, 2014 and the earlier decision of 23rd  January,  2014.   She
    explained  that  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  of  30th
    September, 2014 resulted  in  the  application  by  the  appellant  for
    judicial review.  Those proceedings were settled by  agreement  between
    the parties on the basis that the Secretary of State would within three
    months reconsider her earlier decision.  The  Secretary  of  State  had
    agreed to  those  judicial  review  proceedings  being  compromised  by
    agreement and the matter was reconsidered by the  Secretary  of  State,
    but the decision of 8th September, 2015 resulted in a similar  refusal.
    At the time of the decision of 8th September, 2015,  the  Secretary  of
    State's long residence guidance was in force and paragraph 9.2.3  makes
    clear that applications under  paragraph  276B(i)(b)  which  were  made
    before but not decided by 9th July, 2012, and reconsiderations, as this
    was,  would  be  decided  or  reconsidered  in  accordance  with   that
    paragraph.  The Transitional Appeals Guidance was  also  in  force  and
    this provides:-

     "These appeal rights conferred to exist for decisions made on or  after
         6th April, 2015 where:

         .    ...


         .    ...


         .    any other application was made before 6th April,  2015  [which
             of course this application was] the outcome  of  which  is  an
             appealable decision under  pre-Immigration  Act  2014  regime,
             unless the decision was a refusal of an asylum or human rights
             claim."


    She submitted that this application was not either an asylum  or  human
    rights claim, it was a claim under paragraph 276B  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Guidance was in force and gives the appellant  a  right  of
    appeal and the Transitional Appeals Guidance says that the Tribunal has
    jurisdiction.  The appellant had  a  legitimate  expectation  that  his
    application would be granted. She then drew my attention  to  what  the
    Court of Appeal had said at paragraphs 79 and 80 of Singh  and  Khalid.
    There Lady Justice Arden said this:-
         "79. I also agree that these appeals should be dismissed, but  with
             the following qualification.  I respectfully would not  go  so
             far as my Lords in paragraph 40 above and would not  say  that
             the distinction made by Mr  Blundell  is  necessarily  without
             foundation or that the reasoning  of  Jackson  LJ  necessarily
             goes so far as to decide that the Secretary of State can never
             rely on the new Rules in determining  an  application  of  the
             kind referred to in the implementation provision  (as  defined
             in  paragraph  7  above).  For  my  own  part  I  would   urge
             circumspection about those parts of the  old  Rules  which  we
             have not expressly considered, and leave them open to argument
             in an appropriate case when they arise.
         80.  In Edgehill this court decided that a  provision  in  the  old
             Rules that a person should be entitled to indefinite leave  to
             remain ('ILR') after 14 years' continuous residence applied to
             an application to which the implementation  provision  applied
             to the exclusion of a provision in the  new  Rules  increasing
             the minimum period of years of residence to 20  years.    That
             was the question which Jackson LJ posed at the  start  of  the
             relevant passage and the question which he answered at the end
             of it. That ruling must apply  to  other  specific  provisions
             which are different in the new Rules from  those  in  the  old
             Rules."
10.  I then agreed to adjourn briefly to allow Miss Bond to obtain from  her
    instructing solicitors a copy  of  the  grounds  for  judicial  review.
    Before adjourning, it transpired that Miss Bond had a copy in her  file
    and so  I  briefly  adjourned  in  order  that  the  usher  could  take
    photocopies.  On resuming the hearing,  Miss  Bond  told  me  that  the
    appellant should have  been  given  a  right  of  appeal  against  both
    decisions taken on 23rd January, 2014 and on 30th September, 2014.  The
    appellant should have granted a right of appeal because they were  both
    decisions under long residence applications.  She reminded  me  of  her
    earlier submission that under paragraph 9.2.3 of the Guidance there  is
    a right of appeal, so the decision of 30th September, 2014, should have
    given the appellant a right of appeal against that decision.  She  told
    me that the Upper Tribunal had jurisdiction to consider the decision of
    30th September, 2014, because the Secretary of State's  reconsideration
    under the JR proceedings which the Secretary of State compromised  were
    compromised on the basis that a fresh decision would be taken.

11.  She submitted that the new decision was appealable under  the  Guidance
    and should have been considered under the old  immigration  rules  and,
    therefore, the judge had materially erred in  law.   The  Secretary  of
    State erred in law by failing to apply her own guidance.

12.   Responding  briefly  Mr  Wilding  submitted  that  the  appellant  was
    effectively creating "fog and smoke" and  that  the  issue  before  the
    Tribunal was much more straightforward.  The issue was,  he  submitted,
    whether, at the relevant date of the decision under appeal, there was a
    transitional provision which allowed the appellant to argue that he met
    the  requirements  of  paragraph  276B  of   the   immigration   rules,
    notwithstanding that the immigration rule had been withdrawn some three
    years previously.  He submitted that the only thing  relevant  was  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Singh and Khalid.  At  paragraph  32
    of that decision the court pointed out that the starting point must  be
    that the decision of the House of Lords in Odelola v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2009] UKHL 25 which  establishes  the  general
    rule  that  changes  in  the  immigration  rules  apply  not  only   to
    applications for leave to enter or remain on or  after  the  date  they
    take effect, but also to applications pending as at that date.  But  it
    was recognised that that would not be so where the Statement of Changes
    in question contained an express indication to the  contrary:  see  per
    Lord Brown at paragraph 39 (p. 1241B).  At paragraph 44  of  Singh  and
    Khalid the court took account of the position under  paragraph  HC  565
    which, at paragraph 75, sets into Part 8 three new  paragraphs,  A277A,
    A277C, to follow immediately after paragraph A277.  At paragraph  A277C
    it says:-

         "Subject to paragraphs A277  to  A280  and  paragraph  GEN.1.9.  of
         Appendix FM of  these  Rules,  where  the  Secretary  of  State  is
         considering any application to which the provisions of Appendix  FM
         (family life) and paragraphs 276ADE  to  276DH  (private  life)  of
         these Rules do not already apply, she will also do so in line  with
         those provisions."

     The court pointed out at paragraph 44 that HC 565 has no equivalent  to
    the implementation provision in HC 194, so that in accordance with  the
    principle in Odelola, it applies to applications pending as at the date
    of  implementation.   Before   12th   September,   2012,   there   were
    transitional provisions  where  pending  applications  were  considered
    under the old immigration rules.  However, HC 565, effective  from  6th
    September, 2012, has no transitional provisions.  There  was  a  window
    between 9th July, 2012 and 6th September, 2012, where the applicant had
    to be dealt with under the old immigration rules, but  the  immigration
    rules HC 565 took that provision away.

13.  He submitted that the judge had not erred when, at paragraph 21 of  his
    decision he said that the appellant had  no  right  of  appeal  on  the
    grounds that the requirements of the immigration rules  were  met.   At
    the date of the decision of 30th September, 2014 and  at  the  date  of
    decision on 8th September, 2015 the rule had been withdrawn.

14   The Immigration Judge  could  not  have  considered  the  appeal  under
    paragraph 276B, because paragraph 276B had been withdrawn.  As  to  the
    Guidance, he submitted that the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  does
    comply with the Guidance.  In both decisions, the  Secretary  of  State
    very clearly did consider paragraph 276B, but at both dates of decision
    that particular immigration  rule  had  been  deleted,  therefore,  the
    appellant's appeal could not have been allowed under that rule  because
    at the date of the hearing before the judge the Rule no longer existed.

15.  Turning to Counsel's submissions on the  Guidance,  he  submitted  that
    the Guidance does not assist, because the old rule  has  in  fact  been
    considered by the Secretary of State in the decisions.   In  fact,  the
    appellant has, Mr Wilding told me, been granted leave to remain in  any
    event, because the judge had allowed the human rights  appeal.   It  is
    not right to say that the appeal before  the  Tribunal  today  and  the
    appeal before the First-tier was an old  style  appeal.   The  Guidance
    accurately reflects what the commencement order says and is  that  part
    which has been highlighted, namely that the appeal rights  continue  to
    exist for decisions made on or after 6th April, 2015  where  any  other
    application was made before 6th April, 2015 the outcome of which was an
    appealable decision under the pre-Immigration Act 2014  regime,  unless
    the decision was a refusal of an asylum or  human  rights  claim.   The
    decision of 8th September, 2015, which is the only decision  which  the
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal in  respect  of,  was  in
    fact a rejection of his human rights claim.  Immigration Rules  HC  565
    had withdrawn the long residency provisions and so there was  no  right
    of appeal, but it did not matter because as at the date of decision the
    rule had been withdrawn and fall out of the transitional window between
    9th July and 6th September, 2012.  The decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State of 30th September, 2014 is not, he submitted, relevant.   It  was
    not an appealable decision  to  this  Tribunal  and  it  has  not  been
    appealed to this Tribunal.  The only matter that  is  relevant  is  the
    decision of September, 2015.

16.   As  to  Counsel's  submission  that  the  Guidance  itself  gives  the
    appellant a  legitimate  expectation  that  his  application  would  be
    granted, it is a fact that paragraph 276B of the old immigration  rules
    was  considered,  but  the  appellant  simply  failed  to  meet   their
    requirements.

17.   Counsel  suggested  that  the  Transitional   Appeals   Guidance   was
    subsequent to the decision in Singh and Khalid.  It is  suggested  that
    it is arguable that the appellant's case comes within  paragraph  9.2.3
    of the Guidance.  This submission was rejected by the judge, but  based
    on his credibility findings, the Secretary of State should have allowed
    the appellant's appeal.  The Transitional Appeals Guidance applies  and
    on the basis of the judge's findings  of  fact,  the  appellant  should
    succeed in his appeal.

18.  I reserved my decision.

19.  The appeal being considered by the First-tier Tribunal was  in  respect
    of a decision taken by the Secretary of State on 8th  September,  2015.
    I reject Counsel's submission that in some way the earlier decisions of
    the Secretary of State are incorporated into  this  appeal.   They  are
    very clearly not.  The Secretary of State made  earlier  decisions  and
    they  had  been  challenged  by  way  of  judicial  review,  but  those
    proceedings were settled amicably between the parties on the basis that
    the Secretary of State would reconsider the appellant's  circumstances.
    The Secretary of State has reconsidered those circumstances and  it  is
    her reconsideration  which  leads  to  this  appeal,  not  her  earlier
    decisions..  The relevant decision before me therefore must be that  of
    8th September, 2015.  I am not concerned with the earlier decisions  of
    the Secretary of State of 23rd January, 2014 and 30th September,  2014.



20.  When one looks at the decision of 8th September, 2015,  one  sees  that
    it is a decision based on an application under paragraph 276B of what I
    shall refer to as being the old rules.  The Secretary of State was  not
    satisfied on the evidence placed before her that the appellant  had  at
    least fourteen years' unlawful residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    could meet the  requirements  of  paragraph  276A4  with  reference  to
    paragraph 276A1 and paragraphs 276B(i)(b).  The Secretary of State felt
    that  there  was  insufficient  documentary  evidence  to  support  the
    appellant's claims for the years 1999 to 2004 and there was no evidence
    to cover the years 1999 to 2004.  The Secretary of  State  refused  the
    appellant's application, but in doing so granted a right of  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

21.  On 9th July, 2012, the Secretary of State  introduced  new  immigration
    rules and between 9th July, 2012 and 6th September,  2012  applications
    had to be dealt with  under  the  old  rules  in  accordance  with  the
    decision in  Edgehill  &  Anor  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 204.

22.  When the Secretary of State took her decision of 30th September,  2014,
    the immigration rule which she considered no longer existed.  I  accept
    the submissions made by Mr Wilding that the judge  did  not  err.   The
    decision does, with very great respect to the submissions made by  Miss
    Bond, come within paragraph 9.2.3 of the long residence guidance.   The
    appellant's appeal could not be allowed because the relevant  Rule  had
    been deleted, notwithstanding the fact that at the date of the  hearing
    of the appeal before the judge, the judge found in making his  findings
    that the appellant has been in the United  Kingdom  continuously  since
    7th December, 1991 and therefore did, as at the  date  of  the  hearing
    before the judge, namely 25th  July,  2016  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276B.  However, by that time the  rule  had  been  withdrawn.
    The only course for the judge was to consider the matter as he did  and
    allow the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.  The  grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal submitted as  an  alternative  ground
    that the appellant has established his presence in the United  Kingdom,
    such that his removal would breach Article 8 of the European Convention
    for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.

23.  I accept Mr  Wilding's  submissions  in  respect  of  the  guidance  on
    transitional appeals.  This was a decision against a refusal of a human
    rights claim.  It very clearly says that that is what it  was,  at  the
    top of page 5 of the reasons for decision which accompanied the  letter
    from the Home Office to the appellant of 8th September, 2015.   I  also
    adopt  Mr  Wilding's  submissions  in  respect  of  Miss  Bond's  brief
    submission on legitimate  expectation.   She  had  submitted  that  the
    appellant had a legitimate expectation that his  application  would  be
    dealt with under the long residence guidance and under the Transitional
    Appeals Guidance.  Mr Wilding submitted that the Secretary of State had
    clearly applied her guidance and considered paragraph 276B, although at
    the date of consideration it had been withdrawn.

24.  One matter which Mr Wilding did not specifically address me on was  the
    submission that on the basis  of  the  judge's  findings  of  fact  the
    Secretary  of  State  should  have  allowed  the  appeal.   The   judge
    effectively found that the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  had
    been met  because  the  appellant  had  been  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    according to the judge's findings,  continuously  since  7th  December,
    1991.  Miss Bond's submission was that on the basis of that finding the
    Secretary of State should have allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  under
    paragraph 276B and granted the appellant indefinite  leave  to  remain.
    However, at the date of the findings, 25th July, 2006, the  immigration
    rule under which the application had  originally  been  made  had  been
    withdrawn for over four years.

Notice of Decision

25.  I have  concluded  that  the  making  of  the  decision  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gribble did not involve the making of a  material  error
    of law and I uphold the judge's decision.  The judge was right to  find
    that the appellant had no right of appeal in respect of his application
    under Immigration Rules which had been withdrawn.

26.  No anonymity direction is made.


Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal.

10th June 2017




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal.


