
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/31136/2014
                                                               IA/31137/2014
                                                               IA/31138/2014
                                                               IA/31139/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 November 2015                   |On 20 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                             MJAFTONI MEKOLLARRI
                             ADRIATIK MEKOLLARRI
                              ELSEIT MEKOLLARI
                              ADELIO MEKOLLARI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Holt counsel instructed by Joyya Law Associates
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of these Appellants. Having considered  all  the  circumstances
    and evidence I do not  consider  it  necessary  to  make  an  anonymity
    direction.

 2. The Appellants are all Albanian nationals the first two Appellant are a
    husband and wife and the third and fourth Appellants are their two sons
    aged 18 and 12.

 3. This is a resumed hearing in a case where the  Appellants  had  applied
    for leave to remain on the basis of their family and private  life  and
    their applications had been  considered  under  Appendix  FM  paragraph
    276ADE and under Article 8 outside the  Rules.  The  applications  were
    refused in a decision letter dated 18 July  2014.  They  appealed  that
    decision and at a hearing where it was  conceded  that  the  Appellants
    could not meet the requirements of the Rules their appeal  was  allowed
    under Article 8 in a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Dickenson
    promulgated on 29 October 2014. The decision to allow the appeal  under
    Article 8 outside the Rules was appealed and came before  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Pickup on 2 March 2015.  He found an error of law in the
    decision finding that the Judge did not conduct a  'fair  and  balanced
    approach to the pros and cons of the proportionality assessment; it was
    heavily weighted in favour of the claimants.'

Preliminary Issue

 4. Mr Holt accepted that his instructing solicitors had not auctioned  the
    clear directions of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup in that they had
    not provided any additional evidence in documentary form and served  it
    on the Tribunal 7 days before the hearing. He indicated he did not  ask
    for an adjournment but that he would  attempt  to  address  the  issues
    relating to the fourth Appellant who was the only one  who  was  now  a
    child  as  the  third  Appellant  had  turned  17  in  the  period   of
    adjournment.

The Law

 5. The burden of proof in  this  case  is  upon  the  Appellants  and  the
    standard of proof is upon the balance of probability.

 6. As the Appellants are in the United Kingdom  and  the  only  matter  in
    issue is an Article 8 assessment the relevant date for  the  assessment
    is the date of hearing

 7. It is now generally accepted that the  new  Rules  do  not  provide  in
    advance for every nuance in the application of Article 8 in  individual
    cases. At para 30 of Nagre, Sales J said:

    "30.   ... if, after the process of applying the new rules and  finding
         that the claim for leave to remain under them fails,  the  relevant
         official  or  tribunal  judge  considers  it  is  clear  that   the
         consideration under the Rules has fully addressed any  family  life
         or private life  issues  arising  under  Article  8,  it  would  be
         sufficient simply to say that; they would not have  to  go  on,  in
         addition, to consider the case separately from the Rules. If  there
         is no arguable case that there may be  good  grounds  for  granting
         leave to remain outside the Rules by reference to Article 8,  there
         would be no point in introducing  full  separate  consideration  of
         Article 8 again after having reached a decision on  application  of
         the Rules."

 8. This was also endorsed by the Court of Appeal in Singh and Khalid where
    Underhill LJ said (at para 64):

    "64.   ... there is no need to conduct a full separate  examination  of
         article 8 outside the  Rules  where,  in  the  circumstances  of  a
         particular  case,  all  the  issues  have  been  addressed  in  the
         consideration under the Rules."

 9. More recently the Court of Appeal in  SS  Congo  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387
    stated in paragraph 33:

         "In our judgment, even though a test  of  exceptionality  does  not
         apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
         accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of
         special contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances
         would need to be identified to support a claim  for  grant  of  LTR
         outside the new Rules in Appendix  FM.  In  our  view,  that  is  a
         formulation which is not as strict as a test of exceptionality or a
         requirement of "very compelling reasons"  (as  referred  to  in  MF
         (Nigeria) in  the  context  of  the  Rules  applicable  to  foreign
         criminals), but which  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the  focused
         consideration of public interest factors as finds expression in the
         Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in  Appendix  FM.
         It also reflects the formulation in Nagre at para. [29], which  has
         been tested and has survived scrutiny in  this  court:  see,  e.g.,
         Haleemudeen at [44], per Beatson LJ. "

10. As this is a case involving a child I  have  also  taken  into  account
    Zoumbas v SSHD UKSC where it was held that there was no  "irrationality
    in the conclusion that it was in the children's best  interests  to  go
    with their parents to the Republic of Congo. No  doubt  it  would  have
    been possible to have stated that, other things being equal, it was  in
    the best interests of the children that they and their  parents  stayed
    in the United Kingdom so that they could obtain such benefits as health
    care and education which the decision-maker recognised might  be  of  a
    higher standard than would be available in the Congo. But other  things
    were not equal. They were not British citizens. They had  no  right  to
    future education and health care in this country. They were part  of  a
    close-knit family with highly educated parents and were of an age  when
    their emotional needs could only be  fully  met  within  the  immediate
    family unit. Such integration  as  had  occurred  into  United  Kingdom
    society would have been predominantly in the  context  of  that  family
    unit. Most significantly, the decision-maker concluded that they  could
    be removed to the Republic of  Congo  in  the  care  of  their  parents
    without serious detriment to their well-being".  It was also held  that
    there was no "substance in the criticism that  the  assessment  of  the
    children's best interests was flawed  because  it  assumed  that  their
    parents  would  be  removed  to  the  Republic  of  Congo.  ....It  was
    legitimate for the decision-maker to ask herself first whether it would
    have been proportionate to remove the parents if they had  no  children
    and then, in considering the best interests  of  the  children  in  the
    proportionality exercise, ask whether  their  well-being  altered  that
    provisional balance. When one has regard to the age  of  the  children,
    the nature and extent of their integration into United Kingdom society,
    the  close  family  unit  in  which  they  lived  and  their  Congolese
    citizenship, the matters on which Mr Lindsay relied did not create such
    a strong case for the children that their interest in remaining in  the
    United Kingdom could have outweighed the considerations  on  which  the
    decision-maker relied in striking the balance  in  the  proportionality
    exercise (paras 17 and 18 above). The assessment of the children's best
    interests must be read in the context  of  the  decision  letter  as  a
    whole."

11. In Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
    appeals)[2013] UKUT 197(IAC) (Blake J) the Tribunal held that (i)  The
    case law of the Upper Tribunal has identified the following principles
    to assist in the determination of appeals where children are  affected
    by the appealed decisions: (a) As a starting point it is in  the  best
    interests of children to be  with  both  their  parents  and  if  both
    parents are being removed from the United Kingdom  then  the  starting
    point suggests that so should dependent  children  who  form  part  of
    their household unless there are reasons to the contrary; (ii)  It  is
    generally in the interests of children  to  have  both  stability  and
    continuity of social and educational  provision  and  the  benefit  of
    growing up in the cultural norms of the society to which they  belong;
    (iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than the  state  of  origin
    can lead to development of social cultural and educational  ties  that
    it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in  the  absence  of  compelling
    reason to the contrary. What amounts to lengthy residence is not clear
    cut but past and present policies have identified  seven  years  as  a
    relevant period; (iv)  Apart from the terms of published policies  and
    rules, the Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is likely  to
    be more significant to a child that the first  seven  years  of  life.
    Very young children are focussed on their parents  rather  than  their
    peers and are adaptable; (v) Short periods of residence,  particularly
    ones without leave or the reasonable expectation of leave to enter  or
    remain, while claims are promptly considered,  are  unlikely  to  give
    rise  to  private  life  deserving  of  respect  in  the  absence   of
    exceptional factors. In any event, protection of  the  economic  well-
    being of society amply justifies removal in such cases.

12. In EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 it was  held
    that despite finding, in a  family's  appeal  against  a  decision  to
    remove them, that the best interests of the children lay in continuing
    their education in the United Kingdom with both parents also remaining
    in the United Kingdom, the Tribunal had been entitled to find that the
    need to maintain immigration control outweighed  the  children's  best
    interests.

13. I am obliged in this case to take into account  Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as  amended  by  the
    Immigration  Act  2014)   which   sets   out   the   public   interest
    considerations  that  I   must   have   regard   to   in   determining
    proportionality.  I  will  therefore  also  take  into   account   the
    provisions of section 117B (6) in relation to qualifying children.  If
    a child is a qualifying child for the purposes of section 117B of  the
    2002 Act as amended, the issue will generally be  whether  it  is  not
    reasonable for that child to return. Although R (on the application of
    Osanwemwenze) v SSHD 2014 EWHC 1563  was  not  specifically  concerned
    with section 117B it has some relevance in terms of the reasonableness
    of a child leaving the UK. In this case,  the  claimant's  14-year-old
    stepson from Nigeria had been in the United Kingdom for  more  than  7
    years and had leave to remain in his own right. It was held that  this
    was an important but  not  an  overriding  consideration  and  it  was
    reasonable to expect the claimant's family including  the  stepson  to
    relocate to Nigeria. The  parents  had  experienced  life  there  into
    adulthood and would be able to provide for the children and help  them
    to reintegrate. In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) (Ockelton)
    the Tribunal held that when the question posed by s117B(6) is the same
    question posed in relation to children by paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv),  it
    must be posed and answered in the proper context  of  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect the child to follow its parents to their  country
    of origin  EV (Philippines). It is not however a question  that  needs
    to be posed and answered in relation to each child more than once.

Evidence

14. On the file I had the Respondents bundle. I had a copy  of  the  reason
    for refusal letter. The Appellant put in an  appeal  and  a  bundle  of
    documents numbered 1-216.

15. I heard evidence from the first two Appellants and there  were  witness
    statements from them. I indicated to  Mr  Holt  he  had  leave  to  ask
    supplementary questions in so far as they were relevant but the absence
    of any supporting documentary evidence would be relevant to the  weight
    that could  be  given  to  such  evidence  where  it  could  have  been
    supported. The third and fourth Appellants  were  not  called  to  give
    evidence nor were there and witness statements from them.

16. Mjaftoni Mekollari adopted her witness statement  at  page  13  of  the
    bundle. She gave evidence in English.

17. She confirmed that the fourth Appellant, her son  Adelio,  was  now  12
    years old and was in Year 7 at Prestwich Art College having started  at
    the school on 2 September 2015. Previously he  had  attended  Brentnall
    Primary School. He was taught in English.

18. She confirmed that Adelio spoke Albanian. At home  they  spoke  English
    and Albanian as this enabled him to speak to his grandmother who  could
    not speak English.

19. In relation to education in Albania he would be in  year  8  there  and
    when he went into year 9 he would  have  to  do  a  test  in  Albanian,
    similar to a SATS test here in literacy and writing and this  test  was
    quite important as if he did  not  pass  it  would  affect  his  future
    education. The test is very complicated and she did not think he  could
    pass it.

20. He was very happy at his new school. He had no friends from his primary
    school but had made new friends. He plays rugby and enjoys swimming.

21. They had not discussed returning to Albania with Adelio as they feel it
    would be too stressful for him. He has previously expressed concerns in
    relation to his language ability if they returned to Albania  and  that
    he has no friends there.

22. In relation to her own employment prospects on return  to  Albania  the
    had worked as an assistant epidemiologist when they lived in Albania as
    she was a qualified nurse. She had attended a  course  in  relation  to
    nursing the equivalent of a degree. Having spent 9 years in the  United
    Kingdom she would not be  able  to  return  to  this  job  as  she  had
    qualified under the Communist regime. Nurses now are required to have a
    degree. Those who qualified like her were  able  to  take  a  mandatory
    course to up grade while working. She  did  not  believe  anyone  would
    employ her in Albania. In the  United  Kingdom  she  had  worked  as  a
    support worker for people with learning disabilities.

23. In cross examination she stated that  nursing  was  very  different  in
    Albania. She said she could not do the same job as she was doing in the
    UK as you had to be a nurse to do it.

24. In relation to the suggestion that people usually came  to  the  United
    Kingdom  to  better  themselves  and  utilise  their   United   Kingdom
    experience in their home country  she  stated  that  any  qualification
    obtained in the United Kingdom would not be recognised in Albania.

25. She had her mother and two brothers in Albania. Her brothers were  both
    married with big families. They had been back to  Albania  twice  since
    they came to the United Kingdom.

26. By way of clarification to me she confirmed  that  sate  education  was
    free from the age of 6 up to 20. She had to make a contribution to  her
    accommodation as a nurse. She confirmed that both  English  and  French
    was taught in school.

27. Adriatik Mekollari gave evidence through an interpreter and adopted the
    contents of his witness statement at pages 16-18 of the bundle.

28. He confirmed that at home he and Elseit spoke Albanian 90% of the time.
    Sometimes Elseit had difficulty  expressing  himself  in  Albanian.  He
    stated that Adelio would need 10 years for his Albanian to be  as  good
    as Elseits. He believed that Adelio  stood  no  chance  of  success  in
    Albania if they returned there.

29. In cross examination he confirmed that if he had to tell Adelio off  if
    he was naughty he did it in Albanian.

30. His own English was good enough for work and the  street  but  not  for
    court. He confirmed that he had extended family in Albania.

Final Submissions

31. On behalf of the Respondent Mr McVitie made the following submissions:

      a) The only issue in this case was now whether the  Appellants  should
         be allowed leave to remain under Article 8 as they did not meet the
         Rules.

      b) The decision had to take into account  the  current  caselaw  which
         stated that  the  starting  point  was  that  the  Appellants  were
         Albanian nationals and their residence in the  United  Kingdom  was
         always temporary.

      c) This was a private life case as their family life would continue in
         Albania.

      d) The statutory position was that little weight should be accorded to
         the Appellants  private  life  as  their  status  had  always  been
         precarious.

      e) The Appellants relied on the position of the child Adelio  in  this
         case for their appeal to succeed as Elseit was now an adult.

      f) He accepted that for Adelio there would  be  a  disruption  in  his
         education as although born in Albania he had started his  education
         in the United Kingdom and had never studied in Albania.  He  argued
         that this was not uncommon for children  today.  Adelio  understood
         Albanian. There was a functioning education system in  Albania  and
         there would be support for him. His parents were a product of  that
         system. He would have the support  of  his  family.  There  was  no
         evidence before the court to suggest that there would be no support
         available in Albania or  private  tutors  available.  Children  are
         adaptable.

      g) He reminded the court that no positive benefits can be derived from
         s 117B.

      h) He relied on paragraph 60 of EV where the court found:

         "That is a long way from the facts of our case. In our case none of
         the family is a British citizen. None has the right  to  remain  in
         this  country.  If  the  mother  is  removed,  the  father  has  no
         independent right to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is
         entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them. As  the
         immigration judge found it is obviously in their best interests  to
         remain with their parents. Although it is, of course a question  of
         fact for the tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of  being
         educated at public expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to
         the children of remaining with their parents.  Just  as  we  cannot
         provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate  the
         world."

32. On behalf of the Appellants Mr Holt made the following submissions:

      a) He conceded as he had before the  First-tier  that  the  Appellants
         could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM  and  paragraph  276
         ADE.

      b) Adelio met the definition of qualifying child in paragraph  117B(6)
         and therefore the public interest did not require  the  removal  of
         his parents unless it was reasonable for Adelio to leave the United
         Kingdom. He acknowledged therefore that the question was whether it
         was reasonable for Adelio to leave the United Kingdom.

      c) He relied on Azimi-Moyed.

      d) Adelio came to the United Kingdom when he was  5  and  was  now  12
         years old. He is therefore putting down social and cultural ties.

      e) He acknowledged that the starting point was that his best  interest
         was to stay with his parents and if they were removed he should  go
         with them.

      f) There would be significant disruption in Adelios education in  that
         there was a mismatch. He would enter the Albanian system at the end
         of the primary mode of education. Almost immediately he would  have
         to take a test that would  determine  the  secondary  mode  of  his
         education. He accepted that he had no independent evidence  of  the
         Albanian system.

      g) He stated that Adelio could not be punished because their leave was
         precarious.

      h) He suggested that there was a precedent in that Elseit was  granted
         discretionary leave in order to do his A levels and it was the same
         situation now

      i) It was not reasonable  for  Adelio  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom
         therefore it was not in the public interest to remove him.



Findings

33. On balance and taking the evidence as  a  whole,  I  have  reached  the
    following findings

34. The Appellants are a family of  Albanian  nationals  ,  the  first  two
    Appellants are a mother and father who are respectively 43 and 48 years
    old and their two sons who are the  third  and  fourth  Appellants  who
    are18 and 12 years old. The family have been refused leave to remain on
    the basis of their family and private live which  was  refused  by  the
    Respondent by reference to Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE and Article
    8 outside the Rules.

35. Mr Holt conceded at the first hearing of this appeal that he could  not
    challenge the refusal under the Rules as the family did  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM in relation to family life nor did they  at
    the time of the application meet the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE.



36. The background to this application is that the first Appellant came  to
    the United Kingdom on 24 January 2007 as a work permit holder  and  she
    was joined by her husband and two children in September 2007. The third
    and fourth Appellants were then aged 10 and 3 years old.

37. An application for further leave on the same basis was refused in  2011
    because they did not meet the Rules but on 17 April 2012 the Appellants
    were granted discretionary leave to remain until 31st  August  2013  to
    allow Elseit to complete his GCSE examinations in June 2013.

38. On 21 August 2013 the Appellants applied for further  leave  which  was
    refused on 25 September 2013 and following  a  reconsideration  refused
    again on 21 July 2014. It is that decision that is the subject of  this
    appeal.

39. The Appellants concede,  as  they  must,  that  they  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules. Mr Holt argues that it is the  circumstances
    of Adelio that amount to compelling circumstances to justify why  those
    Rules should not be applied in these Appellants case in the usual  way.
    I have determined the issue on the basis of the questions posed by Lord
    Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27

    Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with
    the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for his private (or as
    the case may be) family life?

40. I am satisfied that the Appellants enjoy a family life  in  the  United
    Kingdom as they have lived here together as  a  family  since  2007.  I
    accept that there would be a degree of disruption to that  family  life
    if they were required to return to Albania having lived in  the  United
    Kingdom for 7/8 years.

41. The family enjoy a private life in the United  Kingdom  as  mother  and
    father have both worked here since their arrival and the children  have
    both been in education. The nature and degree of their life beyond work
    and school I am unable to make findings on  as  there  is  no  evidence
    before me of engagement with the wider community or of  friendships  in
    the community.

    If so, will such interference have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

42. I am satisfied that removal would have consequences of such gravity  as
    potentially to engage  the  operation  of  Article  8  given  that  the
    threshold of engagement is low.

    If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

43. I am satisfied that there is in place the legislative framework for the
    decision giving rise to the interference with Article 8 rights which is
    precise and accessible enough for  the  Appellants  to  regulate  their
    conduct by reference to it.

    If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society  in  the
    interests of national security, public safety  or  the  economic  well-
    being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for  the
    protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and
    freedom of others?

44. The interference does have legitimate aims since it is  in  pursuit  of
    one of the legitimate aims set  out  in  Article  8  (2)  necessary  in
    pursuit  of  the  economic  well  being  of  the  country  through  the
    maintenance of the requirements of a policy of immigration control. The
    state has the right to control the entry  of  non  nationals  into  its
    territory and Article 8 does not mean that  an  individual  can  choose
    where she wishes to enjoy their private and family life.

    If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate public  end
    sought to be achieved?

45. In making the assessment I have also taken into account  ZH  (Tanzania)
    (FC)  (Appellant)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home   Department
    (Respondent) [2011] UKSC 4 where Lady Hale noted Article  3(1)  of  the
    UNCRC which states that "in all actions  concerning  children,  whether
    undertaken  by  ...  courts  of  law,  administrative  authorities   or
    legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a  primary
    consideration."

46. Article 3 is now reflected in section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 which provides that, in relation, among  other
    things, to immigration, asylum or nationality, the Secretary  of  State
    must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring  that  those   functions   "are
    discharged having regard to the  need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
    welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom".  Lady  Hale  stated
    that "any decision which is taken without having regard to the need  to
    safeguard and promote the welfare of any children involved will not  be
    "in accordance  with  the  law"  for  the  purpose  of  article  8(2)".
    Although she noted that national authorities were expected to treat the
    best interests of a child as "a primary consideration", she  added  "Of
    course, despite the looseness with  which  these  terms  are  sometimes
    used, "a primary  consideration"  is  not  the  same  as  "the  primary
    consideration", still less as "the paramount consideration".

47. Adelio is 12 years old in the first year of his secondary education  so
    I consider that while he has just completed an important  step  in  the
    education process,  his  SATS,  he  is  4  years  away  from  the  next
    significant step sitting his GCSEs. I remind myself that at  the  point
    when the family were  granted  discretionary  leave  based  on  Elseits
    circumstances, that was the year immediately before he was due to  take
    his GCSEs which was clearly an important point in his education.

48. Adelio speaks English as he has been in education in the United Kingdom
    since he was 5 years old. I am also satisfied that he speaks  Albanian:
    both parents confirmed it. I noted that he spoke to his grandmother  in
    Albanian and his father confirmed that when he was told off, it was  in
    Albanian. They were clearly anxious to emphasise that he was less  able
    to express himself in Albanian than his older brother which I accept is
    largely true given first of all the boys respective ages when they left
    Albania, the age gap between them, and the fact that at the moment  the
    parents have had no incentive to  help  him  to  improve  his  language
    skills in Albanian. I remind myself that in relation to language he has
    the significant benefit of being in a household  of  Albanian  speakers
    who, if they chose, could speak only Albanian to him to assist  him  in
    improving his fluency. I note that of course when the  family  came  to
    United Kingdom Elseit was 10 and not a native speaker  of  English  but
    appears to have learnt to speak it fluently flourished  in  the  United
    Kingdom education system and achieved a  number  of  As  in  his  GCSEs
    including in English. I note Mrs Adelios concerns  about  her  son  not
    having friends in Albania but the same could have been said  of  Elseit
    in 2007 when he came to the United Kingdom but that was the  choice  of
    his parents at that time.

49. There is no independent documentary evidence before me in  relation  to
    the quality of the education system offered in Albania  and  I  see  no
    reason to  speculate  that  the  United  Kingdom  education  system  is
    inherently superior and certainly neither  parent  suggested  that  the
    system was poor just that it was different.  Moreover  I  again  remind
    myself that the first  and  second  Appellants  were  products  of  the
    Albanian education system and indeed so was the third Appellant when he
    came to the United Kingdom aged 10 and adapted so well.

50. Nor is there evidence in relation to Adelios personality and  abilities
    to show that it would not be in his best interests to return to Albania
    with his family and be educated there and indeed all  of  the  evidence
    from his primary school suggests that he is a bright and able boy who I
    am satisfied could, with the help of a supportive  family  adapt.   The
    first Appellant in evidence accepted that as the COIS makes clear there
    is a functioning education system there which is free for all  Albanian
    children. She accepts that in fact both English and French  are  taught
    in school. While she is concerned about her sons ability to complete  a
    particular literacy test in year 9 which could be within a year  or  so
    of his return that was the only issue she raised about  the  system  in
    Albania: no issues were raised by either parent about  the  quality  of
    what was provided. It is a natural tendency for all parents to  believe
    that every test their child takes may decisively impact on their future
    but there is before me no evidence of the critical importance  of  this
    test or that it determines the rest of a  child's  future  in  Albania.
    While the first Appellant is a concerned mother she is not an expert in
    Albanian education and she has on her own evidence lived out of Albania
    for some years and things have changed during that period: it  was  not
    clear on what basis she made the assertions about the importance of the
    test she was concerned about. Given that it is accepted that English is
    taught within the education system there  I  find  it  likely  that  in
    addition to the support that would be  available  to  Adelio  from  his
    family there would be support within the school system to assist him in
    reintegrating through his language skills. I  therefore  conclude  that
    there is nothing before me to suggest that educationally it  would  not
    be in Adelio's best interests to be educated in Albania. I note that in
    NN (South Africa) & Anor v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2013] EWCA Civ 653 Lord Justice Patten said "Judges are  not  required
    to elevate the disruption and inconvenience which inevitably flows from
    a move abroad to a breach of the child's Article 8 rights."

51. I have noted that in addition to  speaking  Albanian  the  family  have
    maintained their social and cultural contacts with  two  family  visits
    since they have been in the United Kingdom. As it was stated  in  Azimi
    Moyed on which Mr Holt relies the starting point is it is in  the  best
    interests of children to be with both their parents and if both parents
    are being removed from the  United  Kingdom  then  the  starting  point
    suggests that so should dependent  children  who  form  part  of  their
    household unless there are reasons  to  the  contrary.  I  accept  that
    Adelio has now lived in the United Kingdom for 7 years  and  will  have
    become integrated into United Kingdom life  and  culture  but  this  is
    balanced by the fact that as he is not a  British  citizen  he  has  no
    right to live or be educated in the United Kingdom.  There  is  nothing
    about the period of 7 years that suggests it is a bright line in  every
    case which results in a decision being disproportionate.

52. I have reminded myself that Lord Bingham in Razgar  stated  that  in  a
    judgement on proportionality that the ultimate  question  is,  "whether
    the refusal of leave to enter or remain in circumstances where the life
    of the family cannot reasonably be expected to  be  enjoyed  elsewhere,
    taking full account of all considerations weighing  in  favour  of  the
    refusal, prejudices the family  life  of  the  applicant  in  a  manner
    sufficiently serious to amount to a breach  of  the  fundamental  right
    protected by Article 8. If the answer to this question is  affirmative,
    the refusal is unlawful and the authority must so decide."

53. Given what is said in Razgar and at section 117B (6) I  have  therefore
    assessed whether it would be reasonable to expect the fourth  Appellant
    to be removed from  the  United  Kingdom  and  for  the  Appellants  to
    continue their family life in Albania against  a  factual  matrix  that
    includes the facts that this family are not British citizens,  they  do
    not meet the Rules and would return together to  a  country  where  the
    parents have lived for the majority of their life and where Elseit  has
    lived for over half of his life.

54. I remind myself that the  Appellants  case  is  only  being  considered
    outside the Rules because they do not meet the provisions of the  Rules
    that are intended to address family and private life.  The  maintenance
    of effective immigration controls, of which the Rules are a part, is in
    the public interest.

55. I accept that the first Appellant speaks English to a reasonable degree
    and although the second Appellant did not speak English before me given
    that he has worked in the United Kingdom and passed an English  test  I
    accept that he speaks English to a limited extent. I accept  of  course
    that both the third and fourth Appellants speak English.

56. I accept that the first two Appellants have worked since they have been
    in the United Kingdom and therefore have not  to  that  extent  been  a
    burden on the state. The children have  been  educated  in  the  United
    Kingdom which of course carries a cost as would any future education.

57. However I remind myself that  this  case  is  largely,  as  Mr  McVitie
    argued, one based on private  life  given  that  the  family  would  be
    returned together to Albania where they could continue to  enjoy  their
    family life. There is no evidence of any engagement by the family  with
    the wider community beyond the work and education of the two  boys.  As
    indicated above education will be available to  the  boys  in  Albania,
    friends and other social contacts can be made afresh in Albania and old
    friendships maintained though social media.

58. Moreover by virtue of paragraph 117 B (5) I  note  that  little  weight
    should be given to the private life established by  this  family  at  a
    time when their private life was precarious.  It was precarious because
    the family were always here only for so long as they had leave and they
    had no legitimate expectation that their leave would be renewed.  While
    they were always in the United Kingdom legally I take into account that
    after the refusal of 25  September  2013  and  the  eventual  grant  of
    discretionary leave it was, if anything, even more precarious  and  the
    period of leave that was  granted  was  for  a  specific  time  limited
    purpose to allow Elseit to complete his GCSEs. This Elseit was able  to
    do and he has also completed his A levels .Mr Holt argues  that  Adelio
    should not be punished for the fact that his family life in the  United
    Kingdom was precarious but this is not a  punishment  but  a  statutory
    provision that I am obliged to take into account that has no  exception
    for private life established by children.

59. Although not necessarily advanced as compelling circumstances the First
    Appellant suggested that she would have difficulties finding employment
    on return. Both of the first two Appellants have skills and  worked  in
    Albania prior to come  to  the  United  Kingdom.  The  first  Appellant
    suggests that the system of training Nurses has changed since she lived
    in Albania but again there was no documentary evidence  provided  about
    this and nothing to rebut the reasonable suggestion that there would be
    many in the first Appellant's shoes who had trained under whatever  the
    old system was and there must be in place a system of retraining should
    the first Appellant wish to work in that field.  The  second  Appellant
    works as a chef in the United Kingdom and he did not seek to suggest he
    could not find similar work on his return.  They  will  both  have  the
    benefit of further skills learnt in the United Kingdom and the  support
    of their extended family members there. In note that in  SS(Congo)  and
    Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 in relation to one of the  appeals  Richards
    LJ said that the fact that the  Appellant would lose  his  job  in  the
    United Kingdom if he had to leave to enjoy family  life  elsewhere  and
    hence would prefer to establish family life here  does  not  constitute
    compelling circumstances to require the  grant  of  leave  outside  the
    Rules: as the authorities make clear, Article 8 does not create a right
    for married couples to choose to live in a Contracting State.

60. Taking all of the factors into  account  with  the  best  interests  of
    Adelio as a primary factor I am satisfied that it would reasonable  for
    Adelio to Return to Albania with his family.

61. In determining whether  the  removal  would  be  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim of immigration control I find that  none  of  the  facts
    underpinning the Appellants life in the  United  Kingdom  taken  either
    singularly or cumulatively outweigh the  legitimate  purpose  of  their
    removal.

62. I have considered the issue  of  anonymity  in  the  present  instance.
    Neither party has sought a direction. The Appellant is an adult and not
    a vulnerable person. I see no reason to  make  any  direction  in  this
    regard.

Conclusion

63. On the facts as established in this appeal, there are  no  grounds  for
    believing that the Appellants removal  would  result  in  treatment  in
    breach of ECHR.

64. I therefore find that the decision of the Respondent  appealed  against
    is in accordance with the law and the applicable Immigration Rules.

Decision

65. The appeals are dismissed.


Signed      Date 17.11.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

