
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/31910/2014
                                                               IA/31911/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                             Mrs ERNESTINA LIMA
                                                             First Appellant
                                     and

                           PAULO CESAR De OLIVEIRA
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Vaughan (counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellants against  the  decision  of  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Perry, promulgated on 13 January 2015,  which  dismissed
the Appellants' appeals

Background

3.    The  first  appellant  is  the  second  appellant's  wife.  The  first
appellant was born on 24 February 1961. The second appellant was born on  14
October 1960. Both appellants are nationals of Brazil.

4.    The first appellant entered the  UK  on  2  October  2003  with  entry
clearance as a visitor. The second appellant entered the UK soon after.  The
appellants were married in the UK on 13 March 2004.  The  first  appellant's
son from a previous  relationship  entered  the  UK  in  July  2004  as  the
dependent of the first appellant. The appellants were granted further  leave
to remain which expired on 31 July 2007.

5.    On 12 December 2008 the first appellant submitted an  application  for
leave to remain outside the rules  on  the  basis  of  her  article  8  ECHR
rights. The second appellant and the first appellant's son  were  listed  as
dependants on the first  appellant's  application.  The  respondent  refused
that application initially on 3 August 2009.  It  was  discovered  that  the
decision was made in error because the appellants then  representatives  had
submitted an application which contain  matters  which  did  not  relate  to
these appellants, but in fact related to another of their clients. When  the
mistake was discovered, further  representations  were  made  leading  to  a
refusal decision from the respondent dated 23rd of August 2013. In the  face
of  a  judicial  review  challenge  from  the  appellants   the   respondent
reconsidered that decision & made a fresh refusal decision on 24 July 2014.

The Judge's Decision

6.     The  Appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Perry  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's  decision.  The  Judge  considered  the  appeal  of  the  first
appellant's son at the same time and, in  the  same  decision,  allowed  the
appellant's son's appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds  only.  The  decision  in
relation to the first appellant's son is the subject matter  of  a  separate
appeal brought by the respondent to the Upper Tribunal (IA/31913/2014).

7.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  10  June  2015  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Rintoul gave permission to appeal stating

    "Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has  been  granted  to  the
    Secretary of State in respect of the linked appeal of  the  appellant's
    son (IA/31913/2014) which was allowed.  The  factual  matrices  of  all
    three appeals are inextricably linked, and the appeal of  the  son  was
    allowed, and while accepting that if the decision in favour of the  son
    were to be overturned on appeal there would be significantly less merit
    in the grounds it is arguable that there is merit in  ground  2.  While
    there is less merit in  ground  1  and  3,  permission  is  nonetheless
    granted on all grounds."

    The decision in relation to the first appellant's son  is  the  subject
matter of a separate appeal brought by the respondent to the Upper  Tribunal
(IA/31913/2014).

The Hearing

8.    (a)   Mr Vaughan, counsel for the appellants,  moved  the  grounds  of
appeal. He took me through  the  appellant's  immigration  history  and  the
history of applications and decisions on  reconsideration,  leading  to  the
decision which is the subject matter of this appeal. He took me to  [63]  of
the  Judge's  decision,  where  the  Judge  finds  that  the  respondent  is
responsible for the delay from 20 August 2009  to  24  July  2014.  He  then
referred me to the respondent's statutory  guidance  entitled  "Every  Child
Matters". He reminded me that at [65] the Judge finds  that  the  respondent
failed to adhere to the terms of that guidance, and argued  that  the  Judge
erred in law by not finding that the failure to  follow  statutory  guidance
amounted to illegality. He argued that because  the  Judge  found  that  the
respondent had not adhered to statutory guidance the delay was unlawful  and
therefore illegal.

    (b)    Mr Vaughan  argued  that  the  respondent  had  considered  this
application  timeously,  a  decision  would  have  been  reached  when   the
appellant's son was still in minority and he argued (because  of  the  dicta
of Blake J in EM and others (returnees) Zimbabwe  CG  [2011]  UKUT  98)  the
applications of both appellants and the first  appellant's  son  would  have
inevitably met with success. He argued that  the  Judge  should  have  found
that the delay caused significant prejudice to  the  appellants,  which  was
not acknowledged by the Judge. He argued that this  amounts  to  a  material
error of law.

    (c)    Mr Vaughan turned to the second ground of appeal and argued that
at [68] and [69] of the decision the Judge  failed  to  analyse  the  impact
separation of the appellants from the first appellant's son would  have.  He
argued that there is clear evidence of the significant bond of  affection  &
dependence placed before the Judge which had simply been ignored. He  argued
that there were no findings in relation to  the  impact  of  separation  and
that the absence of such findings was both significant and material.

    (d)    Turning to ground 3, Mr Vaughan argued that the appellants  have
been the victims of a bogus  legal  adviser  who  had  been  prosecuted  and
convicted for offences relating to the dishonest  provision  of  immigration
services. Notwithstanding the terms of [54], he  argued  that  at  [60]  the
Judge makes findings which amount of adverse  credibility  findings  against
the first appellant, even though the evidence that the first  appellant  was
the victim  of  a  bogus  legal  adviser  went  without  challenge  and  was
supported by the conviction of that bogus legal adviser. He argued that  the
adverse credibility findings are unfair  and  amount  to  irrationality.  He
argued  that  the  findings  at  [60]  undermine  the  overall   article   8
proportionality assessment carried out by the Judge. He urged me to set  the
decision aside and to fix a second stage  evidential  hearing  to  determine
the case of new.

9.    (a)   Ms Fijiwala, for the respondent, told me that the decision  does
not contain any errors of law, material or  otherwise.  She  said  that  the
decision is, in fact, a  carefully  worded  decision  demonstrating  that  a
flawless fact finding exercise had been carried out by the  Judge,  who  had
correctly directed himself in law before reaching  unassailable  conclusions
which were well within the range of  conclusions  open  to  the  Judge.  She
argued the grounds of appeal amounted to little more than an attempt to  re-
litigate matters which have now been judicially determined.  She  relied  on
[13] to [16] of EB Kosovo. She told me that a fair reading of  the  decision
indicated that the Judge had taken full account of  the  delay  in  reaching
the respondent's decision in the applications made by  the  appellants,  and
that the Judge had given correct weight to the impact of that delay.

    (b)    Ms Fijiwala told me that at [54] the  Judge  finds  that  family
life exists between parents and the first appellant's son and that  at  [70]
he had taken account of the first appellant's son's  age  and  the  shifting
balance now that his relationship with a long-term girlfriend  was  becoming
more important than his relationship with his mother. She  told  me  that  a
fair  reading  of  the   decision   clearly   demonstrates   that   a   full
proportionality balancing exercise had been carried out by  the  Judge,  who
took account of every facet of these appellants cases.

    (c)    Turning to the third ground  of  appeal,  Ms  Fijiwala  drew  my
attention to [60] of the decision  and  insisted  that  there  has  been  no
unfairness and that the Judge took full account of the fact that  appellants
have been victims of deception

Analysis

10.   The first ground of  appeal  is  in  two  parts.  Ground  1(a)  is  an
argument that the Judge was wrong to find that the  failure  to  follow  the
exact wording of the  respondent's  paper  "Every  Child  Matters"  was  not
unlawful. The central issue relates to delay which  is  dealt  with  by  the
judge between [62]  and  [67].  At  [65]  the  Judge  clearly  engages  with
counsel's argument in relation to  illegality,  and  rejects  the  argument.
Ground 1(a) does not identify an error  of  law  but  is,  quite  simply,  a
refusal by the appellants to accept findings that were competently  made  by
the Judge.

11.   Ground 1(b) relates directly to the question of delay, and is  without
substance. The Judge manifestly engages with the issue delay.  He  commences
[62] by finding that there has been serious delay. At  [64]  he  finds  that
there are two chapters to the delay, the first being the  responsibility  of
the appellants the second being the responsibility of the respondent.

12.   In EB (Kosovo) (FC) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41  the  House  of  Lords  said
that delay could be relevant in three ways. First the applicant  may  during
the period of  any  delay  develop  closer  personal  and  social  ties  and
establish deeper roots in the community than he could  have  shown  earlier.
The longer the period of delay the likelier this is  to  be  true.   To  the
extent  that  it  is  true  the  applicant's  case  will  be   strengthened.
Secondly, delay may be relevant to an immigrant without leave  to  enter  or
remain who is in a precarious situation, liable  to  removal  at  any  time.
Any relationship into which such an applicant enters is  likely,  initially,
to be tentative, being  entered  into  under  the  shadow  of  severance  by
administrative order.  This is more  true  where  the  other  party  to  the
relationship is aware of the  precarious  nature  of  the  position  and  is
treated as relevant to the quality of  the  relationship.   With  delay  the
sense of impermanence in such a relationship will fade.  Thirdly  delay  may
be relevant in reducing the weight that would otherwise be accorded to  fair
and firm immigration control if the delay is shown to be  the  result  of  a
dysfunctional system which yields unpredictable and unfair results.

13.   Between [62] and [67] the Judge carefully  considered  the  impact  of
delay, and factors that delay into  the  overall  proportionality  balancing
exercise. Ground 1(b) is  framed  on  the  basis  that  the  Judge  "wrongly
concluded ...". Once again it is a ground  of  appeal  whose  foundation  is
simply a disagreement with a finding in fact which was open to the Judge  to
make. In Green (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT 254 (IAC) (Blake  J)  the
Tribunal said that "Giving weight to a factor one way or another is for  the
fact finding Tribunal and the assignment of weight will rarely give rise  to
an error of law".

14.   The second ground of appeal argues  that  the  Judge  failed  to  make
findings of the impact of these two appellants  separation  from  the  first
appellant's son (whose appeal was successful). The first appellant's son  is
now an adult. At [55] the Judge finds that family life exists between  these
appellants and the first appellant's son.  But  the  reason  for  the  first
appellant's son's success at appeal are set out at [70]. It  is  there  that
the Judge finds that family life exists between the  first  appellant's  son
and his long-term girlfriend, who he intends to  marry.  In  doing  so,  the
Judge clearly draws a balance between the development  of  family  life  and
the fact that the dependency the first appellant's son has had on these  two
appellants is coming to an end. The evidence in this case was  clearly  that
a new family unit is in the course of creation  between  the  appellant  and
his long-term girlfriend. There is no inconsistency between [55]  and  [70].
When the two paragraphs read  together  it  is  clear  that  the  Judge  has
considered the natural progression of family life and the age of  the  first
appellant's son.

15.   In Kugathas v SSHD [2003] INLR 170 the Court of Appeal said  that,  in
order to establish family life, it is necessary to  show  that  there  is  a
real committed or effective  support  or  relationship  between  the  family
members and the normal emotional ties between a  mother  and  an  adult  son
would not, without more, be enough. In Etti-Adegbola v SSHD [2009] EWCA  Civ
1319 the Court of Appeal concentrated on the last  part  of  that  test  and
confirmed that the Tribunal had applied the right test  in  finding  that  a
family's behaviour was "no way exceptional  or  beyond  the  norm".   In  JB
(India) and Others v ECO, Bombay [2009] EWCA Civ 234  the  Court  of  Appeal
reiterated that the approach in Kugathas must be applied to the question  of
whether family life for the purposes of Article 8 subsists  between  parents
and adult children.

16.   The Judge's finding that family life exists  between  the  appellant's
son  and  his  long-term  girlfriend  is  entirely   consistent   with   the
established case law. It is also consistent with the implicit  finding  that
the article 8 rights of these appellants and the first appellant's  son  are
entirely separate, so that it was correct to consider them independently  of
one  another.  Because  family  life  is  established  between   the   first
appellant's son and his girlfriend, it is  not  necessary  to  consider  the
impact of separation  of  the  first  appellant  from  her  adult  son.  The
creation of a new, independent family unit  was  one  of  the  determinative
factors in each of the separate appeals. The  inevitable  separation  caused
by the first appellant's son's intention to marry is part  of  the  ordinary
life cycle of a family.

17.   The third ground of appeal alleges procedural  unfairness  caused  by
the Judge's credibility findings. At [54]  the  Judge  finds  that  a  Miss
Vivieros was convicted for fraudulently providing immigration  services  to
the appellant and others; the Judge goes on to find that that is  a  factor
which he must take into account in his overall proportionality  assessment.
At [60] the Judge finds that the first appellant does not give  a  flawless
account of her involvement with Ms Vivieros, however, the  Judge  concludes
that he must take the deception  practised  on  the  first  appellant  into
account. What the Judge clearly does is take a balanced view of the overall
evidence and consider which parts of the appellant's evidence are  reliable
and which parts are not. He does not say that he finds the first  appellant
to be wholly incredible, nor does he rejects  the  appellant's  account  of
being a victim of deception. Instead  he  carefully  weighs  all  of  those
matters to inform his proportionality assessment. That is precisely what  a
Judge should do.

18.   Taken together, the grounds of appeal amount to a  challenge  to  the
Judge's article 8 proportionality assessment, but they do  not  identify  a
material error of law. In R (on the application of Luma Sh Khairdin) v SSHD
(NIA 2002: Part 5A) IJR [2014] UKUT 00566 (IAC) it was held where the Upper
Tribunal is considering, pursuant to section 11 of  the  Tribunals,  Courts
and Enforcement Act 2007, whether there is an error of law in the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal involving Article 8 proportionality, the task of
the Upper Tribunal is confined (at that point) to deciding  if  the  First-
tier Tribunal's assessment of where to strike  the  balance  was  unlawful,
according to the error of law principles set out in R  (Iran)  [2005]  EWCA
Civ 982. In R (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA civ 982 the Court  of  Appeal  took
the firm view that a decision  on  proportionality  of  an  Adjudicator  or
Immigration Judge who has properly directed himself can only be  overturned
on reconsideration on traditional public law  grounds.   In  Akaeke  [2005]
EWCA Civ 947 Carnwath LJ said much the same thing when he observed that the
weight given to a relevant factor, such as unreasonable delay of  the  Home
Office, is a matter for the Tribunal,  "subject  only  to  the  constraints
imposed by judicial review principles".

19.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that although a decision may  contain  an  error  of  law
where the requirements to give adequate reasons  are  not  met,  the  Upper
Tribunal would not normally set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal
where there has been no  misdirection  of  law,  the  fact-finding  process
cannot be criticised and the relevant Country Guidance has been taken  into
account, unless the conclusions the judge draws from the primary data  were
not reasonably open to him or her.

20.   In each of these cases, the Judge carefully considered each strand  of
evidence placed before him. He carefully records the submissions  that  were
made and then, after correctly directing  himself  in  law,  makes  reasoned
findings of fact before reaching conclusions which were manifestly  open  to
him to reach.

21.   I find that the Judge's decision, when  read  as  a  whole,  sets  out
findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on  cogent
reasoning.

CONCLUSION

22.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

23.   The appeals are dismissed. The decision of  the  First  tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed      Date 2 January 2016

