
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Numbers:
IA/31626/2015

                                                     IA/31268/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                |              Decision & Reasons      |
|                                    |Promulgated                           |
|On: 11 May 2017                     |              On: 16 May 2017         |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                SAEED RAJPUT
                                 ABIDA SAEED
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellants:    Mr Read (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are both citizens of Pakistan.  The first  appellant  is
    the husband of the second appellant.  The appellants are the parents of
    two British citizen daughters working in the United Kingdom  ('UK')  as
    doctors.  The couple also have two sons said to be residing in  the  UK
    and Dubai respectively.


 2. The appellants have appealed  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dated 28 September 2016 in which it  dismissed  their  appeals
    under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 3. In a decision dated 20 February  2017  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lindsley
    granted the appellants permission  to  appeal  against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision on the basis that it is arguable that: (i) there  was
    a failure  to  determine  the  family  life  relationship  between  the
    appellants and their daughters under Article 8 of the ECHR,  and;  (ii)
    the assessment of medical evidence relating to  the  first  appellant's
    ability to fly is irrational.

Error of law

Agreed approach

 4. At the beginning of the hearing I indicated a provisional view  to  the
    representatives: as observed in the decision granting  permission,  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to make any findings on family life and this
    aspect of the appeal needs to be remade but there has  been  no  appeal
    against the factual findings  (save  for  the  letter  from  the  first
    appellant's GP, Dr Morais), and these findings should form the basis of
    the family life Article 8 assessment together with any updated evidence
    and submissions.  Both representatives agreed with this approach.

GP letter

 5. As far as the error of law stage of the hearing was concerned, I  heard
    brief submissions from Mr Read to  the  effect  that  the  findings  at
    [15(i)] were not open to the First-tier Tribunal.  I did  not  need  to
    hear from Mr McVeety.


 6. In my judgment, the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to  attach  little
    weight to  the  evidence  of  the  first  appellant's  GP,  Dr  Morais,
    contained in a letter dated 16 June 2016, that the first  appellant  is
    not fit to fly "due to his deteriorating physical and  mental  health".
    In my judgment, the reasons  provided  for  this  at  [15(i)]  are  not
    irrational.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  regard  the
    evidence as being relevant to the first  appellant's  circumstances  in
    June 2016, as opposed to the date of hearing some three  months  later.
    The assessment of fitness to fly for illness worsened by stress is  not
    a fixed concept, but likely  to  be  fluctuating   and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was entitled to note that the GP letter did  not  address  the
    circumstances nearer in time to the date of  hearing.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal was also entitled to note that the GP did not consider whether
    there are ways in which the adverse impact of flying could be  reduced,
    such as one  of  the  daughters  accompanying  the  appellants  on  the
    journey.  Importantly, the First-tier Tribunal drew  attention  to  the
    absence of support for the GP's assessment regarding  fitness  to  fly,
    from any of the specialist consultants treating  the  first  appellant.
    It was argued on the appellant's behalf that the GP was  better  placed
    to assess fitness to fly.  I entirely accept that a GP is in  principle
    able to assess fitness to fly, however in this particular case  it  was
    not  irrational  to  take  into  account  a  complete  absence  of  any
    indication of  concerns  with  flying  from  the  appellant's  treating
    cardiologist, Dr Jenkins, when he had offered his opinion on the  first
    appellant's health in a letter dated 29 February 2016.  Dr Jenkins  was
    aware that the first appellant was going through an appeals process but
    did not address the appellant's ability to fly in the event his  appeal
    was unsuccessful.


 7. I therefore ruled that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  of  fact,
    including the assessment of the GP letter, were  not  infected  by  any
    error of law.  It followed that my assessment of family  life  for  the
    purposes of Article  8(1)  and  proportionality  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8(2), should be made in light of those factual findings.   Both
    representatives agreed with this approach.

Remaking the decision

Hearing

 8. Mr Read asked for more time to prepare for the  'substantive'  hearing.
    I therefore stood the matter down until 11.45, when Mr  Read  indicated
    he was ready  to  proceed.   At  the  beginning  of  the  'substantive'
    hearing, Mr Read invited  me  to  take  into  account  three  items  of
    documentary evidence not available  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal:  (i)
    correspondence demonstrating the initial hearing listed to be heard  in
    June 2016 was adjourned at the appellants' request,  and  relisted  for
    September 2016, when it was heard; (ii) a letter dated 28  August  2015
    from Dr Jenkins, which  describes  the  first  appellant's  history  of
    coronary artery bypass graft surgery and stroke.  He concluded that  it
    is difficult to predict his long-term prognosis  and  that  whilst  the
    current  medication  regime  reduces  the  risk  of  a  further  stroke
    substantially, he is still at risk; (iii) a letter  dated  3  September
    2015 from Dr Morais, to which I return later.  Mr Read  confirmed  that
    he did not wish to rely  upon  any  updated  evidence  (documentary  or
    oral), post-dating the First-tier Tribunal hearing.


 9. Mr McVeety invited me to find that although the  appellants  live  with
    one of their daughters at present, there is  no  family  life  for  the
    purposes of Article 8(1). In any event, he  submitted  the  appellants'
    immigration history is such that there is a strong public  interest  in
    removal and this greatly outweighs the family life in question.

10. In his submissions Mr Read pointed out  that  both  daughters  are  now
    British citizens.  He invited me to find  that  there  is  family  life
    between the daughters and their parents, in light  of  the  nature  and
    extent  of  the  links  and  contacts,  the  ages  and  health  of  the
    appellants, and the living arrangements.


11. Mr Read invited me to revisit the findings relating to  the  assessment
    of whether the first appellant is fit to  fly,  in  light  of  all  the
    evidence available. He however accepted there was  no  updated  medical
    evidence beyond that available  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    additional three documents referred to above (which  all  pre-date  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing).


12. Mr Read confirmed that he placed no reliance upon Article  3  and  only
    relied upon Article 8  in  so  far  as  it  concerns  respect  for  the
    appellants' family life. He clarified that the relevance of the medical
    evidence generally, and the proposition that  the  first  appellant  is
    unable to fly specifically, is solely in  relation  to  explaining  the
    nature and depth of the dependence of  the  first  appellant  upon  his
    daughters.


13. At the end of submissions, I reserved my decision,  which  I  now  give
    with reasons.

Approach to Article 8

14. This is a case that potentially involves the family and private life of
    two people, who are not foreign national offenders, but in relation  to
    whom it is now accepted cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules.   As  such  the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of  compelling
    circumstances -  see  Treebhawon  and  Others  (NIAA  2002  Part  5A  -
    compelling circumstances test) [2017] UKUT 13 (IAC)  at  [44].   In  so
    doing I must apply the five  stage  Razgar  v  SSHD  [2004]  2  AC  368
    questions.  Of particular importance in this case  are  the  following:
    identifying the relevant family  and  private  life  to  be  respected,
    determining the weight to be  attached  to  these  in  accordance  with
    Article 8 jurisprudence and Part 5A  of  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ('the  2002  Act');  taking  into  account  the  public
    interest considerations; conducting the relevant balancing exercise.

Family and private life

15. It is now uncontroversial that in Article 8 jurisprudence, the  meaning
    of 'family life' can extend in certain circumstances to include,  inter
    alia, relationships between adults: see  AA  v  UK  [2012]  INLR  1,  R
    (Gurung) v SSHD [2013] 1 WLR 2546 and Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ  630
    in which Sir Stanley Burnton said this at [24]:

           "I do not think that the judgments to which I have referred lead
           to any difficulty in determining the correct approach to Article
           8 in cases involving adult children. In the case of  adults,  in
           the context of immigration control, there is no legal or factual
           presumption as to the existence or absence of  family  life  for
           the purposes of Article 8. I point out that the approach of  the
           European  Commission  for  Human  Rights  cited  approvingly  in
           Kugathas did not include any requirement of  exceptionality.  It
           all depends on the facts. The  love  and  affection  between  an
           adult and his parents or siblings will not of itself  justify  a
           finding of a family life. There has  to  be  something  more.  A
           young adult living with his parents or  siblings  will  normally
           have a family life to be respected  under  Article  8.  A  child
           enjoying a family life with his parents does not suddenly  cease
           to have a family life at midnight as he turns 18 years  of  age.
           On the other hand, a young adult  living  independently  of  his
           parents may well not have a family  life  for  the  purposes  of
           Article 8."


16. In the recent Court of Appeal decision of Raiv v SSHD [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    330 the above principles were noted to be uncontroversial.


17. It is not disputed that the appellants do not have family life for  the
    purposes  of  Article  8  with  their  UK-based  son.   He  has   lived
    independently of his parents for a long time and does not  provide  any
    particular emotional or financial support over  and  above  the  normal
    bonds of  love  and  affection.  I  now  turn  my  attention  to  their
    relationship  with  their  daughters,  the  sole  focus  of  Mr  Read's
    submissions.


18. Fareeha, is a British  citizen,  about  43  years  old  (her  statement
    provides an age but not a date of birth).  She is a full-time GP.   She
    currently lives with her parents in Manchester and has  done  so  since
    April 2016. Prior to this she lived and worked in  Doncaster.   In  her
    statement she explains that she moved to  Manchester  in  order  to  be
    close to her parents and to "provide support to them to run their daily
    life like shopping etc., attending hospitals and GP appointments".


19. Her sister, Aqsa, is about 39.  She is also a British citizen and full-
    time GP.  She lives independently of  her  parents  with  her  husband,
    having moved away from her parents' home in  December  2015  [10],  but
    visits them on a daily basis.  In her statement  she  claims  that  she
    does this to ensure timely medication and monitor  her  father's  well-
    being and condition on a regular basis.  She also  assists  in  running
    their daily life such as cooking, cleaning, attending hospitals and  GP
    appointments.  Aqsa has also explained that she is in  a  "married  off
    and on have problematic family situation".   Her  parents  support  her
    through these difficulties.


20. I now turn to the first appellant's health concerns.  I do not  propose
    to address every item of evidence.  I have taken all the evidence  into
    account and focus upon the evidence relied upon by  Mr  Read.   It  has
    been claimed that the appellants' ages (they are in their late 60s) and
    the first appellant's health  make  them  particularly  dependent  upon
    their daughters.  When  this  is  viewed  together  with  the  family's
    circumstances in the UK, it is argued  that  there  is  a  particularly
    close family  relationship  between  the  appellants  and  their  adult
    daughters.  I accept that the daughters are close to their parents, and
    there  is  love  and  affection  between  them.    I  accept  that  the
    appellants rely upon their daughters for financial support and that the
    daughters assist them with some  day  to  day  activities.   I  do  not
    accept, on the evidence available to me, that the  first  appellant  is
    dependent upon his daughters to care for him medically or in any  other
    manner, on a day to day basis.  As the First-tier Tribunal observed  at
    [16(k)] he is a "highly articulate, capable and bright man...capable of
    looking after his medicine and the occasional visit to a doctor."  Both
    daughters work full-time  and  the  appellants  look  after  themselves
    during this time.  In any event, the evidence available to me does  not
    address the medical condition of the first appellant as at the date  of
    hearing, and dates to June 2016 and beforehand.


21. The letters from Dr Jenkins demonstrates that  the  appellant  has  had
    coronary surgery in 2009 and suffered from a small stroke in 2015.   He
    is on long term medical therapy for these matters.   These  letters  do
    not indicate that it  is  necessary  for  the  first  appellant  to  be
    accompanied to medical appointments or for his condition to be  checked
    on a daily basis.  Indeed the letter dated February 2016 was a  review,
    and a further review was offered in six months.  This is not indicative
    of extensive, regular medical appointments.


22. I accept that the first appellant has health concerns as summarised  by
    Dr Morais, and  this  includes  a  combination  of  concerns  including
    coronary issues, the risk of another stroke, stress and diabetes.  I do
    not accept that these cannot be treated in Pakistan.   The  exact  same
    medication may not be available but there is insufficient  evidence  to
    support the proposition that the  first  appellant  cannot  be  treated
    appropriately in Pakistan.  As the First-tier Tribunal pointed  out  at
    [15(f)], the daughters earn very  good  salaries  in  the  UK  and  the
    appellants will be able to access good medical care and  other  support
    in Pakistan.


23. I do not accept the submission that the first  appellant  is  unfit  to
    fly.  There is no updated medical evidence before me  to  support  that
    proposition.  In a letter dated 3 September 2015, Dr Morais stated that
    the first appellant "is not suitable to travel at  the  moment  as  the
    control of his  INR  is  proving  somewhat  difficult.   Until  he  has
    stabilised INR I believe it is not advisable for him to travel  due  to
    the risk of bleeding due to uncontrolled INR and also due to  the  risk
    of stroke if it is too law".  By February 2016 Dr Jenkins described the
    INR as more stable than previously.  In  the  June  2016  letter  again
    refers to an unstable INR but there is no up to date evidence  from  Dr
    Jenkins regarding this.  Dr  Morais  described  the  first  appellant's
    physical health as having deteriorated in June 2016 but there is no  up
    to  date  medical  evidence  addressing  the  control  of   the   first
    appellant's INR or any other matter that might indicate he is unable to
    fly.  I have not even been provided with any updated evidence from  the
    first appellant about his medical condition.  He attended  the  hearing
    but did not submit an updated statement.  There was no  application  to
    call him to give evidence.  The daughters did not  attend  the  hearing
    and have not provided updated statements.


24. Whilst I accept that the daughters may assist the  first  appellant  by
    attending hospitals and GP appointments with him and visiting at  lunch
    from time to time, the medical evidence does not support the claim that
    this is necessary.  In any event the first appellant has the support of
    his wife, the second appellant.  Mr Read did not draw my  attention  to
    any significant health concerns relating to the second appellant. It is
    difficult to see why the appellants cannot undertake shopping and other
    daily tasks  together,  and  without  assistance  from  the  daughters.
    Having considered all the evidence together, I find that the appellants
    are able to, and do, on a  regular  basis,  carry  out  tasks  such  as
    shopping  and  attending  appointments  without  their  daughters.    I
    consider the evidence as to dependency upon the daughters to have  been
    exaggerated.    The appellants attended the hearing before  me  without
    their daughters.


25. I do not accept that there is that necessary ingredient  of  "something
    more" than love and affection between the appellants  and  their  adult
    daughters in order for there to be family  life  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8(1).

              i) I do not accept that the first appellant's current  medical
                 condition requires the  level  of  care  claimed  from  the
                 daughters;
             ii) Whilst the first appellant has health needs, these are  met
                 by an appropriate medical regime in the UK and can  be  met
                 in Pakistan, and do not require any  particular  additional
                 support from the daughters, albeit I accept  that  all  the
                 parties benefit from the normal love, affection and support
                 generally present in such family relationships;
            iii) The daughters are committed to their  parents  but  do  not
                 provide any real or  effective  additional  support  beyond
                 that to be expected within the boundaries of  normal  bonds
                 of love, care and affection;
             iv) I find that the appellants are  able  to  and  do  mutually
                 support one another;
              v) Although Fareeha has lived with her  parents  for  about  a
                 year, they appeared to cope reasonably well for the  period
                 when they did not live with one of their  daughters  before
                 this.  Fareeha is 43 and has her  full-time  employment  of
                 her own.
             vi) Aqsa has her own  family  and  does  not  reside  with  her
                 parents.


26. The assessment of family life depends on a careful  assessment  of  all
    the facts.  Having carried this out I find that that  whilst  there  is
    family life between the appellants and their daughters, this  does  not
    constitute family life for the purposes of Article 8(1).


Public interest considerations


27. In case I am wrong about the absence of family life for the purposes of
    Article 8(1), I now go on to conduct the proportionality assessment.  I
    do so on the basis that the relationships between  the  appellants  and
    their daughters constitutes family life for Article 8(1) purposes.
28. Proportionality is the "public interest question" within the meaning of
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act.  For ease of reference I  set  out  below  the
    relevant extracts from Part 5A.

           "117B Article 8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in
    all cases
           (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in  the
           public interest.
           (2) It is in the public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and (b) are  better  able
           to integrate into society.
           (3) It is in the public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           financially independent, because such persons-
           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and (b) are  better  able  to
           integrate into society.
           (4) Little weight should be given to-
           (a) a  private  life,  or  (b)  a  relationship  formed  with  a
           qualifying partner, that is established by a person  at  a  time
           when the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.
           (5) Little weight should be given to a private life  established
           by a person at a time when the person's  immigration  status  is
           precarious.
           (6) In the case of a person who is not  liable  to  deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-
           (a)  the  person  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and (b) it  would  not  be
           reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom."


29. By section 117A(2) of the 2002 Act I am obliged to have regard  to  the
    considerations listed in section 117B.  I consider  that  section  117B
    applies to this appeal in the following way:

              i)  The  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective
                 immigration controls is engaged.  There is a strong  public
                 interest in the  removal  of  the  appellants.   The  first
                 appellant conceded that when he arrived in the UK  in  2004
                 it was his intention to settle - see [8(b)] of  the  First-
                 tier Tribunal decision.  When his visa expired in  2007  he
                 remained  in  the   UK   unlawfully,   notwithstanding   an
                 unsuccessful  appeal.    The   appellants   are   therefore
                 longstanding overstayers from 2008  and  have  remained  in
                 full knowledge of this - see [6] and [15(g) and  (h)].   Mr
                 Read accepted in his submissions that the  first  appellant
                 could not be said to have acted reasonably  or  responsibly
                 in overstaying his leave.
             ii) There is no infringement of the "English  speaking"  public
                 interest in relation to the first appellant, but  there  is
                 in relation to the second.
            iii)  The  economic  interest  must  be  engaged   because   the
                 appellants have had and will continue to  have  significant
                 and extended recourse upon the  NHS.   The  daughters  have
                 assisted in looking after their  parents  but  not  secured
                 private medical insurance for them, even  though  they  are
                 able to afford this.
             iv) The evidence relevant to the private lives  established  by
                 the parents is very scant indeed despite the length of time
                 that they have been in the UK.  That private life qualifies
                 for the attribution of little weight only.


30. As set out above I proceed on the assumption that there is family  life
    for the purposes of Article 8(1).  Although the daughters support their
    parents, they do not require full-time carers.  They would be  able  to
    cope reasonably with paid support and medical  attention  in  Pakistan.
    The daughters would be able to afford this.    Whilst  the  nature  and
    extent of the family life will undoubtedly change and probably  reduce,
    it will not cease.  All the relevant actors are likely  to  be  anxious
    about disrupting the status quo that has existed for many years but the
    daughters will be able to take it  in  turns  to  visit  their  parents
    regularly in Pakistan.  They were born in and grew up in  Pakistan  and
    continue to have strong links there.  The First-tier Tribunal noted  at
    [8(c)]  that  Aqsa's  passport  revealed  that  she  often  travels  to
    Pakistan.


31. The interference with the family life in question is outweighed by  the
    strong public interest in removing the  appellants,  given  their  poor
    immigration history.  This includes entering the UK on a temporary HSMO
    visa even though there was  an  admitted  intention  to  settle  and  a
    prolonged period of blatant unlawful overstaying. When asked about this
    in the First-tier Tribunal, Aqsa was unable to  explain  why  no  steps
    were taken to regularise the appellants' status at an earlier  point  -
    see [10].


32. I therefore conclude that even if there is family life for the purposes
    of  Article  8(1),  the   interference   with   this   would   not   be
    disproportionate for the purposes of Article 8(2).

Decision

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside to the limited extent indicated above.


34. I remake the  decision  by  dismissing  the  appeals  on  human  rights
    grounds.


Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 12 May 2017
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
