
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: IA/31153/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |     Decision & Reasons          |
|                                          |Promulgated                      |
|On 16 November 2017                       |     On 04 January 2018          |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                            Heidi PradillA Ybanez
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. G. Cutting, Counsel, instructed by RC
Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Row, promulgated  on  23  November  2016,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse further leave to remain.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "The grounds contend that the Judge erred in considering  the  position
    of the Appellant's 9 month British citizen child, born between the date
    of the refusal and the date  of  the  hearing.   While  it  is  unclear
    whether the Home Office policy set out at page 3  of  the  grounds  was
    brought to the judge's attention by the Appellant representative at the
    hearing, the failure to have regard to it in the decision  renders  the
    grounds arguable."


 3.  The  Appellant  and  Sponsor  attended  the  hearing.   I  heard  oral
    submissions from both representatives following which I stated  that  I
    found the decision involved the making of a material error of  law  and
    that my full reasons would follow.


Submissions


 4. Mr. Cutting submitted that, following the Home Office policy, it  would
    be unreasonable for  a  British  citizen  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  It would be appropriate to grant  leave  in  the  Appellant's
    case because  there  were  no  considerations  such  as  illegality  or
    criminality which justified separation.  At [28] the  judge  had  found
    that the Appellant was trying to avoid an application  made  under  the
    immigration rules but this was not the case.  The Appellant  had  given
    birth in between the application and the hearing.  The  proper  way  to
    proceed was to amend the grounds to include the British citizen  child,
    which was what had been done.  It was not an attempt to circumvent  the
    immigration rules but was the only way to deal with  the  circumstances
    which had arisen.  He submitted that the policy should have been  taken
    into account.


 5. I was referred to the case of Mandalia [2015] UKSC  59,  in  particular
    paragraph [29].  This states:


    "So the applicant's right to the determination of  his  application  in
    accordance with policy is now generally taken to flow from a principle,
    no doubt related to the doctrine of legitimate  expectation  but  free-
    standing, which was best articulated by Laws  LJ  in  R  (Nadarajah)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]  EWCA  Civ  1363,  as
    follows:


         "68 ... Where a public authority has issued a promise or adopted  a
         practice which represents how it proposes to act in a  given  area,
         the law will require the promise or practice to be honoured  unless
         there is good reason not to do so. What  is  the  principle  behind
         this proposition? It is not far to seek. It is said to be  grounded
         in fairness, and no doubt in general terms  that  is  so.  I  would
         prefer to express it rather more broadly as a requirement  of  good
         administration,   by   which   public   bodies   ought   to    deal
         straightforwardly and consistently with the public.""


  6. Mr. Cutting submitted that he liked to hope that the  Respondent  would
     have made a different decision in the Appellant's case had the  British
     citizen child been born at the time of application.


 7. In response Mr. Nath asked whether the policy had been put to the judge
    to consider.  He accepted that matters had to be considered as  at  the
    date of the hearing, and that the  child  had  been  born  between  the
    application and the decision.  However, the judge needed to be taken to
    the policy.  The judge had  considered  the  Appellant's  circumstances
    from paragraphs [10] to [22] and whether  it  was  reasonable  for  the
    Appellant to leave.  He had considered the return  as  a  family  unit.
    The Appellant knew that her status was precarious  but  she  had  given
    birth to a child when this status was precarious.  The judge considered
    this at [29] and found against her.  It was a  position  that  a  judge
    could take.


 8. Mr. Cutting submitted that it was  clear,  as  shown  by  [19]  of  the
    decision, that the Appellant's case had been argued on the  same  terms
    as the policy, i.e. that it was unreasonable to expect the Appellant to
    leave the United Kingdom.  The decision was muddled.   In  relation  to
    section 117B(4), family life established  when  a  person  was  in  the
    United Kingdom legally, even if with precarious status, could be  given
    weight.  The Appellant had always been  here  legally.   Little  weight
    should not have been given to her family life as the precariousness  of
    her  leave  was  not  an  issue.   Neither  the  Appellant's  nor   the
    Respondent's representative had provided the guidance, but it  was  the
    Respondent who was  responsible  for  putting  the  policy  before  the
    Tribunal.  The policy should have been considered and  the  Appellant's
    removal was not in the  public  interest  in  accordance  with  section
    117B(6).


Error of law


 9. I find that the decision involved the making of a material error of law
    in the judge's failure  to  consider  the  Respondent's  guidance,  the
    Immigration Directorate Instruction Family Migration, Appendix FM 1.0b,
    Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year  Routes,
    August 2015.


10. The guidance was provided  to  me.    Paragraph  11.2.3  addresses  the
    question of whether it would be reasonable to expect a British  citizen
    child to leave the UK.  It states:


         "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.


         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, provided  that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.


         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where  the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
         otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer  in
         the UK or in the EU."


 11. The judge addressed the question of whether it was reasonable to expect
     the Appellant's child to leave the United Kingdom from  [19]  to  [22].
     This followed consideration of the welfare of the child  from  [13]  to
     [18].  It was submitted by Mr. Nath that the judge was considering  the
     case of the family returning together, but he also accepted  that  this
     was not the question that had to be asked.  Under section  117B(6)  the
     question to be asked is whether or not it is  reasonable  to  expect  a
     British citizen child to leave the United Kingdom.


 12. I accept Mr. Cutting's submission that the decision is not very clearly
     set out, but I find that the consideration of the child's welfare is at
     [13] to [22].  The judge refers to the welfare of  the  child  being  a
     primary consideration [13].  At  [18]  the  decision  states  that  the
     child's best  interests  are  to  stay  with  his  mother  and  father.
     However, at [18] it also states: "The  child  would  not  be  adversely
     affected however if the family decided to move to the Philippines.


 13. As stated above, this is not what  has  to  be  considered.   The  best
     interests of the child are to  stay  with  his  mother  and  father  as
     stated.  The effect of the Respondent's decision  is  to  separate  the
     child from his mother, the  Appellant.   Therefore,  as  found  by  the
     judge, the best interests of the child are not served by the  decision.
     This has to be taken into account when the reasonableness of return  is
     considered.


 14. Further, I find that the judge has not considered the age of the  child
     as at the date of the decision.  The child was born on  22  April  2016
     and therefore at  the  decision  would  have  been  seven  months  old.
     Therefore the finding that he could return whenever he  wished  to  the
     United Kingdom is not founded on the facts.  Further, I find  that  the
     finding at [20] that the child could remain with his  father  does  not
     fully take into account his very young age at the date of the hearing.


 15. The judge has considered reasonableness of  return  by  applying  other
     factors such as the entire family moving to the Philippines,  but  this
     is not what has to be considered.  The consideration is what is in  the
     best interests of the child and to weigh up the effect of the  decision
     on those best interests.


 16. There is no  reference  at  all  to  the  Respondent's  guidance  which
     provides that, in a  case  where  a  British  citizen  child  would  be
     required to leave the  United  Kingdom,  the  starting  point  is  that
     removal of that child would be unreasonable.  If the Appellant's mother
     were to leave the United Kingdom, the best interests of the child would
     not be served.  The judge has looked at it from the point  of  view  of
     the Appellant and Sponsor moving to the Philippines as a  family  unit,
     but this was not the question before the judge under section 117B(6).


 17. I find that the judge's  decision  has  also  been  influenced  by  the
     finding that the Appellant was trying  to  circumvent  the  immigration
     rules.   This  was  not  the  case.   The  child  was  born  after  the
     Respondent's decision had been made, and an  appeal  had  been  lodged.
     The situation as at the date of the hearing was that there was a  young
     British child who needed to be  considered.   I  find  the  failure  to
     consider the guidance and the failure to properly apply it to the facts
     as at the date of the decision is a material error of law.





Remaking

 18. Following the case of Mandalia, the  Respondent's  guidance  should  be
     taken into account.  I was also referred to SF  and  others  (Guidance,
     post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC),  which  states  in  the
     headnote:


     "Even in the absence of a "not in accordance with the  law"  ground  of
     appeal, the Tribunal ought to take the Secretary  of  State's  guidance
     into account if it points  clearly  to  a  particular  outcome  in  the
     instant case. Only in that way  can  consistency  be  obtained  between
     those cases that do, and those cases  that  do  not,  come  before  the
     Tribunal."


 19. I have considered the Appellant's appeal under Article  8  outside  the
     immigration rules in accordance with the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.
      Evidence was provided in the form of utility bills to  show  that  the
     Appellant and Sponsor are still living together and I find  that  their
     relationship is genuine and subsisting.  Evidence was also provided  of
     their family  life  in  the  form  of  the  photographs  taken  at  the
     Appellant's child's christening.  I find that  the  Appellant,  Sponsor
     and their child have a family life sufficient to engage  the  operation
     of Article 8.  I find that  the  decision  would  interfere  with  this
     family life.


 20. Continuing the steps set out  in  Razgar,  I  find  that  the  proposed
     interference would be in accordance with the law, as  being  a  regular
     immigration decision taken by UKBA in accordance with  the  immigration
     rules.  In terms of proportionality, the Tribunal has to strike a  fair
     balance between the rights of the individual and the interests  of  the
     community.  The public interest in this case  is  the  preservation  of
     orderly and fair immigration control in the interests of all  citizens.
     Maintaining the integrity of the immigration rules is self-evidently  a
     very important public interest.  In practice, this will  usually  trump
     the  qualified  rights  of  the  individual,  unless   the   level   of
     interference is very significant.  I find that in this case, the  level
     of  interference  would  be  significant  and  that  it  would  not  be
     proportionate.


 21. In assessing the public interest I have taken into account  section  19
     of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   Section  117B(1)
     provides that the maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
     the public interest.  However, section 117B(6) provides that the public
     interest does not require the person's removal where "(a)the person has
     a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,
     and (b)it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the
     United Kingdom."


 22. I find that  the  Appellant's  child  is  a  British  citizen,  and  is
     therefore a qualifying child.  I find that the Appellant has a  genuine
     and subsisting parental relationship with her  child.   In  considering
     whether it is reasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
     Kingdom, I have considered his best interests.  I find that  it  is  in
     his best interests to remain with both of his parents.  I find that  at
     the date of the hearing before me he was under one year  old.   I  find
     that, especially given his young age, it is not in his  best  interests
     to be separated from  either  of  his  parents,  particularly  not  his
     mother.


 23. I have set out the relevant part of  the  Respondent's  guidance  above
     [10].  I find that there are no other factors which  would  lead  to  a
     reason to justify separation and  therefore,  in  accordance  with  the
     Respondent's policy, I find that it is not  reasonable  to  expect  the
     Appellant's child to leave the United Kingdom.  I therefore  find  that
     the requirements of  section  117B(6)  are  met  and  that  the  public
     interest does not require the removal of the Appellant from the  United
     Kingdom.


 24. Taking into account all of the above, I find  that  the  balance  comes
     down in favour of the Appellant.  I find, in carrying out the balancing
     exercise required, that the Appellant  has  shown  on  the  balance  of
     probabilities that the decision is a breach of her rights, and those of
     the Sponsor and their child, to a family life under Article 8 ECHR.


Decision


 25. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
     material error of law and I set the decision aside.


 26. I remake the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal on  human  rights
     grounds.  Section 117B(6) applies.


 27. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 2 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and a fee has been  paid.   The  circumstances  of
the  Appellant  changed  following  the  Respondent's  decision.    In   the
circumstances I do not make a fee award.


Signed                                  Date 2 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain






