
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/32764/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 July 2015                      |On 24 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between
                           DAVIE CHITANZO NALIKATA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Wilkins for GMIAU
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnson Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this  appeal  but
    in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in
    the First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy promulgated on  5
    December 2014 which allowed the Appellant's appeal and held that it was
    disproportionate  and  unlawful  under  Article  8  of   the   European
    Convention on Human Rights to remove him and his dependents to Malawi.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 8 May 1981 and is a national of Malawi.

 4. The Appellant and his spouse arrived in the United Kingdom in 2003  and
    2005 as students. Their leave was extended until  2011  and  2010.  The
    Appellant's last application was made on 29 January 2011 for  leave  to
    remain as a student and his spouse  as  dependent  was  refused  on  22
    February 2011. They were issued with a notice of liability for  removal
    on 25 October 2013.

 5. Their son Evan Andrew Nalikata was born 14 April 2012 with a number  of
    health problems.

 6. On 11 February 2014 an application for leave to remain was refused with
    no in country right of appeal on 4 June 2014.

 7.  On 14 July 2014 the Appellant made further representations  to  remain
    under Article 8.

 8. On 30  July  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

      a) The Appellant could not meet the requirements of  the  Rules  under
         Appendix FM and paragraph 276 ADE.

      b) The health issues of Evan did not meet the threshold of Article 3.

      c) The particular circumstances described by the Appellant in relation
         to Evan did not constitute exceptional circumstances.

The Judge's Decision

 9. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Foudy ("the Judge") allowed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
    decision under Article 8 outside the Rules. The Judge found :

      a) The Appellant could not meet the Rules as a partner or parent.

      b) The Appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE  as
         she found he had ties to Malawi where he had lived the majority  of
         his life although she found that the needs of Evan might hamper his
         efforts to reintegrate.

      c) She then considered the matter under Article 8 outside the Rules.

      d) She found the circumstances  in  the  case  to  be  compelling  and
         exceptional.

      e) She considered the involvement and commitment of the Appellant  and
         his wife to their local church.

      f) At paragraph 30 she acknowledged that she had taken into account  s
         117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act 2002 and  those
         factors are referred to throughout the decision including that fact
         that the Appellant is an  overstayer  although  this  was  after  a
         period of lawful residence(para 15); that there  is  a  significant
         public interest in removing overstayers and the cost of the  family
         to the NHS (para 25); that while they are not working now they  are
         highly qualified fluent English speakers and are likely to  make  a
         contribution to the United Kingdom economy in the future(para 26).

      g) The particular feature of the case that persuades her  to  look  at
         the case outside the Rules  and  that  she  finds  exceptional  and
         compelling is Evans health situation.

      h) She acknowledges that Evans health does not reach the threshold for
         engagement of Article 3.

      i) She examines in  detail  the  medical  evidence  and  Evans  health
         problems and concludes that returning the family  to  Malawi  is  a
         disproportionate interference with the family life of the Appellant
         , his wife and child.

10. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing  that  the  Judge  had  given  no
    consideration to the public interest factors set out in s 117B  of  the
    Nationality Asylum and Immigration Act; the Judge had  failed  to  have
    regard to Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and had  failed  to  identify
    what was exceptional about the Appellant's case.

11.  On 27 January 2015 First-tier tribunal Judge Osborne  gave  permission
    to appeal.

12. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms Johnson  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that :

      a) She suggested that the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  Rules   and
         therefore there is no need to conduct a full  separate  examination
         of Article 8 outside the Rules where, in  the  circumstances  of  a
         particular  case,  all  the  issues  have  been  addressed  in  the
         consideration under the Rules relying on Singh  and  Khaled  [2015]
         EWCA Civ 74

      b) She suggested that paragraph 276ADE(vi) should have been considered
         in relation to the child.

      c) In relation to paragraph 117B she  suggested  that  the  Judge  had
         applied the wrong test as the Appellant's leave was precarious  and
         then unlawful.

      d) The Judge had failed to consider the cost to the  taxpayer  of  the
         child's heath care.

      e) It was irrelevant that the Appellant and his wife might be able  to
         find well paid jobs in the future as the relevant date was the date
         of hearing.

      f) There was no consideration of whether  the  child  could  have  the
         treatment in Malawi or indeed what treatment would be  required  as
         of the date of hearing.

13. On behalf of the Respondent Ms Wilkins submitted that :

      a) The argument about applying the Rules to the child was difficult to
         understand and had not been in the grounds of appeal.

      b) The decision had to be looked at in the round.

      c) The Judge had rightly considered the position of the whole family.

      d) This was not a standard Article 8 case and the child's  health  was
         the central feature of the case and there was a  clear  examination
         of his best interest.

      e) Those features that Ms Johnson claimed had not been  assessed  were
         all considered in the decision.

      f) It would be open to the Respondent to grant  a  limited  period  of
         leave and review after their circumstances changed.

      g)  The  conclusion  reached  by  the  Judge  balanced  all  of  these
         considerations against the public interest.

Finding on Material Error

14. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

15. This was in essence an application for leave outside the Rules  on  the
    basis of the health circumstances  of  the  Appellant's  two  year  old
    child.

16. The grounds of appeal challenge the Judge's decision on the basis  that
    she did not give weight to those factors set out in section 117B of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. I am satisfied that  this
    is without merit. The Judge clearly  states  at  paragraph  30  of  the
    decision that she 'fully considered' the provisions. While she does not
    specifically identify them in the decision they  are  clearly  factored
    in:

       . The Judge  acknowledges  that  the  Appellant  does  not  meet  the
         requirements of the Rules (paragraph 6-10) and that it  is  in  the
         public interest to remove overstayers which reflects 117B(1)

       . The Judge acknowledges that the Appellant and his wife  are  fluent
         English speakers(paragraph 26) which reflects 117B (2)

       . She acknowledges that they are not  working  at  the  time  of  the
         decision (paragraph 26) but notes that they have worked in the past
         and are well qualified and likely to find work in the future  which
         given the focus on the economic well being of  the  United  Kingdom
         reflects 117B (3)

       . She recognises that in assessing the evidence in  this  appeal  the
         Appellant is an overstayer but also fairly points out that he lived
         in the Uk  lawfully  for  8  years  (paragraph  15)  and  that  the
         circumstances in which they came to overstay  were  rather  unusual
         (paragraph 19).

17. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Judge  in  her   proportionality
    assessment has taken into account  all  the  factors  relevant  to  the
    public interest.

18.  The  grounds  argue  that  the  Judge  failed  to  identify  what  was
    exceptional in this case in allowing it under Article 8 and  indeed  Ms
    Johnson suggested that having found that the Appellant did not meet the
    Rules no separate assessment was required. I am satisfied that this  is
    not a completely fair reflection  of  the  law.  It  is  now  generally
    accepted that the new IRs do not provide in advance for every nuance in
    the application of Article 8 in individual cases. At para 30 of  Nagre,
    Sales J said:

         "30.     ... if, after the process of applying the  new  rules  and
             finding that the claim for leave to remain under  them  fails,
             the relevant official or tribunal judge considers it is  clear
             that the consideration under the Rules has fully addressed any
             family life or private life issues arising under Article 8, it
             would be sufficient simply to say that; they would not have to
             go on, in addition, to consider the case separately  from  the
             Rules. If there is no arguable case that  there  may  be  good
             grounds for granting leave to  remain  outside  the  Rules  by
             reference to Article 8, there would be no point in introducing
             full separate consideration of Article 8  again  after  having
             reached a decision on application of the Rules."

19. This was also endorsed by the Court of Appeal in Singh and Khalid where
    Underhill LJ said (at para 64):

         "64.      ...  there  is  no  need  to  conduct  a  full   separate
             examination of article 8  outside  the  Rules  where,  in  the
             circumstances of a particular case, all the issues  have  been
             addressed in the consideration under the Rules."

20. However more recently the Court of Appeal in SS Congo [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    387 stated in paragraph 33:

         "In our judgment, even though a test  of  exceptionality  does  not
         apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
         accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of
         special contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances
         would need to be identified to support a claim  for  grant  of  LTR
         outside the new Rules in Appendix  FM.  In  our  view,  that  is  a
         formulation which is not as strict as a test of exceptionality or a
         requirement of "very compelling reasons"  (as  referred  to  in  MF
         (Nigeria) in  the  context  of  the  Rules  applicable  to  foreign
         criminals), but which  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the  focused
         consideration of public interest factors as finds expression in the
         Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in  Appendix  FM.
         It also reflects the formulation in Nagre at para. [29], which  has
         been tested and has survived scrutiny in  this  court:  see,  e.g.,
         Haleemudeen at [44], per Beatson LJ. "

21. The Judge in a careful, focused  and  balanced  decision  analysed  the
    medical evidence from both the United Kingdom and Malawi in relation to
    unusual health problems of the child of the family and  concluded  that
    these amounted to compelling circumstances that warranted  a  grant  of
    leave outside the Rules. That was the correct test to apply and she was
    entitled to reach this conclusion having taken into account all of  the
    relevant  evidence.   Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment   of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law.

22. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

23. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

24. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 23.7.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
