








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32652/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 16 September 2014                         |On 14 October 2014           |
|Prepared:  23 September 2014                  |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mr Hakiimu Seruwagi
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L Appiah, counsel (instructed by Bloomsbury
Immigration   Specialists)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer  to  the  appellant  as  the
      secretary of state and the respondent as "the claimant."


   2. First-tier Tribunal Judge James allowed the claimant's appeal  against
      the secretary of state's refusal  dated  22nd  May  2013  to  issue  a
      derivative residence card under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006
      - the 2006 regulations. She found that on the  totality  of  evidence,
      the claimant had discharged the burden  of  proof  upon  him  and  the
      reasons given by the secretary of state did not justify the refusal of
      a derivative residence card under the regulations.


   3. On 29th July 2014,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davidge  granted  the
      secretary of state's application to appeal on the basis  that  it  was
      arguable that the Judge  had  failed  adequately  to  reason  how  the
      claimant's circumstances met the requirements of Regulation 15A of the
      2006, (the derivative provisions).


   4. Ms Appiah, who also represented the  claimant  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge,  appeared  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  opposing  the
      secretary of state's appeal.


   5. On behalf of the secretary of state,  Mr  Walker  contended  that  the
      Judge erred in finding the claimant to be the  primary  carer  of  his
      eldest child. He accepted that the claimant was a direct  relative  of
      his son. The parents lived together. It is not as  though  the  couple
      have separated and live apart with only one parent looking  after  the
      child. He submitted that the child's mother, Ms  Annet  Lunkuse,  also
      assumed caring responsibility for the child. It was  clear  that  they
      all resided at the same address.


   6. Ms Lunkuse was an exempt person for the purpose of the regulations.


   7. In order to succeed under Regulation 15A(7) the claimant had  to  show
      that he was primarily responsible for the child's care.  It  had  been
      submitted that there was not sufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the
      child would be unable to remain in the EEA if the claimant were forced
      to leave the UK.


   8. Mr Walker submitted that it is  clear  that  the  child's  mother  was
      involved in the children's  lives.  Simply  because  the  claimant  is
      involved in the day to day care whilst his wife goes to study or  work
      does not result in his being regarded as "the primary carer" under the
      regulations.


   9. On behalf of the claimant, Ms Appiah submitted that regard had  to  be
      had to the  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  a  whole,
      including the statements from the appellant and his  wife.  The  Judge
      had been alive to the evidence. At the  commencement  of  the  hearing
      before the First-tier Tribunal, the Judge noted that the only  grounds
      of appeal to be proceeded with were those under the 2006  Regulations.
      She identified the issue to be whether or  not  the  claimant  is  the
      primary carer of his eldest child. Ms Appiah confirmed to me  that  it
      had been agreed that the sole issue was whether the claimant  was  the
      primary carer.


  10. She submitted that the Judge properly assessed the available  evidence
      confirming the claimant's marriage to a British citizen and  the  fact
      that since then they have had two children from that marriage. She had
      regard to the numerous payslips submitted for both  the  claimant  and
      his wife. Both hold jobs. The claimant's wife's job is studying for  a
      nursing degree as well as practical nursing  placements  at  the  same
      time.


  11.  She  noted  that  the  claimant  works  part  time.  This  part  time
      arrangement was in order to "allow" the claimant to care for  his  two
      children so that his wife could attend her university course.


  12. His wife is currently studying at Canterbury University, confirmed  by
      a letter  offering  her  a  placement  as  well  as  a  recent  letter
      confirming her attendance and enrolment on the nursing course. This is
      a degree course, which is full time with a completion  date  in  2016.
      She is  also  required  to  undertake  practical,  vocational  nursing
      placements  in  various  different  geographical  places  as  well  as
      attending formal lectures and seminars at the University of Kent, some
      70 miles distant from the marital home.


  13. The Judge had regard to both their witness  statements  and  the  oral
      evidence to the effect that the Claimant's wife leaves her London home
      often as early as 5.30 in the morning to travel  by  car  to  Kent  in
      order to undertake her vocational nursing placement and also to attend
      her lectures at the university. Ms Appiah confirmed that the  evidence
      before the Judge was that his wife returned late at night, often close
      to 11pm.


  14. The Judge had regard to the  claimant's  responsibility  for  ensuring
      that his two children are dressed and fed  prior  to  taking  them  to
      school and nursery before he leaves for  work  himself.  He  commences
      work at 10am after dropping the children off at school, and picks them
      up after finishing work from an after school club at about 5pm. It  is
      he  who  is  responsible  for  taking  them  to  doctors'  and  dental
      appointments in respect of which appointment  cards  as  well  as  NHS
      cards have been produced; he also accompanies them to play in the park
      or to go to the zoo, cinema and play centres.


  15. The Judge found from the documentation presented that the family was a
      hard working one and the wife was undertaking a degree  some  distance
      from her London home to better the opportunities for  the  family.  In
      order for her to obtain a qualification, the  family  is  prepared  to
      juggle and alter child caring arrangements from the  more  traditional
      matriarchal role to the father undertaking the primary carer role.


  16. On the entirety of the evidence before her, she found that the  father
      was the primary carer for the children.









Assessment


  17. The Judge has given a careful and detailed  assessment  in  accordance
      with the evidence presented by the claimant and his wife, coupled with
      substantial documentary evidence.


  18. It is asserted by the secretary of state that the Judge has  erred  in
      law in finding that the claimant was the primary carer. It was obvious
      that the children's mother was very much involved in their lives.


  19. In order to be the primary carer, it is not  a  requirement  that  the
      other parent is not involved in the lives of their children at all.  I
      accordingly do not accept Mr Walker's submission that 'it would  be  a
      different story' if the parties had been separated.


  20. The evidence revealed that the claimant's wife is out of the house  at
      about 5.30 am  and  returns  late  at  night.   This  relates  to  the
      undertaking of her course which also  includes  the  need  to  undergo
      placements of a practical nature.


  21. The claimant also has a part time job which  he  is  able  to  fit  in
      around the needs of the children. It is  he  who  is  responsible  for
      getting them up, taking them to school and fetching them. It is he who
      is responsible for the day to day needs  of  the  children,  including
      their medical needs. The fact that the  children's  mother  will  have
      contact with her children for part of the week does not  detract  from
      the finding that the father is responsible for their primary care.  It
      is not a requirement that he have sole care of the children.


  22. Although the mother is involved in their lives, this does not  detract
      from the findings of the Judge that  the  claimant  is  their  primary
      carer.  That finding was available and is sustainable on the  evidence
      produced.


     Decision


     The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  involve  the
making of any     material error on a  point  of  law.  The  decision  shall
accordingly stand.


     No anonymity order made.




                               Signed                 Date 23 September
                                   2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


