
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/32205/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25 July 2017                          |On 18 September 2017              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                            MR SAJJAD ALI PATHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Singh
For the Respondent:    Mr Goba


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Pathan is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1988.  He appealed against a
    decision of the Secretary of State made  on  10  September  2015  which
    refused his application for leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant under paragraphs  245ZX,  322(IA)  and  322(2)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 2. In  summary,  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    application met the requirements of Appendix A and Appendix  C  of  the
    Rules.  Further, that Mr Pathan had made a false statement in  relation
    to the application and had used deception in  relation  to  a  previous
    application.

 3. He appealed.




    First tier hearing

 4. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 19 October  2016  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Miles allowed the appeal 'to the extent that the  [Secretary
    of State's] decision is not in accordance with the law.'

 5. His analysis is at paragraphs 10 to 13 of the decision.   At  [10],  in
    respect of the claim of deception (submitting a false document namely a
    TOEIC English language certificate from ETS) he notes SM & Qadir (ETS -
    Evidence - Burden of Proof) 2016 UKUT 229 and states that the  evidence
    from the Home Office officials Ms Collings and Mr Millington 'was  held
    not to discharge the legal burden on the respondent  to  prove  such  a
    certificate to be false'.  However, he also notes 'reference to further
    evidence commissioned by the respondent in the form of a statement from
    a  Professor  Peter  French,  as  well  as  other  subsequent  reported
    decisions on this issue.'

 6. He goes on (at [12]) '... given the decision in  SM  &  Qadir  ...  the
    refusal could not be in accordance with the law  in  relation  to  that
    matter in the light of that development'.

 7. On the other matter (giving a false CAS number purportedly assigned  by
    Birkbeck College) the judge noted that there was 'discussion'  of  this
    and that 'given the standing and reputation of that college the  notion
    that it would be party to the issue of a false CAS is  very  difficult,
    simply on its face, to accept.'  Also, 'there may be  an  issue  as  to
    whether the number was correctly inputted for the purpose  of  checking
    its veracity.' [11]

 8. He concluded as follows (at [12]) (ETS) '... I was minded to allow  the
    appeal to that limited extent with a view to inviting the respondent to
    give further consideration to that issue in the light of the up-to-date
    case law and evidence.  Furthermore, such a course  would  also  enable
    the respondent to revisit the  issue  surrounding  the  CAS  number  to
    ensure that accurate checks had been married (sic).'

 9. And at [13] 'In all these circumstances  therefore,  I  find,  for  the
    reasons given, that the respondent's decision is not in accordance with
    the law, specifically in relation to the  refusal  of  the  application
    with reference to the ETS English language  certificate,  and  to  that
    extent  therefore  the  appeal  is  allowed.   It  follows   that   the
    application remains  outstanding  before  the  respondent  for  further
    consideration of that matter and the Tribunal would respectfully invite
    the  respondent  also  to  give  further  consideration  to  the  issue
    surrounding the CAS number for the reasons given.'

10. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal which was granted on
    1 June 2017.


    Error of law hearing

11. At the error of law hearing before me Mr Goba agreed with Mr Singh that
    the First-tier decision showed material error of law such that  it  had
    to be set aside.  I agreed.

12. It suffices to note the following.  The judge  failed  to  engage  with
    issues that were before him and made no relevant findings.  On the  CAS
    aspect his opinions about Birkbeck College and whether  the  respondent
    might in inputting the CAS number to check its veracity  have  confused
    the figure '1' and the capital letter 'I' and the figure '0'  with  the
    capital letter 'O' and his invitation that the  respondent  might  look
    again at it was not the correct approach.  It  was  for  the  judge  to
    analyse the evidence before him applying the appropriate  standard  and
    burden of proof and to reach reasoned findings on that matter.

13. As for the ETS issue his purported analysis is  inadequate.   While  he
    refers to SM & Qadir his  comment  that  the  case  decided  that  'the
    refusal could not be in accordance with the law' is not what that  case
    decided.   That  case  held  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  generic
    evidence,  combined  with  her  evidence  particular   to   these   two
    appellants, sufficed to discharge the evidential burden of proving that
    their TOEIC certificates had been  procured  by  dishonesty.   However,
    given the multiple frailties  from  which  this  generic  evidence  was
    considered to suffer and, in the light of the actual  evidence  adduced
    by the appellants, the Secretary of State  failed  (in  that  case)  to
    discharge the legal burden of proving dishonesty on their part.  During
    the course of the determination the Tribunal  added  that  'every  case
    belonging to the ETS/TOEIC stable will invariably  be  fact  sensitive.
    To this we add that every appeal will be determined on the basis of the
    evidence adduced by the parties' (at para 102).

14. In Mr Pathan's case the judge did not enter into analysis  of  when  or
    how Mr Pathan took the ETS case or what it involved.

15. In addition, he rejected the Secretary of State's claims  and  evidence
    without any examination of it, although that  evidence  including  from
    Professor French, was identified by the judge, listed at [10],  as  new
    evidence for the Secretary of State and indeed relied on.

16. As indicated both parties at the hearing before me agreed that, for the
    reasons given, the decision showed material error of law and  that  the
    case would need to be reheard.

Conclusions

17.  The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

18. The  decision  is  set  aside.   In  light  of  the  foregoing,  it  is
    appropriate in terms of section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the  2007  Act  and  of
    Practice Statement 7.2 to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for
    a fresh hearing before a different judge with no findings preserved.

No anonymity direction has been requested or made.



Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway


