
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/32189/2013
                                                               IA/32211/2013
                                                               IA/32216/2013
                                                               IA/32221/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd December 2015                 |On 5th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                      mr Emmanuel Oluwadaisi Arowosafe
                       mrs Justinah Kehinde Arowosafe
                                     S A
                                     P A
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are Nigerian nationals  who  appeal  with  permission  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  their  appeals  against
    the  Respondent's  refusal  to  allow  them  leave,  outside   of   the
    Immigration Rules on the basis of their private and family life rights.
     At an earlier hearing on 14th September I  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision, it being conceded by the Respondent, that the  judge
    had materially erred in failing to  make  a  finding  as  to  the  best
    interests of the children and  to  bring  that  forward  as  a  primary
    consideration in the overall balancing exercise required under  Article
    8 ECHR.  The matter was listed for rehearing  before  me  in  order  to
    afford the Appellants an opportunity to bring forward updated evidence.



 2. The Appellants concede that they have no  claim  to  remain  under  the
    provisions of the Immigration Rules set out at HC 395 as amended.   The
    principal Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as a student on  15th
    September 2007.  His leave was extended  to  28th  January  2013.   His
    dependent spouse and two daughters joined him here on 24th August 2011.
     The Appellants' case relies on an assertion that the best interests of
    the two minor Appellants [SA] born on 27th October 2007, and so 8 years
    old as at the date of my consideration, and  her  younger  sister  [PA]
    born on 9th March 2009, and so 6 years and 9 months as at the  date  of
    my consideration, are to be able to continue to reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and that those best interests should be determinative  in  the
    Article 8 balancing exercise to the point that  they  and  the  parents
    should be allowed to remain in the United Kingdom.

 3. In support of that contention the Appellants  have  provided  a  letter
    from Haberdashers' Aske's Hatcham College confirming that [PA] has been
    enrolled with them since 29th August 2014 and is currently  in  year  2
    and that [SA] has similarly been enrolled since 22nd April 2014 and  is
    currently in year 3, with both children having a very  good  attendance
    rate.  The children's father is  noted  to  attend  parents'  evenings,
    school events and to be supportive to the girls and  the  school.   The
    letter is written  and  signed  by  Mrs  Marion  James,  Administration
    Officer.  In addition there is a letter from Lewisham  Dental  Practice
    dated 15th October 2015 confirming that the children are registered  at
    the practice and that the father brings the children for regular dental
    checkups.  There is a letter from Lewisham  Medical  Centre  confirming
    that the father has been registered with the  practice  since  December
    2012, and that he brings the daughters to the clinic.   The  letter  is
    signed by Dr C Brodie, GP.  There is  a  letter  of  support  from  Mrs
    Angela Lynch who confirms that [SA] is a classmate of her daughter  and
    that Mrs Lynch is aware of the father's active involvement in the  care
    of his children, attesting  to  his  collection  and  delivery  of  the
    children to school each day.  I have been provided with a photograph of
    the two girls in the presence of their father and mother and there  are
    various receipts for grocery purchases.

 4. Mr Tarlow relied on the reasons for  refusal  letter  setting  out  the
    detail of the adult Appellants' failure to establish any entitlement to
    remain under any  category  specific  part  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    including the private life requirements set out at paragraph 276ADE  or
    the Article 8 family life considerations  of  Appendix  FM.   The  only
    issue is whether or not, even though neither child  has  the  necessary
    seven years' residence requirement for 276ADE(iv) their best  interests
    were such that the public  interest  in  their  removal,  as  fixed  by
    Section 117 of the Immigration, Nationality and Asylum  Act  2002,  was
    outweighed.  Mr Tarlow submitted that the evidence showed that in  fact
    the best interests of the children was to be with their parents, and to
    return with their parents to Nigeria.  The parents had lived in Nigeria
    for many years before coming to the United Kingdom.  The children  were
    still in the earlier rather than later years of childhood and  able  to
    adapt to life there on return.  The parents' preference  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom was not  significant  in  the  Article  8  balancing
    exercise.

 5. Mr Arowosafe addressed me, emphasising that the children enjoyed  their
    education having an established  attendance  at  Haberdashers'  Aske's.
    Their best interests are paramount.  The children  have  no  ties  with
    anyone in Nigeria and  had  built  relationships  here.   A  return  to
    Nigeria at this stage would lead to a setback in their education.   The
    girls were aware of the precariousness of the position here and it  had
    affected them psychologically, they were upset about the possibility of
    returning to Nigeria and wanted to remain.  Mr Arowosafe told  me  that
    no-one other than he and his wife were responsible  for  the  children.
    Mr Arowosafe told me that  the  Boko  Haram  insurgency  was  prevalent
    throughout the whole of Nigeria with bombing taking place everywhere to
    the point that the physical safety of the children would be  threatened
    by living in Nigeria.  Finally he told me that  healthcare  in  Nigeria
    was poor.  In short the children's position in the United  Kingdom  was
    good and their best interests would be threatened if they were returned
    to the environment of Nigeria.

My Consideration and Findings

 6. My starting point must be the best interests of the two minor children.
     I take into account that [SA] is now 8 years old and [PA] almost 7.  I
    note that they have both been in the United Kingdom since their arrival
    as dependants of their father in  2011.   [PA]  has  been  enrolled  at
    Haberdashers' Aske's, in year 2, since the end of August 2014, and  has
    a good attendance rate.  [SA] has been attending the  same  school  for
    somewhat longer, since April 2014 and is in the year above i.e. year 3.
     She too has a very good attendance rate.  I note the letter  from  the
    mother of a friend and classmate of [SA] which tends to show  that  she
    has settled into the school and is enjoying her time there.

 7. I take account that both of the children are at an early stage in their
    education.  I am told that the children are focused on  their  life  in
    the United Kingdom  rather  than  the  position  in  Nigeria,  and  the
    evidence is that their paternal grandparents had died during the course
    of the father's studies in the United Kingdom.  I note  that  at  their
    young age their focus is on their immediate family here in  the  United
    Kingdom rather than their country of origin.  [PA] was only 3 years old
    when she arrived in the United Kingdom.  [SA] was a little older, being
    about 5 years old.  In that context whilst [PA] may have little  or  no
    memory of Nigeria I think it is more likely than not, on a  commonsense
    view, that [SA] will have some recollection of her homeland and life in
    Nigeria. I find that  for both of them their connections  with  Nigeria
    are readily renewable in light of their citizenships,  prior  residence
    in Nigeria, but most importantly the support that they  can  anticipate
    receiving from their parents,  both  of  whom,  on  the  evidence,  are
    responsible  and  caring  individuals.    Neither   child   will   have
    linguistic, medical or other difficulties in reintegrating to  life  in
    Nigeria.  There is no suggestion that  there  will  be  any  linguistic
    difficulties for the children on return to Nigeria, although I am  told
    that the medical  facilities  available  in  Nigeria  are  not  of  the
    standard in the United Kingdom, neither of the minors have any specific
    medical difficulties so that I am satisfied that that position  carries
    little weight in my assessment.

 8. The proposed removal  will  not  interfere  significantly  with  either
    [PA]'s or [SA]'s family life as the intention is to remove them as part
    of their family unit.  I take account of the general concerns about the
    security situation in Nigeria arising from the  Boko  Haram  insurgency
    and the general law and order concerns raised by their father.  However
    whilst that may account for the parents' preference for the children to
    remain in the United  Kingdom,  the  sweeping  assertions  made  by  Mr
    Arowosafe do not provide a proper evidential basis  for  me  to  attach
    significant weight to that position.

 9. Taking the case at its highest it has not been established  on  balance
    that the consequences of  the  children's  return  to  Nigeria  in  the
    company of their parents are significantly deleterious.  In  short  the
    ordinary position prevails:  it is  in  the  best  interests  of  these
    children to be where there parents are.

10. I bring forward my consideration of the best interests of the  children
    into the overall balancing exercise  required  in  an  Article  8  ECHR
    assessment.

11.  The  weight  to  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in  maintaining
    immigration control,  in  the  context  of  the  Appellants  having  no
    entitlement to remain, is strong.  Whilst the parents  have  been  here
    lawfully, the father since 2007 and the mother  since  2011,  residence
    has always been on a temporary basis,  precarious  in  the  context  of
    limited leave.  The precariousness of their residence is underlined  by
    the fact that the father's status as a student, here  to  do  his  PhD,
    could only ever give rise to an expectation of continued family life in
    the United Kingdom during his studies.  In the event his  intention  to
    continue his studies for a doctorate in theology were defeated  by  the
    demise of his parents.  The first Appellant has  produced  evidence  in
    the bundle as it was before  the  First-tier  to  show  that  he  is  a
    committed Christian, an active member  of  his  local  church  who  has
    helped out at a food bank and charity shop and  gained  admiration  for
    his service.  I note that the Appellant has had the benefit of evidence
    from Mr Raymond Woolford who attended at the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    confirmed to the judge his understanding  that  the  family  were  much
    loved and respected in the community, held in such high regard  by  him
    that he was willing to offer to the first Appellant employment  in  the
    property management company or in the community project, both of  which
    he ran.

12. The Appellant was born and raised in Nigeria, he was educated to a high
    level there and as the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  earlier  found,  the
    proposition that his ties to Nigeria had been severed when he  left  in
    2007, is not a realistic assertion in the  context  of  an  absence  of
    evidence, other than the demise of his parents, to suggest that he  has
    no other relatives  or  in-laws  or  a  wider  circle  of  friends  and
    relations.

13. The previous judge's determination found that the Appellants' assertion
    of complex difficulties involving ethnic and  religious  discrimination
    and an ongoing health scare in relation to the Ebola virus,  so  as  to
    expose the children and family to calamitous events, was found  not  to
    be established in the context of this family, returning to Lagos  where
    the father was brought up and has his roots.   That  consideration  was
    not disturbed by the error in the judge's decision, and, as I  set  out
    above, there is no evidential  basis  before  me  upon  which  I  could
    properly take a different view.

14. Standing back and looking at the appeal in the round, bringing  forward
    my consideration of the best interests of the children, and of all  the
    factors relevant to the  proportionality  exercise,  I  find  that  the
    decision of the Respondent to remove the Appellants does not breach the
    UK's Article 8 obligations.  The decision  of  the  Respondent  was  in
    accordance with the law and the Immigration Rules and does  not  breach
    Article 8 ECHR.

Notice of Decision

15. The Appellants' appeals are dismissed on all grounds.

16. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   E Davidge     Date 30 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
