
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/32235/2015
                                                               IA/32237/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 July 2017                            |On 18 July 2017                  |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

               the secretary of state For the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           ferdaushi asma zulfiqar
                              md. omar khayyam
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondents:   Mr S Karim of Counsel by Direct Access


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondents


   1. The Respondents are wife born on 12 January 1979 and husband  born  on
      28 February 1982.  They  are  both  citizens  of  Bangladesh.   On  24
      September 2014 the wife applied for further leave to remain as a  Tier
      4 (General) Student Migrant and the husband as her dependant.

The Secretary of State's Decision

   2. On 17 September 2015 the Secretary of State (SSHD) refused the  wife's
      application under paragraph 322(2) of the  Immigration  Rules  on  the
      ground that the wife had  submitted  in  connection  with  an  earlier
      application of 12 August 2013 a  TOEIC  certificate  from  Educational
      Testing Service (ETS) which had been fraudulently obtained by the  use
      of a proxy test taker.  Consequently, the application also fell to  be
      refused under paragraph 245ZX(a) of the  Rules  and  the  husband  was
      refused in line.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

   3. On 30 September 2015 each of the husband and the wife lodged notice of
      appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
      2002 as amended.  The grounds are lengthy but in  essence  assert  the
      wife had taken the TOEIC test in person and had not used a proxy  test
      taker.

   4. By a decision promulgated on 29 November 2016 Judge of the  First-tier
      Tribunal Maciel allowed the appeals of the wife and the husband.   She
      found the wife to be a credible witness and that  she  had  taken  the
      TOEIC test herself and not used a proxy test taker.

   5. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the SSHD  had
      produced sufficient generic and specific  evidence  to  discharge  the
      burden of proof and the Judge had erred in finding the SSHD had failed
      to fulfil the evidential burden and failed to raise a prima facie case
      that the wife employed deceit in her application.  The  grounds  argue
      the Judge erred in her consideration of the evidence  to  support  the
      allegation that the wife had used deception and that in  reaching  the
      finding that the wife had not used deception, had failed to take  into
      account that there may be other reasons why a person who  is  able  to
      speak English to the  requisite  level  would  nevertheless  cause  or
      permit a proxy test taker to undertake the test  on  their  behalf  or
      otherwise cheat.

   6. On 31 May 2017 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Parkes  granted  the
      SSHD permission to appeal all grounds.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

   7. Both the wife and the husband attended although they took no  part  in
      the hearing other than for the wife to confirm their current address.

Submissions for the SSHD

   8. Mr Armstrong acknowledged that the Court of Appeal had  subsequent  to
      the Judge's decision handed down judgment in Majumder and Qadir v SSHD
      [2016] EWCA Civ.1167 on appeal from the decision of the Upper Tribunal
      in SM and Qadir v SSHD (ETS - evidence - burden of proof) [2016]  UKUT
      00229 (IAC).  He referred me to the head note of  the  Upper  Tribunal
      decision much of which remains relevant and had not been overturned by
      the Court of Appeal which states -

         (1)  The  SSHD's  generic  evidence,  combined  with  her  evidence
             particular to these two Appellants, sufficed to discharge  the
             evidential burden of proving that their TOEIC certificates had
             been procured by dishonesty.

         (2)  However, given the multiple frailties from which this  generic
             evidence was considered to suffer and, in  the  light  of  the
             evidence  adduced  by  the  Appellants,  the  SSHD  failed  to
             discharge the legal burden  of  proving  dishonesty  on  their
             part.

   9. He relied in particular on paragraph (i) of the head note and referred
      me to paragraph 17 of the Judge's decision in which  she  stated  that
      the SSHD had failed to fulfil the evidential burden.  He then referred
      me to paragraph 68 of the decision in SM and Qadir in which the  Upper
      Tribunal were satisfied the SSHD had discharged the evidential  burden
      and the SSHD could rely on the generic evidence and the other evidence
      before the Upper Tribunal in that case  to  discharge  the  evidential
      burden of proof.

  10. Mr Armstrong then referred me to the judgment in SSHD  v  Shehzad  and
      Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ.615 and in particular paragraph 26 in  which
      the Court of Appeal found that even if the  SSHD's  evidence  in  that
      case which comprised the generic evidence and the  "ETS  Look-up  Tool
      document", being the same evidence as submitted by the SSHD to support
      the allegation of deception in this  appeal,  were  rejected  then  it
      still  was  incumbent  on  the  applicant  to  provide   a   plausible
      explanation to rebut any suggestion that deception had been used.

  11. He submitted that the  Judge  had  erred  in  relying  on  the  wife's
      facility in English at the date of the hearing on 14 November 2016  to
      justify her finding she had been capable of and had  taken  the  TOEIC
      test on 27 June 2012.  Further, he referred to  paragraph  57  of  the
      decision in MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016]  UKUT  00450  (IAC)  which
      provided the basis for one of the grounds for appeal namely that:-

         In the abstract, of course, there is a range of reasons why persons
         proficient in English may engage in TOEIC  fraud.   These  include,
         inexhaustibly, lack of confidence, fear of failure,  lack  of  time
         and commitment and contempt for the immigration system. ...

  12. The Judge's findings at  paragraph  17  of  her  decision  had  failed
      adequately to take into account the Upper Tribunal decisions in SM and
      Qadir and MA and the Court of Appeal judgment in Shehzad.  These three
      cases  all  acknowledged  that  in  ETS  cases  the  generic  evidence
      submitted provided by the SSHD met the  evidential  burden  of  proof.
      There was a material error of law  in  the  Judge's  decision  and  it
      should be set aside.



Submissions for the Wife and Husband

  13. Mr Karim submitted that the  SSHD  had  not  shown  that  the  Judge's
      decision contained a material error  of  law.   There  may  have  been
      errors of law but none of them were material.  The Upper  Tribunal  in
      MA had found the question of whether a  person  engaged  in  fraud  in
      procuring a TOEIC  English  language  proficiency  qualification  will
      invariably be intrinsically fact sensitive.  At paragraph  11  of  her
      decision the Judge stated that the  SSHD  had  conceded  the  evidence
      submitted by the SSHD to show deception was limited  because  ETS  was
      not willing to disclose any more information.  At paragraph 15 she had
      cited and quoted at some length from the determination in Shen  (paper
      appeals:  proving  dishonesty)  [2014]  UKUT  236  (IAC).   The  Upper
      Tribunal had identified the  "boomerang  effect".   First,  sufficient
      evidence to raise an issue of deception must be produced by the  SSHD.
      Then it is for  the  applicant  to  provide  an  innocent  explanation
      described  as  "an  account  which  satisfies  the  minimal  level  of
      plausibility".  If the applicant does this then the burden shifts back
      to the SSHD to establish on the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
      innocent explanation should be rejected.

  14. At paragraph 17 the Judge had found  that  the  SSHD  had  "failed  to
      fulfil the evidential burden".  At paragraph 18 she had  distinguished
      this case from other ETS cases by noting that there was no explanation
      how the ETS Look-up Tool data were obtained, abstracted and  what  the
      data really meant.  There were simply copies of  the  certificate,  of
      what purported to be the "ETS SELT Source  Data",  a  document  headed
      "ETS Invalid Test Analysis" which merely gave details  and  assertions
      about mis-match scores in data held on "CAS/CID" and an extract headed
      MIDA Matched Data.

  15. Crucially, the Respondent had not challenged the Judge's  findings  at
      paragraph 19 of her decision that she had found  the  wife's  evidence
      credible and that she did in fact take the TOEIC  tests  herself.   It
      was clear the Judge had based her conclusions on the evidence set  out
      at paragraphs 5-8 of her decision.  The wife had been subject to cross-
      examination at the hearing before the Judge and further, the Judge had
      said in her decision not to make a fee award that  no  fee  award  was
      appropriate because  the  wife's  credibility  had  been  called  into
      question by the SSHD and she had been able to establish it only  after
      cross-examination.

  16. Mr Karim further submitted that the SSHD  had  failed  to  follow  the
      practice at paragraph 32 of the judgment  in  Majumder  and  Qadir  to
      which she had herself  referred  and  which  covered  cases  like  the
      wife's, namely:-

         .... The third category also consists of appeals by the SSHD, where
         the appeal is against the decision in which it was  held  that  the
         generic evidence had not discharged the initial  evidential  burden
         and was thus erroneous in that respect,  but  that  other  evidence
         meant that the Secretary of State  would  not  have  been  able  to
         discharge the legal burden.  (Counsel for the SSHD) indicated  that
         in this class of  case,  also  without  giving  an  undertaking  in
         respect of any particular case, the SSHD was mindful to concede and
         to abandon the appeal.

  17. Even if the SSHD had discharged the evidential burden of proof it  had
      not been shown there was any material error of law made by  the  Judge
      in the light of her finding that the wife was a credible  witness  and
      had given a plausible explanation.

Response for the SSHD

  18. Mr Armstrong referred to the "boomerang" approach  to  the  burden  of
      proof.  The Appellant had failed to provide an  adequate  explanation.
      There was no corroborative evidence relating to her attendance at  the
      test centre and no evidence that she had challenged  the  decision  of
      ETS to consider her test results invalid.  There had been  ample  time
      between the SSHD's decision to refuse further leave in September  2015
      and the hearing in  November  2016  for  the  wife  to  have  gathered
      evidence to support her explanation.

  19. The SSHD should not be criticised for relying on the limited  evidence
      which ETS was prepared to provide, namely the ETS Look-up  Tool.   The
      wife's  test  had  been  invalidated  and  her  explanation  had  been
      invalidated  because  of  suspected   fraud.   Her   explanation   was
      insufficient and the Judge's decision should be set aside.

Findings and Consideration

  20. The Judge's concise treatment of the evidential burden at paragraph 17
      of her decision may not have fully taken into account the  "boomerang"
      approach which she had set out in full at paragraph 15.  But if  there
      is an error of law here, it is not material when set against a finding
      that the wife's evidence about attending the test  centre  and  taking
      the TOEIC test in person was credible.

  21. Even so, on the basis  of  the  head  note  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's
      decision in SM and Qadir, even if the Judge's findings that  the  SSHD
      had failed to discharge the evidential burden of proof  is  incorrect.
      She gave sustainable  reasons  for  finding  the  wife's  account  and
      explanation in response to be credible and so to have  discharged  the
      burden of proof on the wife and to shift the burden back to the  SSHD.
      The SSHD has not challenged the Judge's treatment of the third part of
      the process where the burden of proof returns to the SSHD to establish
      on the balance of probabilities that the wife's  innocent  explanation
      should be rejected.  Indeed, the  Judge's  sustainable  reasoning  for
      finding the wife credible is sufficient to settle that.

  22. Consequently, I find that there is no material error  of  law  in  the
      decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  her  decision  shall
      stand.

Anonymity

  23. There was no request for an anonymity order and I  see  no  reason  to
      make one.





NOTICE OF DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal decision did not contain a  material  error  of
    law and shall stand.  The consequence is:-


    The appeals of the wife and her dependent husband are allowed.

    No anonymity direction is made.



Signed/Official  Crest                                            Date   17.
vii. 2017




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


