
[pic]
IAC-BH-JLS-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32778/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 26 January 2016                            |On 12 April 2016               |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                     TAC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Khan, Legal Representative of EU Migration
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I consider anonymity to be appropriate in this appeal as it covers  the
    best interests of a minor who is a British citizen. Accordingly I  make
    the following direction:


       DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14  OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE
       (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008
       Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings
       or any form of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
       identify the original appellant.  This direction applies to,  amongst
       others, all parties.  Any failure to comply with this direction could
       give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the sake of consistency and to avoid confusion,  I  shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  At the initial hearing of this appeal before the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 17 August 2015 I reached the conclusion that  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal contained errors on points of  law  for  the
    reasons given in my decision sent out on 11 September 2015 which I  now
    repeat below also setting out the background to the appeal:

         "Background

          1. On 25th June 2015 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Shimmin
             gave permission  to  the  respondent  to  appeal  against  the
             decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  A  J  Parker  in
             which he allowed the appeal, under the Immigration  Rules  and
             on human rights grounds under Article 8, against the  decision
             of  the  respondent  on  14th  July  2014  to  refuse  asylum,
             humanitarian and human rights protection to the  appellant,  a
             citizen of Zimbabwe.

          2.  It  should  be  noted  that  this  appeal  arises  from   the
             respondent's rejection on  14  July  2014  of  submissions  by
             representatives on 18th December 2010 making asylum and  human
             rights claims.  Although the appeal bears the designation "IA"
             it should, more properly, have been classified  as  an  asylum
             appeal.

          3. In the grounds of application the respondent took  issue  with
             the judge's conclusions about the application of  Appendix  FM
             and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and the  Article
             8 claim generally.   No  issue  was  taken  with  the  judge's
             rejection of the appellant's claim to be a refugee  or  to  be
             entitled to humanitarian protection or at risk of infringement
             of his rights under Articles 2 and 3 of the  1950  Convention.
             The grounds contend that the judge erred in making  favourable
             conclusions about the alleged cohabitation  of  the  appellant
             with his partner, Ms S H.  In particular it is submitted  that
             the judge failed to give adequate reasons for finding that  Ms
             SH was credible and failed to take into consideration negative
             credibility findings made by the Tribunal  in  a  decision  of
             Judge (then Adjudicator) Telford sent out  on  27th  September
             2002.  In particular the judge failed to resolve a significant
             difference in the date of  the  commencement  of  cohabitation
             given by the  appellant  and  that  by  Ms  SH.   It  is  also
             suggested that the judge failed to apply the  relevant  burden
             and standard of proof.

          4. Judge Shimmin gave permission on the basis  that  all  of  the
             above points were arguable.

         Error on a Point of Law

          5. I heard submissions from both representatives  after  which  I
             concluded that the decision showed an error on a point of  law
             although only in relation to the judge's conclusions about the
             application of the  Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8.   The
             submissions made in respect of the application and my  reasons
             for reaching the conclusions now follow.

          6. Mr Khan indicated that the appellant had submitted a  response
             to the grounds of application but was  unable  to  provide  me
             with a copy.  The response is not included in  the  bundle  of
             documents submitted by representatives on 3rd August 2015.  Mr
             Khan confirmed that the appellant did not take issue with  the
             dismissal of the asylum and Articles 2 and 3 claims.

          7. He proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the  judge's  findings  in
             relation to family  life  issues  could  stand.   He  drew  my
             attention to paragraphs 12 and 16 of the decision in which the
             judge refers to the appellant's partnership  with  Ms  SH  and
             also the reasoning for accepting the relationship as  set  out
             in paragraph 26.  He also thought that the judge's conclusions
             about letters from  the  appellant's  daughter's  mother  were
             adequately  reasoned  in  paragraph  28.   He   believed   the
             conclusion in paragraph 30 about the relationship between  the
             appellant, his claimed partner and the appellant's  child  was
             also one open to the judge for the reasons given.

          8. Mr  McVeety  confirmed  that  the  respondent  relied  on  the
             grounds.  He  asserted  that  the  judge  had  not  given  any
             material consideration to the application of  the  Immigration
             Rules.  He drew  attention  to  the  conflicting  evidence  in
             paragraph 29 about the appellant's claimed  relationship  with
             his daughter which was directly contradictory to the  positive
             findings made in relation to the issue. Reasons for dismissing
             those matters had  not  been  given.   Mr  McVeety  also  drew
             attention to the conflict between paragraphs 31 and 32 of  the
             decision.  In the former the judge reached the conclusion that
             the appellant could succeed under the parent route in Appendix
             FM yet, in the latter, he dealt with Article 8 on the basis of
             the welfare of the child.  No adequate reasons had been  given
             for the conclusion under the Rules.

          9. Mr Khan concluded by indicating that, if an  error  was  found
             ,he believed that the issues relating to family life should be
             dealt with in the Upper Tribunal.  He also  stressed  that  he
             believed the  judge  was  not  in  error  in  making  positive
             credibility findings in the absence of documentary support.

         10. Whilst I am satisfied that the decision dismissing the refugee
             and humanitarian  protection  claims  can  stand,  this  being
             conceded by Mr Khan, the judge's handling of the appeal  under
             the Immigration Rules and on Article 8 grounds outside them is
             confused and inadequately reasoned.

         11. As to credibility issues the  judge  acknowledges,  throughout
             the decision, inadequacies in the evidence  of  the  appellant
             and Ms SH. For example relating to the date of commencement of
             the relationship.  However  the  judge  gives  no  reason  for
             accepting the parties' other evidence despite the  significant
             inconsistency.  Further,  in  relation  to  letters  from  the
             appellant's daughter's mother he acknowledges that  signatures
             might be different and cannot explain why the mother  produced
             an old passport considerably predating  the  letters.   Whilst
             the judge reaches the conclusion that he cannot make a finding
             of fraud or falsehood in relation to the letters he  does  not
             explain why they should not be regarded as unreliable applying
             the guidance set out in Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439.  Nor
             does the judge  give  reasons  for  his  conclusion  that  the
             appellant exercises "quality contact" with his  daughter  when
             there is no evidence that he is known to  the  school  or  the
             general practitioner to whom the appellant had written.

         12. Against the  background  of  inadequate  reasoning  the  judge
             reaches the conclusion that, under the provisions of paragraph
             E-LTRPT.2.4(a), the  appellant  can  succeed  because  of  his
             relationship with both his partner and  his  child.   However,
             the judge  applies  no  analysis  of  the  relevant  rules  in
             Appendix FM.  For example, the judge does not consider whether
             the application falls for refusal under S-LTR or meets all  of
             the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRP.2.2-2.4 and 3.1.  Nor is
             there  any  consideration  of  the  application  of  EX.1   in
             conjunction with the other Rules.  The  judge's  consideration
             of Article 8 family life issues taking into consideration  the
             best interests of the child is  also  flawed  because  of  the
             failure to consider the provisions in Section 117B of the 2002
             Act (as amended) and the issue of whether or not it  would  be
             reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

         13. For the reasons I have  given  the  decision  therefore  shows
             errors on points of law in relation to the judge's findings of
             fact and consideration of the application of  the  Immigration
             Rules and human rights outside them."

 3. At the  resumed  hearing  the  appellant  gave  evidence  adopting,  as
    evidence-in-chief, his statement which  commences  on  Page  2  of  the
    supplementary bundle submitted by representatives on 15  January  2016.
    In this the appellant confirms the details of his daughter, Ms TC  born
    on the 5th November 2007 as a result of his relationship with  his  ex-
    partner, Ms KS, who is a British citizen.   They  have  joint  parental
    responsibility for his daughter also a British  citizen,  making  major
    decisions regarding her upbringing.

 4. The Appellant also claims to have established  a  genuine  and  private
    family life with his partner, Ms SH,  a  British  citizen  born  on  12
    January 1990 with whom he has been living since 16 June 2012.

 5. As far as his background is concerned he states that  he  came  to  the
    United Kingdom on 19 January 2002  and  claimed  asylum.   However  the
    claim was refused on 24th April 2002 and his subsequent appeal  against
    that decision was dismissed.  He made a human rights claim on 21 August
    2003 and was given six months  leave  to  enter  expiring  on  the  2nd
    December 2005.

 6. In oral evidence the appellant claimed that his relationship  with  his
    partner and his child has strengthened.  He would  like  to  marry  his
    partner but states he is not permitted by the respondent to  do  so  at
    present.  So far as his  daughter  is  concerned,  he  attends  parents
    evenings and other events  at  his  daughter's  school.   He  buys  her
    clothes and toys.  He draws attention  to  the  school  report  on  his
    daughter dated July 2014 and copies of the test report relating to  his
    daughter.  There are also copies  of  orders  and  receipts  for  books
    purchased for his daughter in 2015.  On page 14 is a  letter  from  his
    daughter's GP  in  which  there  is  confirmation  of  receipt  of  his
    daughter's birth certificate naming him as the father and acknowledging
    his contact details to be used by the practice.  His  daughter  is  not
    stated to have any significant clinical diagnoses, allergies or dietary
    requirements. The letter is  dated  22  April  2015.   There  are  also
    clothing receipts for children's clothes bearing the appellant's  name.
    On pages 26 to 29  inclusive  of  the  supplementary  bundle  are  also
    photographs of the appellant, his daughter and partner.

 7. The appellant asserted that  his  daughter  could  not  follow  him  to
    Zimbabwe as her mother would not allow it and there would be  risks  to
    her living in the country.  He points out  that  his  daughter  is  now
    eight years of age  and  is  settled  and  established  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 8. During cross-examination the appellant pointed out that his  daughter's
    school contacts him when she goes on trips so that  he  knows  what  is
    going on.  His daughter's mother is also contacted.  He  conceded  that
    he has no documentation from the school to confirm they contact him but
    emphasised that they have  done  so.   He  indicated  that  his  former
    partner and mother of his child had not attended to give  evidence  but
    drew attention to a letter from her of 29 July 2015 which sets out,  in
    detail, the arrangements for his contact with his daughter which is  as
    follows:

          i) Saturday from 11am to Sunday 2pm during school term time;

         ii) School holidays have to be arranged days before;

        iii) All visits and activities are supervised  by  the  appellant's
             mother at her house in Nottingham.

 9. The remainder of the letter confirms that access on the basis  set  out
    above has been exercised and Ms KS says that the appellant is  a  "good
    dad" to his daughter and "I  cannot  stop  his  having  time  with  his
    daughter".

10. The appellant stated that his former partner was  not  present  at  the
    hearing to give evidence as he had only learned of the hearing date  in
    the previous week.  He explained that the arrangement had  always  been
    for him to see his daughter at his mother's house as his former partner
    trusts this arrangement.

11. The appellant was asked why he had previously made errors in the  dates
    given about his relationship with his present partner.  He  said  there
    was a misunderstanding but he had moved to her house on the  16th  June
    2012.  His present partner is a support worker  in  Nottingham  dealing
    with people with learning disabilities.

12. During re-examination the appellant indicated that those attending  the
    previous hearing in the First-tier Tribunal were his  partner's  mother
    and his partner.  His mother did not attend on that occasion because of
    her work schedule.  At that time he had not thought  it  was  necessary
    for his mother to attend.  He also pointed out that his former  partner
    has another child and thus found it difficult to attend a hearing.

13. Ms SH then gave evidence adopting, as evidence-in-chief, the content of
    her statement which commences on page 4 of  the  supplementary  bundle.
    In this she confirms that she has been living with the appellant in the
    same house since 16 June 2012 in a relationship akin to marriage.   She
    refers  to  written  personal  letters  she  supplied  to  confirm  her
    relationship.  She did not think that these had been considered by  the
    respondent.  She  stated  that,  because  of  her  partner's  uncertain
    immigration status, it was  not  possible  for  him  to  register  with
    utility providers and he had not been able to open a bank account.  She
    drew attention to the fact that the First-tier Judge had given  reasons
    for regarding their relationship as genuine.

14. Ms SH also asserted that the appellant has a strong  relationship  with
    his daughter in respect of whom he  takes  major  decisions  about  her
    upbringing in conjunction with his former partner.

15. In oral evidence at the hearing Ms SH stated that her partner maintains
    regular contact with his daughter and had spoken to her GP  about  her.
    She stated that she goes to the appellant's  mother's  house  when  his
    daughter visits.  They have also taken his daughter out  to  visit  the
    appellant's sister.  She tries to  follow  a  parental  role  with  her
    partner's daughter.  She believes that, if the  appellant  is  removed,
    this would break up their relationship.  She could not live in Zimbabwe
    particularly since she is about to  complete  her  qualification  as  a
    social worker.  She wants to  marry  the  appellant  and  continue  her
    relationship with him here.

16. During cross-examination  Ms  SH  confirmed  that  she  has  no  health
    problems.  When asked what  decisions  the  appellant  made  about  his
    daughter she said that he is concerned with her schooling  and  attends
    parents' evenings.  He is concerned about her medical health.   He  has
    bought her books and clothes and speaks to  her  on  the  phone  almost
    daily.  She pointed out that the appellant's daughter had moved  school
    and he had adopted a similar approach at her previous school.

17. Ms SH said that her mother  had  not  attended  the  hearing  but  drew
    attention to the hand-written letter from her mother dated  26  January
    2016 in which she explains why she could not attend the hearing because
    of personal commitments and points out that she had attended  the  last
    Tribunal  hearing  when  a  statement  was  presented  to  confirm  the
    relationship between the appellant and his daughter.  She  believes  it
    is a sincere relationship.  Ms SH said that  a  relationship  with  the
    appellant and her own career were important and she wanted  to  achieve
    these things together.  She believes that the culture and lifestyle  in
    Zimbabwe would be different for them and the appellant would  lose  his
    close relationship with his daughter.

Submissions

18. Mr  McVeety  first  made  submissions  about  the  appellant's  child's
    interests.   He  helpfully  indicated  that  he   accepted   that   the
    appellant's child could not go to Zimbabwe and that if the requirements
    set out in paragraph E-LTRPT2.4 were  met  on  the  basis  that  access
    rights had been shown and if the appellant had also shown that he would
    continue to take an active interest in his child, the appeal  could  be
    allowed.

19. As to the partnership claim Mr McVeety submitted that there was a  lack
    of evidence of cohabitation and there had been previous confusion  over
    dates.  If such a  relationships  was  shown  then  the  provisions  of
    paragraph EX.1.(b)  would  be  relevant  applying  the  "insurmountable
    obstacles" test.  He questioned whether there were any  obstacles  that
    could not be overcome.  Whilst it might be economically worse  for  the
    appellant and his partner to live in Zimbabwe that would not be such an
    obstacle.   Further,  as  far  as  private  life  was  concerned  under
    paragraph 276ADE,  the  appellant  could  reintegrate  into  Zimbabwean
    society.  He questioned whether there were any compelling circumstances
    in the appeal justifying consideration of human rights  issues  outside
    the Rules.

20. Mr Khan relied on his written submissions.  He expressed  a  view  that
    the appellant could succeed under E-LTRPT2.4.  He emphasised  that  the
    appellant took an active role in the upbringing of his child  supported
    by the evidence of the appellant's partner.

21. My attention was drawn to the Upper Tribunal decision in JA (Meaning of
    "access rights") India [2015] UKUT 225 (IAC) summarised  in  Mr  Khan's
    submission. That decision indicates that, whether or not  an  appellant
    will be able to show that he is taking and intends to continue to  take
    an  active  role  in  his  child's  upbringing  as   required   by   E-
    LTRPT.2.4(A)(i), would depend upon the evidence rather than the  nature
    of "access rights".  In this respect he believed that  the  appellant's
    evidence combined with that his partner was  sufficient  to  meet  this
    burden.

22. As to the claimed partnership Mr Khan asserted that  this  is  genuine,
    the parties having given consistent  evidence  now  about  their  first
    meeting.  He regarded Ms SH's need to complete  her  qualification  and
    the difficulties of living in Zimbabwe as insurmountable  obstacles  to
    the continuation of the relationship  applying  the  test  set  out  in
    EX.2..  He also contended that, in accordance  with  paragraph  276ADE,
    the appellant should not be forced to live in  the  Zimbabwean  culture
    having been in the United Kingdom since 2002.

Conclusions

23. In immigration appeals the burden of proof is on the appellant and  the
    standard of proof is a  balance  of  probabilities.   I   consider  the
    evidence as at the date of hearing.

24. Mr McVeety has helpfully narrowed down the issues  in  this  appeal  in
    relation to the child and partnership issues.  I deal, first, with  the
    ability or otherwise of the appellant to meet the specific requirements
    of a parent of a British child set out in E-LTRPT.2.4 which  stated  at
    the date of the respondent's decision on 14 July 2014:

         "E-LTRPT.2.4

          a) The applicant must provide evidence that they have either:

              i) sole parental responsibility for the child; or

             ii) access rights to the child; and

          b) The applicant must provide evidence that they are taking,  and
             intend to continue to take, an  active  role  in  the  child's
             upbringing.

25. I am satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that the  appellant  has
    shown that he can meet  the  above  provisions.  My  reasons  for  that
    conclusion follow.

26. Although it would have been preferable if the mother of the appellant's
    child had attended the hearing in person, there is a  letter  from  the
    child's mother dated 29 July 2015 setting out very precise  details  of
    arrangements for contact between the appellant and his  daughter  along
    with a hand-written letter from the  appellant's  partner's  mother  to
    confirm the ongoing nature of the  partnership.   Most  importantly,  I
    have heard the evidence of the appellant's partner,  Ms  SH,  which,  I
    accept, confirms the implementation of the arrangements set out in  the
    letter from the appellant's former partner.

27. Whilst I accept that there has been  some  inconsistency  in  the  past
    evidence of the  appellant  about  the  date  of  commencement  of  his
    partnership, I do not regard that as so significant as to require me to
    find the evidence of the relationship between  the  appellant  and  his
    daughter as unreliable and to dismiss the documentary evidence.  I also
    take into consideration, in reaching my conclusions on this issue,  the
    photographic evidence of purchases for the benefit of  the  child  and,
    particularly, the  correspondence  from  the  GP  confirming  that  the
    appellant is registered as a contact  point  in  the  case  of  medical
    emergency.  Putting all of  this  evidence  together  I  regard  it  as
    sufficient to meet the  civil  standard  of  proof  to  show  that  the
    appellant has an arrangement for and exercises access  to  his  British
    child.

28. Additionally I must consider whether the appellant has also shown that,
    apart from the contact which he is already exercising,  he  intends  to
    continue take an active role in his child's upbringing.   I  reach  the
    conclusion that he does.  Ms SH has confirmed in oral evidence that the
    appellant has exercised access, speaks to his  daughter  on  the  phone
    every day and takes an active interest in her education.  Further Ms KS
    has said, in her letter, that the appellant "has always been  proactive
    in [his daughter's] education  often  doing  homework  and  educational
    activities with her on weekends".  It is also clear  that,  as  it  has
    been necessary for  the  appellant's  daughter  to  move  to  different
    schools in  the  last  two  years  because  of  her  mother's  personal
    difficulties, the appellant has ensured that his daughter has access to
    educational material and assists her in her learning.  Ms KS wants  the
    appellant to have even more involvement in his daughter's education  in
    the future.

29. For the reasons I have given I am satisfied that  the  appellant  meets
    the requirements of limited leave to remain as a parent as set out in E-
    LTRPT particularly  E-LTRPT.2.4.  On  this  basis  the  appeal  can  be
    allowed.

30. As I am able to allow the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the  appellant's
    parental relationship with his  child  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to
    consider the  partnership  aspect  to  the  matter.  Nevertheless,  for
    completeness,I should point out that I am satisfied  having  heard  the
    evidence of Ms SH that the parties are in a genuine  relationship.   As
    previously indicated, I do not regard the previous  inconsistencies  in
    evidence about dates as significant and am able to rely upon  the  oral
    evidence of the partnership given before me.  Thus, the test set out in
    EX.1.(b)  is  relevant.   I  have  to  consider   whether   there   are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life  with  the  partner  continuing
    outside the UK.  Insurmountable obstacles is defined in EX.2. as  "very
    significant difficulties" which cannot be overcome or would entail very
    serious hardship for the applicant or their partner.

31. Bearing in mind that the respondent has accepted  before  me  that  the
    appellant's  British  citizen  child,  with  whom  he  has  a  parental
    relationship, could not go to Zimbabwe and bearing in mind  that  I  am
    satisfied that the appellant is  entitled  to  leave  because  of  that
    relationship I conclude that an insurmountable obstacle is  created  to
    the applicant going to Zimbabwe to  enjoy  his  family  life  with  his
    partner there.  Further, I have to bear in mind that further  obstacles
    exist in the form of the appellant's partner's  need  to  complete  her
    professional qualifications and adapt to life in a different community.
     Thus, I am satisfied that the appellant is also entitled to leave as a
    partner.

32. As I am satisfied that the appellant is entitled  to  leave  under  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis of his  relationship  with  his  British
    child and British partner I allow the appeal on immigration grounds.

Decision

33. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    asylum and humanitarian protection claims shall stand.

34. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the  appellant's
    claim under the Immigration Rules contains errors on points of law.   I
    remake that decision and allow it on immigration grounds.

Fee Award

As no fee was payable in this case I make no fees award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
