


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  IA/32745/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 January 2015                    |On 27 January 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                      MR FREDERICK OLUWADAMILOLA ADIGUN
                       (anonymity directions not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY Of STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Collins of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a national of  Nigeria,  born  on  1  March  1989
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 18 July  2013  to
    refuse him leave to remain in United Kingdom  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules and pursuant to Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights. First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholls dismissed his  appeal  in  a
    determination dated 8 October 2014.

 2. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  VA
    Osborne on 27 November 2014 stating that it was arguable that the Judge
    made a material error of law in not considering the appellant's  appeal
    pursuant to the case of Razgar and applied too high a threshold a  test
    which was wrong. The appellant made clear that  he  did  not  make  his
    application pursuant to the Immigration Rules and clearly asked for his
    case to be determined outside the Immigration Rules. The Judge erred in
    law by considering the Immigration Rules and  stating  that  there  was
    nothing further for him to consider outside them and thereby fell  into
    material error.

    The First-Tier Tribunal Judges Findings

 3. The Judge found that the appellant did not meet the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules in respect of his private and family life pursuant to
    276 ADE and there are no factors which exist  "either  individually  or
    cumulatively which could properly be  described  as  exceptional,  very
    compelling, highly unusual or any other such  description".  The  Judge
    stated that the appellant's  circumstances  fall  squarely  within  the
    current provisions in  Appendix  FM  and  there  are  no  compassionate
    factors put forward by the appellant other than the obvious  fact  that
    his removal will disrupt the arrangements he  has  had  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 4. The judge concluded "I do not consider that any of the  factors  listed
    by counsel are sufficiently unusual or exceptional to identify this  as
    one of the few cases not adequately covered by the  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules. He concluded that paragraph 276  ADE  constitutes  a
    complete code which deals with Article 8  issues  in  respect  of  this
    appellant and there are no  factors  which  collectively  outweigh  the
    public interest in the proper enforcement of immigration control.

 5. He went on to say, "I find  that  it  is  not  required  to  separately
    consider the five questions posed in Razgar nor whether the decision to
    remove  the  appellant  from  the  UK  constitutes  a  reasonable   and
    proportionate interference with his Article 8 rights beyond the balance
    already  struck  within  the  Immigration  Rules.  He   dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal.

    Appellant's Grounds of Appeal

 6. The appellants' grounds of appeal state the following.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge has materially erred in law. At paragraph 15 and  16  of
    the determination Judge Nicholls set out the principles from two  cases
    MM and others [2014] EWCA Civ 985 and MF Nigeria [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192
    and  stated  at  paragraph  16  of  his   determination   that   recent
    clarifications given by the Court of Appeal including  the  High  Court
    show that it can properly be said that the Immigration Rules constitute
    a complete code which deals with a person's Convention  rights  and  it
    will take something exceptional or  very  compelling  to  outweigh  the
    terms of the Immigration Rules. He  posed  the  question  that  if  the
    Immigration  Rules  do  constitute  such  a  complete  code  than   the
    principles set out in  Razgar  and  Huang  must  never  be  considered.
    Exceptionality is not a  test  which  must  be  applied  in  individual
    circumstances.

 7. At paragraph 17 the Judge stated that despite Counsel's  best  efforts,
    he is not satisfied that there  exists  in  the  appellant's  case  any
    factors which either individually or  cumulatively  could  properly  be
    described as exceptional, very compelling, highly unusual or any  other
    description". The Judge made a material error in law because  not  only
    did he considered a wrong  test  but  failed  to  set  out  from  which
    authority or authorities he derived the test from.

 8.  The  test  as  described  by  Judge  Nicholls  as  "exceptional,  very
    compelling, highly unusual or any other such description"  is  not  the
    test set out in the jurisprudence. For circumstances to be  compelling,
    the facts of the case are required to be considered. Although the Judge
    considered the facts of the appellant's case in the  determination,  he
    considered the said facts with the wrong legal test in mind.

    Submissions of the Parties at the Hearing

 9. Mr Collins in his submissions  stated  the  following.  The  Judge  has
    applied too high a test for Article 8. The law as it stands states that
    the Judge should have considered the  appellant's  appeal  pursuant  to
    Article 8 as he did not make an application pursuant to the immigration
    rules but outside them.

10. Mr Tufan on behalf of the respondent submitted the following. There  is
    no error of law in the determination of the Judge because he considered
    the evidence and did not find  any  exceptional  circumstances  in  the
    appellant's case where he should be entitled to succeed  under  Article
    8.

    Findings on Error of Law

11. The  Judge  failed  to  recognise  that  the  appellant  had  made  his
    application pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human
    Rights and outside the Immigration Rules. The Judge stated that as  the
    appellant does not fulfil the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    there "is nothing exceptional, very compelling, highly unusual  or  any
    other description in the circumstances" where he  should  consider  the
    appellant's appeal  pursuant  to  Article  8  when  he  cannot  succeed
    pursuant to the Immigration Rules.

12. The Judge fell into error as he  was  only  required  to  consider  the
    appellant's appeal pursuant to Article 8 and not the Immigration  Rules
    and repeated the respondent mistake which also  incorrectly  considered
    the appellant's appeal pursuant to the Immigration Rules when that  was
    not the appellant's application.

13. The appellant however by not making an application in  respect  of  his
    private and family life pursuant to the  Immigration  Rules  inherently
    accepts that he cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.
    The Immigration Rules therefore must  be  the  starting  point  in  any
    Judge's assessment.

14. Therefore, it will  only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
    appellant will succeed pursuant to Article 8 when he  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules. The Judge put it in this way and
    stated that "there is nothing unusual or exceptional to  identify  this
    as one of the few cases not adequately covered by the provisions of the
    Immigration Rules". The Judge stated that the appellant's circumstances
    are adequately catered for within the Immigration Rules. The grounds of
    appeal did not state what circumstances that the  Judge  did  not  take
    into account and thereby fell into material error as opposed to error.

15. The Judge did take into account the appellant's circumstances and  said
    that there is "nothing exceptional, very compelling, highly unusual  or
    any other description in the circumstances". I have been asked to  find
    that this amounts to too high a test and this is what brought the Judge
    into error. I find for the purposes of this appeal that the Judge  fell
    into material error by not considering Article 8 specifically and I re-
    make the decision.

    Remaking of the Decision

16. In determining whether the appellant's removal from the United  Kingdom
    would constitute a disproportionate  interference  with  his  right  to
    respect for private and family life under Article 8, I have  considered
    each of the following issues, as laid down in R v. Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department, ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 at paragraph 17
    of the speech of Lord Bingham of Cornhill:

         (1)      Will the proposed removal be an interference by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or family life?

         (2)      If so, will such interference have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

          3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

          4) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic well-being of the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

          5) If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?

17. The question that I have to decide is whether the refusal of  leave  to
    the appellant, 'in circumstances where the life of  the  family  cannot
    reasonably be expected to be enjoyed elsewhere, taking full account  of
    all considerations weighing in favour of the  refusal,  prejudices  the
    family life of the applicant in a manner sufficiently serious to amount
    to a breach of the fundamental right protected by Article 8'  (Huang  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2007]  UKHL  11  ('Huang',
    para. 20).  In considering this question, we have  taken  into  account
    all factors that  weigh  in  favour  of  the  Appellant's  deportation,
    including  the  desirability  of  applying  a  workable,   predictable,
    consistent and fair system of immigration control  (Huang,  para.  16).
    Against this, I have taken into account  the  effect  that  refusal  of
    leave would have on the enjoyment of the appellant's private and family
    life in the appellant's case, bearing  in  mind  the  core  value  that
    Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention seeks to protect and the  fact
    that '[t]heir family, or extended family, is the group  on  which  many
    people  most  heavily   depend,   socially,   emotionally   and   often
    financially' (Huang, para. 18).

18. I have further considered the case recent  decision  of  the  House  of
    Lords in Beoku-Betts (FC) (Appellant) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2008] UKHL 39 where the issue for determination was phrased
    in the following terms:

              'In determining an appeal under section 65 of the Immigration
             and Asylum Act 1999 (the 1999 Act) (now sections 82 and 84  of
             the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (the  2002
             Act)) against the Secretary of State's  refusal  of  leave  to
             remain on the  ground  that  to  remove  the  Appellant  would
             interfere disproportionately  with  his  Article  8  right  to
             respect for his family life, should the immigration  appellate
             authorities take account of the impact of his proposed removal
             upon all those sharing family life with him or only its impact
             upon him personally (taking account of  the  impact  on  other
             family members only indirectly ie. only insofar as this  would
             in turn have an effect upon him)?

19. Baroness Hale observed that 'the right to respect for the  family  life
    of one necessarily encompasses the right to respect for the family life
    of others, normally a spouse or minor children, with whom  that  family
    life is enjoyed'.  It was further said that:  'Together  these  members
    enjoy a single family  life  and  whether  or  not  the  removal  would
    interfere disproportionately with it has to be looked at  by  reference
    to the family unit as a whole and  the  impact  of  removal  upon  each
    member. If overall the removal would be disproportionate, all  affected
    family members are to be  regarded  as  victims'.   In  light  of  this
    decision we have to consider the family life of  all  those  who  share
    their family life with the appellant.

20. I have also had regard that  from  28  July  2014  section  19  of  the
    Immigration  Act  2014  is  brought  into  force:  Article  3  of   the
    Immigration  Act  2014  (Commencement  No  1,  Transitory  and   Saving
    Provisions) Order 2014 (SI 2014/1820).  This  amends  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 by introducing  a  new  Part  5A  which
    contains sections 117A, 117B, 117D and 117D. Part 5A only applies where
    the Tribunal considers Article 8(2) ECHR directly.

21. It was accepted by Mr Tufan that the first  four  questions  in  Razgar
    must be answered in the affirmative. Therefore the only  question  that
    remains is whether the respondent's decision is  proportionate  to  the
    respondent's legitimate interest in a fair and transparent  immigration
    control.

22. I guide myself that I must make a  fact  sensitive  assessment  of  the
    appellants'   circumstances   and   make   my   own    assessment    of
    proportionality. It is obvious that respect for a claimant's family and
    private life under Article  8  (1)  is  subject  to  proportionate  and
    justified interferences in pursuit of a legitimate  aim  under  Article
    8(2). (Izuazu)

23. In considering proportionality specific to this appellant,  I  consider
    the submissions made on behalf of the appellant at the hearing and  his
    witness statement as to what why his  circumstances  should  be  deemed
    exceptional such as he should succeed pursuant to Article 8.

24. The appellant claims that he has been in this country as a student.  He
    claims that he has now completed his education and after resetting  his
    last exam the results are expected in February 2015. He  said  that  he
    has a training contract which is required before he can practice as  an
    accountant. It was accepted that the  appellant  can  do  his  training
    contract outside the United Kingdom.

25. It has been decided by the higher Courts that the fact that someone has
    studied in this country is not sufficient basis upon which to  base  an
    Article 8 claim. The appellant has been in this country  as  a  student
    for a very long time. He will receive his results in February 2015  and
    will be a qualified accountant subject to him completing  his  training
    contract which can be done anywhere including Nigeria.

26. I find that the appellant must have always known that he would have  to
    return to his country after the  finish  of  his  education  unless  he
    fulfils the requirements of the Immigration Rules for further leave  to
    remain which he has not.

27. The appellant claims that the other exceptional circumstances this case
    is that he has a girlfriend in this country who is  a  Kenyan  but  has
    British nationality. I  consider  the  appellant's  girlfriend  as  the
    appellant's private life under Article 8. The  appellant  can  continue
    his relationship with his girlfriend from abroad or if she  wishes  she
    can join him in Nigeria.

28. I find there are no compelling circumstances in  the  appellant's  case
    for him to succeed  pursuant  to  Article  8  when  he  cannot  succeed
    pursuant to the Immigration Rules for leave to remain in this country.

29. Considering all the evidence in the round I find that even if there  is
    some disturbance in the appellant's private life that he has formed  in
    this country with his studies and his girlfriend, it is not  sufficient
    to trump the interests of the respondent.

    Decision

    Appeal dismissed






Signed by,
      Dated this 25th day of January 2015
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

.............................................
Mrs S Chana

