
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32010/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Field House                   |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th July 2014                               |On 28th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                              Miss Mercy Krofa
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Spio-Aidoo, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national  of  Ghana  whose  appeal  was  allowed  on
    Article 8 human rights grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyd  in  a
    determination promulgated on 24th April 2014.

 2. The Secretary of State lodged grounds of application.  Firstly  it  was
    said that the judge should have considered the  Appellant's  Article  8
    application under Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Rules.
    Paragraph 276ADE was therefore relevant to any  assessment  of  private
    life under Article 8 regardless of whether  the  application  was  made
    before those provisions came into force on 9th July 2012.  Secondly the
    judge erred in law  in  concluding  that  the  Appellant's  failure  to
    regularise her stay was not a fact  to  be  weighed  against  her  when
    assessing whether removal amounted to a  disproportionate  interference
    with her Article 8 rights.

 3. The Appellant lodged a Rule  24  notice  stating  that  the  judge  had
    exercised his independent judicial judgment under Article 8.  The judge
    had found that separating the Appellant or requiring her little brother
    who was born and had lived for ten years here to go and live  in  Ghana
    was disproportionate to any sensible purpose expressed  in  the  Rules.
    The judge had been correct to consider the five step principles as  set
    down in the case of Razgar.  The decision in relation to the  Appellant
    was  made  applying  the  Rules  in  existence  at  the  date  of   her
    application.  The judge could not have  decided  the  Appellant's  case
    differently and in any event the judge's use of discretion could not be
    faulted.

 4. Before me Mr Tufan expanded on  his  grounds.   There  was  a  lack  of
    reasoning given by the judge.  He had  not  applied  paragraph  276ADE.
    The relevance of Chikwamba was unclear.  The fact  that  the  Appellant
    was overweight was not relevant.  I was asked to set the decision aside
    and make a fresh decision allowing the Secretary of State's appeal  and
    failing that if I concluded that a further  fact-finding  exercise  was
    necessary to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  In response to
    submissions made by Ms Spio-Aidoo it was said that there had been delay
    in this case and some of it lay at the door of the Secretary  of  State
    but not all because the Appellant had changed address.

 5. For the Appellant reliance was placed on Rule 24 notice.  The judge had
    conducted an appropriate balancing  exercise.   Whilst  the  judge  had
    referred to Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 this had no effect  on  the
    decision reached and he had properly applied the five steps set out  in
    Razgar.  It was notable in this case while the  decision  was  made  in
    2007 it had not been served on the Appellant until 2013.  The judge had
    assessed all the evidence and had taken into account the  interests  of
    the Appellant's brother.  He had carried out the appropriate  balancing
    exercise.  There was no error in law.

 6. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 7. There is no doubt that the judge was wrong when he noted  in  paragraph
    16 that this was an Article 8 appeal based on the law as it stood prior
    to introduction of the Immigration Rules in relation to family life and
    private life.  The judge does not explain his reasoning but he  appears
    to have taken no account of the approach set out in R  (Nagre)  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and Gulshan (Article 8 - new  Rules  -  correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC).  The principles set out in these cases
    are ones which  the  judge  should  have  followed  namely  that  after
    applying the requirements of the Rules only if there  may  be  arguable
    good grounds for granting leave to remain outside them is it  necessary
    for Article  8  purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are
    compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised  under  them.   It
    may also be  said  that  it  is  unclear  why  the  judge  referred  to
    Chikwamba.  He failed to indicate in what way that  case  (he  gave  no
    citation) was relevant to the outcome of the appeal before him and  the
    parties before me agreed Chikwamba had no application  in  the  present
    case.

 8. Having said that it was accepted by the Appellant's representative that
    the Appellant could not meet the requirements of Article  8  under  the
    Immigration Rules (paragraph  6  of  the  judge's  determination).   It
    follows that the basis of the submission made to  the  judge  was  that
    this was a case which should  be  considered  outwith  the  Immigration
    Rules.  It is well-known that there is ample case law to justify such a
    proposition and that is exactly what the judge went on to  do  carrying
    out a balancing act in terms of Razgar v  SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  27.   The
    judge noted the acknowledgment of the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    that the Appellant did have a family and consequently private  life  in
    the United Kingdom and that her removal would cause  such  interference
    with her life as to potentially  engage  the  operation  of  Article  8
    (paragraph 17).  As the judge noted the question before him was whether
    in all the circumstances it would be proportionate or  disproportionate
    to the legitimate public end sought to be achieved for the Appellant to
    be removed.

 9. The judge noted that the Appellant had  been  here  for  almost  eleven
    years.  The Appellant's brother had lived all his life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He had never been to Ghana.  The judge concluded it would not
    be feasible to expect him to leave the United Kingdom and go  and  live
    in Ghana.  He noted that the Appellant's mother who  had  been  looking
    after him had been here for eleven years and she was well settled.  She
    and the Appellant were active members of the church.  He noted that the
    Appellant relied quite heavily on the emotional support of her  mother.
    He noted that her brother would be "indeed very upset and confused"  if
    she was to leave the United Kingdom.

10. He noted that the Appellant was very closely involved in the church and
    very  close  to  her  brother.   The  Appellant  had   no   family   or
    accommodation to go to in Ghana.   The  Appellant  was  obese,  had  no
    qualifications, and it was therefore unlikely she would  be  employable
    in Ghana.

11. Against that factual background  the  judge  found  that  it  would  be
    disproportionate to remove  the  Appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom.
    While this could be said to be a marginal case and other  judges  might
    have responded differently to the facts found the judge gave clear  and
    coherent reasons why he was allowing the appeal under Article 8. He did
    provide adequate reasons and it can  reasonably  be  inferred  that  he
    considered the Appellant's circumstances compelling or exceptional.  It
    cannot be said that his decision was so perverse or irrational that  it
    amounts to an error in law.  In short, he was entitled to  find  as  he
    did, namely that to remove the Appellant from the  United  Kingdom,  in
    all the circumstances, would be a  disproportionate  interference  with
    her fundamental if qualified rights under Article 8 ECHR.

Decision

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

13. I do not set aside the decision.






Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


