
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32545/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 3 March 2016                              |On 13 April 2016               |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                               miratim mezine

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance and not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Kosovo born  on  3  September  1985.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 2000.

 2. On 20 May  2014  he  made  an  application  for  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a permanent right of residence in the  United  Kingdom.
    That application was refused in a decision dated 4 August 2014.

 3. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Oakley  ("the  FtJ")  at  a  hearing  on  18
    February 2015.  Judge Oakley concluded that the appellant was unable to
    meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations") and his appeal on  that  basis
    was dismissed.  The appeal was also  dismissed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules with reference to Article 8 of the ECHR.

 4. The grounds of appeal before  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant contend that the FtJ erred in law  in  his  consideration  of
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) (very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  in
    Kosovo).

 5. It is also asserted that he erred in law in failing  to  give  adequate
    reasons for concluding that the appellant was able to return to Kosovo.

 6.  In  granting  permission  to  appeal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge   Markus
    highlighted the issue of jurisdiction, in terms of whether  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  ("FtT")  had  jurisdiction  to  consider  Article  8  in
    circumstances where it was dealing with an appeal against a refusal  to
    issue a residence card under the EEA Regulations.

 7. At a hearing before the Upper Tribunal on 3 November  2015  the  appeal
    was adjourned pending the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  on  appeal
    from the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Amirteymour and others  (EEA
    appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC). An  application  for  a
    further adjournment was made subsequent to that hearing on the basis of
    the forthcoming listing of the appeal in Amirteymour.  That application
    was refused in the light of the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  TY
    (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 1233.  A further application for  an  adjournment  of  the  hearing
    listed before me was refused prior to the hearing by  a  judge  of  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 8. On 24 February 2016 the  appellant's  solicitors  wrote  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal asking that the appeal  be  determined  'on  the  papers'  and
    reiterating something of the history of the  appeal  proceedings.   Yet
    again, a request was made for the proceedings to be adjourned to  await
    the outcome of the decision of the Court of Appeal in Armirteymour.

 9. At the hearing before me the respondent was represented  and  ready  to
    proceed.  Having regard to rule 2  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Procedure) Rules 2008, I decided not to adjourn the hearing  because  I
    did not consider that it was in the interests of justice to do  so,  in
    the light of the existing jurisprudence.  Similarly, I decided  not  to
    make a decision without a hearing under rule 34 ('on the  papers')  but
    to proceed to a hearing and consider any submissions made on behalf  of
    the respondent.  Accordingly, I decided to proceed in  the  absence  of
    the appellant and his representative, under rule 38.

10. Mr Kotas simply relied on the 'rule 24'  response  which,  in  summary,
    referred to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Armirteymour.  I  was
    invited to find that the FtJ had no jurisdiction to deal  with  Article
    8.

11. My conclusions can be expressed in short  order.  Armirteymour  decided
    that where no notice under s.120 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 has been served, and where no EEA  decision  to  remove
    has been made, an appellant cannot bring a human  rights  challenge  to
    removal in an appeal under the EEA Regulations.  It  further  concluded
    that neither the factual matrix  nor  the  reasoning  in  JM  (Liberia)
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 has any application to appeals of that type.

12. It is not suggested that in the appeal before  me  there  was  a  s.120
    notice, and none is apparent from the Tribunal file.

13. Although as at the date of  the  hearing  before  me  Armirteymour  was
    awaiting a hearing in the Court of Appeal, on 1 December 2015 the Court
    of Appeal gave judgment in the case of TY  (Sri  Lanka)  in  which,  in
    summary, the Court  of  Appeal  endorsed  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Armirteymour.  In the circumstances, the appellant did not,
    and does not, have recourse to Article 8, whether under the  Article  8
    Immigration Rules or under Article 8 proper, in his appeal against  the
    refusal to issue a residence card.

14. It follows that the FtJ had no jurisdiction to entertain an  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds under the Rules or otherwise, albeit that the  appeal
    on those grounds was dismissed.  Nevertheless, I am satisfied that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in law in considering Article 8 at all, which
    it had no jurisdiction to do.  It follows that the grounds of appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal cannot on any view succeed.

15. Notwithstanding the  error  of  law  on  the  part  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, this is not a case in which it is appropriate  to  set  aside
    its decision because the error of  law  could  not  have  affected  the
    outcome of the appeal.

    Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  However, its decision is  not  set  aside  and  its
    decision to dismiss the appeal on all grounds therefore stands.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                        1/04/16





