

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32104/2013


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 28th April 2014                            |On 29th April 2014           |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                  ALI AZMAT
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Talacchi instructed by Westkin Associates
For the Respondent: Mr Whitwell Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Hodgkinson promulgated on the 5th February 2014, following  a
        hearing at Hatton Cross on 29th January 2014, in  which  the  Judge
        dismissed the appeal under both the Immigration Rules and on  human
        rights grounds.



Background


     2. The Appellant was born on the 2nd November 1972 and is a citizen of
        Pakistan. He entered the UK on 26th November 2012 with the  benefit
        of a multi-entry visit visa granted on 2nd December 2011 and  valid
        until 2nd December 2013.  He has remained in the UK since. On  16th
        May 2013 the  Appellant's  legal  representatives  applied  on  his
        behalf for a variation of his leave to remain on the basis  of  his
        private and family life with reference to Article 8. The  Appellant
        had in the meantime married a British citizen who he met  during  a
        previous visit to the UK. They entered into a customary marriage in
        the UK on 18th  September  2011  and  were  officially  married  in
        Malaysia on 11th July 2012. The  Appellant's  wife  gave  birth  to
        twins on 5th March 2013.


     3. The Judge noted that it was accepted before him that the  Appellant
        was unable  to  satisfy  the  provisions  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
        Immigration Rules in relation to either the "partner"  or  "parent"
        routes and that it was conceded by the  Appellant's  representative
        that the issue was one of  Article  8  ECHR  on  the  basis  of  an
        exercise of a discretionary power outside the Rules.


     4. The Judge conducted an assessment of  the  evidence  following  the
        guidance provided in the case of Razgar before concluding:


              33. In considering the issue of proportionality, I have  taken
   into account                 all of the factors to which I have  referred
   above, which includes   what                  is in the best interests of
   the children, and I  have  given  those  interests                   very
   significant   weight    in    undertaking    the    relevant    balancing
   exercise.  Against this, I reiterate that the appellant has  his  parents
   in                  Pakistan, and he also has his brother and one  sister
   remaining there,                 according to his evidence.   It  may  be
   that the appellant has  not  lived                    in  Pakistan  since
   2005, but there is no reason known to me as to  why                    he
   cannot  do  so.   Whilst  I  accept  that  the  sponsor  does  not  speak
   Urdu, there is no reason known to  me  as  to  why  she  cannot  seek  to
     learn the language, in the event that she elects to return to  Pakistan
              with the appellant and their two children.

              34. If the appellant and the sponsor do not  wish  to  conduct
their family               life in Pakistan, then it is a  matter  for  them
as to whether the                       appellant wishes to  make  an  entry
clearance application to enter the               United Kingdom as a  spouse
in due course, subject to him being  able                   to  satisfy  the
requirements of the relevant Rules at that stage.

              35. As part of my consideration  of  proportionality  in  this
appeal, I                       would  add  that  I  have  also  taken  into
account the reasoning                   contained  in  the  Upper  Tribunals
decision  in  Gulshan  (Article  8  -                  new  Rules-   correct
approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC), as relied                    upon  by  Ms
Parkes, which, in turn, makes reference to relevant case                law,
including   the   Administrative   Court's   judgment   in   R    (on    the
application  of  Nagre)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC   720   (Admin).    In   this
     instance, I am satisfied that, to require the  entire  family  unit  to
live                    together  in   Pakistan,   would   not   result   in
unjustifiably harsh                     consequences for the appellant,  the
sponsor and their two children,                  and that it  would  not  be
disproportionate to expect them to do  so.   I                    would  add
that the two children were conceived at a time when                both  the
appellant   and   the   sponsor   were   aware    that    the    appellant's
position  in  the  United  Kingdom  was  precarious  and,   whilst   clearly
     no blame lies at the two children's feet in relation to thereto, it  is
                  nevertheless a factor of some relevance to  the  issue  of
                       proportionality.

              36. I confirm that, in reaching my conclusions in relation  to
the                    proportionality of the respondent's decision, I  have
not only taken                  into account  the  appellant's  rights  but,
additionally, the impact of the                  respondent's decision  upon
the sponsor, and  upon  the  two  children,                    applying  the
reasoning of the House of Lords in its  judgment  in                  Beoku-
Betts [2008] UKHL 39.

              37. I have also borne in mind the reasoning of  the  House  of
Lords in its               judgment in Huang [2007] UKHL 11  and  note  that
the  Court,  in   the                     judgment,   indicated   that,   in
circumstances where an individual was                 unable to satisfy  the
requirements of a relevant Rule, Regulation or                  similar,  it
was envisaged that it would be in a very few cases  where                the
respondent's   decision   relating   to    that    individual    would    be
      deemed  to  involve  a   disproportionate   interference   with   that
         individual's rights under Article 8  (2).   I  entirely  appreciate
that this                  is not a strict legal test  but  would  add  that
the evidence before me                  causes me to be entirely  satisfied,
based upon my analysis of the                particular facts  and  evidence
relating  to  this   appellant,   that   the                        relevant
balancing exercise should weigh in the respondent's favour.
     5. The Judge concluded that the Respondent's decision did not  involve
        a disproportionate interference with the Appellant's, or any  other
        relevant person's rights and so dismissed the appeal under  Article
        8.


     6. Permission to appeal was sought on the grounds (a) the Judge failed
        to explain adequately or at all why he  did  not  accept  that  the
        sponsor would have difficulty living in Pakistan,  (b)  that  there
        had been no or no adequate assessment of the best interests of  the
        two children, (c)  the  judge  took  no  adequate  account  of  the
        children's British nationality, and (d) that the Judge  misdirected
        himself  as  to  the  proper  approach   to   the   assessment   of
        proportionality in relation to  Article  8  rights.  Permission  to
        appeal was not admitted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett  on
        28th February 2014 as it was out of time  although  Judge  Grimmett
        noted that the grounds  were  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with
        findings made.  The application was renewed directly to  the  Upper
        Tribunal where it was admitted  and  permission  granted  by  Upper
        Tribunal Judge Grubb on  the  basis  it  was  arguable  that  Judge
        Hodgkinson failed properly to consider the best  interests  of  the
        children, in particular in finding that they  could  reasonably  be
        expected to live in Pakistan  and  hence  leave  the  EU  which  is
        arguably contrary to the established case law on the rights  of  EU
        citizens.  It is said to be arguable that  the  Judge  should  have
        approached the appeal on the basis that the family would  be  split
        between the UK and Pakistan and that the children and their  mother
        could not be expected to accompany the appellant to  Pakistan.  The
        Judge should have considered whether that was proportionate.


     7. In his submissions to the Upper Tribunal Mr  Talacchi  relied  upon
        the decision of the Supreme Court in Zoumbas v Secretary  of  state
        for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74, at paragraph 10,  in  which
        the Court paraphrase the principles arising from the  cases  of  ZH
        (Tanzania) [2011] 2 AC 166, H v Lord Advocate [2012] SC (UKSC)  308
        and H(H) v Deputy Prosecutor of the Italian Republic  [2013]  1  AC
        338, as follows


              (1) The best interests of the child are an  integral  part  of
   the                          proportionality assessment under  article  8
   ECHR;


              (2)      In making that assessment, the best interests of  the
   child must be  a                   primary  consideration,  although  not
   always the  only  primary                        consideration;  and  the
   child's best interests do  not  of  themselves                  have  the
   status of the paramount consideration;


              (3) Although the best interests of the child can be outweighed
   by the                  cumulative effect  of  other  considerations,  no
   other consideration                   can be treated as  inherently  more
   significant;


              (4)      While different judges might approach the question of
   the best                     interests of the child in different ways, it
   is important to ask  oneself                the  right  questions  in  an
   orderly manner in order to avoid the risk                   that the best
   interests   of   the   child   might   be    undervalued    when    other
   important considerations were in play;


              (5)      It is important to have a clear  idea  of  a  child's
   circumstances and                what is  in  a  child's  best  interests
   before  one  asks  oneself  whether                those  interests   are
   outweighed by the force of other considerations;


              (6)      To that end there is  no  substitute  for  a  careful
   examination of all               relevant factors when the  interests  of
   the child are involved in an                  article 8 assessment; and


              (7) A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she
   is not                  responsible, such as the conduct of a parent.


     8. Mr Talacchi referred specifically to (3) above  alleging  that  the
        Judge had given undue weight to other  factors  and  treated  other
        factors as being inherently more significant than the needs of  the
        children.


     9. A useful summary of the approach to assessing the best interests of
        children is to be found in ZS (Jamaica) and Another v  SSHD  [2012]
        EWCA Civ 1639 in which the  Court  of  Appeal  reiterated  that  ZH
        (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 made  it  clear  that  the  correct
        approach is to treat best interests of  the  child  as  a  starting
        point and then  go  on  to  assess  whether  those  interests  were
        outweighed by the strength of other considerations.



Discussion



    10. In relation to the ground  on  which  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb
        granted permission to appeal,  namely  that  as  the  children  are
        British and therefore  European  citizen's  the  matter  should  be
        considered as a 'family splitting case', no decision has been  made
        by the Secretary of  State  which  will  have  the  consequence  of
        requiring the children to leave  the  United  Kingdom.   In  Damion
        Harrison and Others v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1736 the Court of Appeal
        rejected an argument that an issue of European law arose in a  case
        in which there was no basis for asserting that it is  arguable,  in
        the light of the authorities, that the Zambrano  principle  extends
        to cover anything short of a situation  where  the  EU  citizen  is
        forced to leave the territory of the EU. If the EU citizen,  be  it
        child or wife, would not in practice  be  compelled  to  leave  the
        country if the non-EU family member were to be refused the right of
        residence, there is nothing in the authorities to suggest  that  EU
        law is engaged. "Article 8 Convention rights may then come into the
        picture to protect family life as the Court recognised  in  Dereci,
        but that is an entirely distinct area of protection".


    11. As the Secretary of State's decision relates to the Appellant  only
        and it has not been shown that it will create a situation where the
        children will have no choice but to  leave  the  territory  of  the
        European Union, I find European law is not engaged in  relation  to
        this appeal.


    12. It is also submitted that  the  Judges  determination  is  somewhat
        muddled. The Judge records that it was accepted that the  Appellant
        is unable to succeed under any of the Immigration Rules and so went
        on to undertake an 'old style' Article 8 ECHR  assessment.   Having
        done so, and having set out the conclusions in paragraphs 33 and 34
        of the  determination,  the  Judge  then  makes  reference  to  the
        decisions in Gulshan and Nagre which are decisions of the  Tribunal
        and High Court which provide guidance on the  correct  approach  be
        taken when considering Article 8 issues in relation to the Rules in
        force post 9th July 2012.


    13. In accordance with the approach set out by the Court of  Appeal  in
        MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, the High Court in  Nagre  [2013]
        EWHC 720 (Admin) and by the Upper Tribunal in Gulshan  [2013]  UKUT
        640, as confirmed by Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate  aim)  [2014]  UKUT
        00085 (IAC), the Judge was required to  consider  the  question  of
        proportionality in the context of the Immigration Rules first  with
        no need to go on to a specific assessment under Article 8 if it  is
        clear from the facts that there are  no  particular  compelling  or
        exceptional circumstances requiring that course to be  taken.  That
        approach is consistent with what the Court of  Appeal  said  in  MF
        (Nigeria) and with the approach of the House of Lords, particularly
        in cases such as Huang [2007] UKHL 11 and Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. In
        Shahzad it was found that where an area of the Rules does not  have
        an express mechanism such as that found in the provisions  relating
        to  deportation  appeals,  the  approach  in  Nagre  ([29]-[31]  in
        particular) and Gulshan should be followed: i.e. after applying the
        requirements of the rules, only  if  there  may  be  arguably  good
        grounds for granting leave to remain outside them is  it  necessary
        for Article 8 purposes to go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are
        compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them.


    14. The starting position for the Judge was to look at  the  Rules  and
        see whether the Appellant was able to meet their requirements.   He
        was not and so the next question to be considered should have  been
        whether the decision would lead to a breach of Article 8 but in the
        context of whether there are factors not covered by the Rules which
        give rise to the need to consider Article 8 further.


    15. It is clear from reading paragraphs 33 and 34 of the  determination
        that the  Judge  accepted  that  this  is,  in  reality,  a  family
        splitting case.  In paragraphs 28 and 29 of the determination there
        is reference to the best interests of the children who were only 11
        months old at the date of the hearing and whose private lives  were
        found to be wholly based upon their relationship  with  each  other
        and with their mother and father.  It is  accepted  that  the  best
        interests of a child are to be brought up by both their parents, if
        possible, and absent countervailing factors.  There was no evidence
        before the First-tier Tribunal to suggest that  the  children  have
        any special needs such as to indicate an adverse  impact  upon  the
        removal of their father.  The Judge noted in paragraph  12  of  the
        determination that it was part of the  Appellant's  case  that  the
        sponsor needed his support in order to look  after  and  raise  the
        children and that she  would  have  difficulty  in  coping  if  the
        Appellant was  not  with  her.  There  was,  however,  no  evidence
        available of any existing condition or situation that would prevent
        the sponsor from adequately meeting the needs of her children.   On
        the basis of the material the Judge was asked to  consider  it  has
        not been arguably made out that the decision to refuse the  appeal,
        even though this may result in the  family  being  separated,  will
        result in compelling circumstances  giving  rise  to  unjustifiably
        harsh consequences for the Applicant or any family member, such  as
        to establish an arguable case at this time.


    16. The Judge also considered the question of whether the family  could
        relocate as a unit and found that in  all  the  circumstances  they
        could on the basis that it was not disproportionate to expect  them
        to do so.  In Gulshan  it was held that the  term  "insurmountable
        obstacles" in provisions such as Section  EX.1  are  not  obstacles
        which are  impossible  to  surmount.  They  concern  the  practical
        possibilities of relocation. In the absence of such  insurmountable
        obstacles,  it  is  necessary  to  show  other   non-standard   and
        particular   features   demonstrating   that   removal   will    be
        unjustifiably harsh.  This is the test that I find was  considered,
        in the alternative, by the Judge in paragraph 35 and on  the  basis
        of the material provided to the Judge  it  has  not  arguably  been
        established that such circumstances existed.  The grounds  question
        whether the Applicant and her husband will be able to relocate  but
        this statement is not supported by adequate  evidence  establishing
        an arguable case that they cannot, despite the  accepted  practical
        difficulties they will/may face. The Judge refers to the  existence
        of family in Pakistan.


    17. The finding in paragraph 34 that, if necessary, the Appellant could
        make an application for entry clearance was challenged on the basis
        that this may take a long time although there is no indication that
        this claim was advanced before the Judge or  evidence  provided  to
        show  that  any  period  out  of  the  United  Kingdom  whilst   an
        application was made would make the requirement for  the  Appellant
        to return to Pakistan disproportionate.  This  is  not  a  decision
        made as a result of policy being imposed by the Secretary of  State
        but as a natural consequence of the lawful decision to  remove  the
        Appellant and the necessary steps that he will have to undertake to
        seek re-entry to the United Kingdom lawfully  in  the  capacity  in
        which he seeks to remain.


    18. I do not find this is an appeal in which it can be found  that  the
        Judge failed to consider material issues.  The Judge considered the
        facts with the degree of care required in appeal  of  this  nature,
        including the best interests of the children. I  do  not  find  any
        arguable  merit  in  the  submission  the   Judge   treated   other
        considerations  as  inherently  more  significant  than  the   best
        interests of the children. The assertion he did so is no more  than
        an attack upon the weight the Judge chose to give to the  competing
        interests.  The Appellant  cannot  claim  to  have  any  legitimate
        expectation that he would be permitted  to  remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom. He entered as a visitor which is a  temporary  status  yet
        chose to marry and have children against a background of a lack  of
        relevant immigration status, a fact which it was found both he  and
        his wife were fully aware of by the Judge. He is in  some  respects
        responsible for the difficulties that  he  now  faces.   There  was
        insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  expecting  family  life  to
        continue in Pakistan is unlawful or irrational  or  that  expecting
        this family to be separated with the Appellant's wife and  children
        remaining as an independent family unit in the  United  Kingdom  is
        unlawful or irrational either. There is no evidence of any  adverse
        impact upon the children whose needs will be  fully  met  by  their
        mother, or mother and father whichever  option  is  chosen  by  the
        family unit, such as to make the decision disproportionate. In AF v
        SSHD [2013] CSIH 88 it was re-iterated that nationality  is  not  a
        trump card and the Tribunal is required to take  into  account  the
        full circumstances


    19. I find the conclusions reached by the Judge are within the range of
        permissible findings open to  the  Judge  on  the  evidence.  Those
        findings are the 'steppingstones' leading  to  the  decision  under
        challenge to dismiss the appeal and I find no arguable legal  error
        material to that decision has been proved.

Decision

    20. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.




   Anonymity.


    21. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  as  no  application  for
        anonymity was made and has not been shown to be  warranted  in  the
        facts.






Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Dated the 29th April 2014



















