
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal Number: IA/32631/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 20 May 2014              On 12 August 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                  Noriko Chathurani Weerasinghe Arachchige
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. G. Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    The Respondent in person.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Oliver promulgated on 24 January  2014,  allowing  the  appeal  of  Ms
      Arachchige against the Secretary of State's  decision  dated  16  July
      2013 refusing Ms Arachchige variation of leave to remain as a  Tier  1
      (Entrepreneur) migrant, and to remove her  from  the  UK  pursuant  to
      section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

   2. Although before me the Secretary of State  is  the  appellant  and  Ms
      Arachchige is the respondent, for the sake  of  consistency  with  the
      proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer  to
      Ms Arachchige as the Appellant and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
      Respondent.


Background

   3. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born  on  30  May  1980.  Her
      personal details and immigration history are a  matter  of  record  on
      file, and it is unnecessary to rehearse them here; I make reference as
      is incidental for the purposes of this document.

   4. On 29 June 2013 the Appellant applied for variation of leave to remain
      as a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant.  The  Respondent  refused  the
      application for reasons set out in a combined  Notice  of  Immigration
      Decision and 'reasons for refusal letter' dated 16 July 2013, in which
      the section 47 removal decision was also communicated.

   5. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application with  reference  to
      paragraph 245DD(b) and (c) of the Immigration Rules. Additionally  the
      Respondent stated:

"In line with paragraph 245DD(l) of  the  Immigration  Rules,  we  have  not
      carried out an assessment as detailed in  paragraph  245DD(h)  of  the
      Immigration Rules as your application has been refused. We reserve the
      right carry out this assessment in any challenge of this  decision  or
      in future applications for Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)."

   6. The Appellant appealed to the IAC. Her appeal was  allowed  under  the
      Immigration Rules for reasons  set  out  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge's determination.

   7. The Respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which
      was granted on 2 April 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chambers.

   8. The Appellant filed a Rule 24 response dated 21 April 2014.


Consideration

   9. The Respondent refused the  Appellant's  application  essentially  for
      three reasons:

(i) A letter provided from the Sri Lanka  Savings  Bank  did  not  meet  the
      evidential criteria under Appendix A of the Rules because it  did  not
      confirm that the bank was  regulated  by  the  appropriate  regulatory
      body.

(ii) The Appellant had not  specified  a  SOC  code  or  job  title  on  her
      application form, and had thereby not shown that she  was  engaged  in
      business activity in an  occupation  which  appears  on  the  list  of
      occupations skill to National  Qualifications  Framework  level  4  or
      above.

(iii) The Appellant's MBA degree certificate from the  University  of  Wales
      that had been submitted as  evidence  of  competency  in  the  English
      language was not an original document, but was a copy.

  10. Further, as noted above, in such circumstances the Respondent did  not
      engage  in  an  assessment  as  envisaged  under  paragraph  245DD(h).
      Paragraph 245DD(h) involves a qualitative assessment of an applicant's
      business including possible consideration (pursuant  to  245DD(i))  of
      the viability of the business plan.

  11. Although the First-tier Tribunal Judge found in the Appellant's favour
      in respect of the matters summarised at paragraph 9 above in  reliance
      upon the 'evidential flexibility' policy (determination  at  paragraph
      8), he seems on the face of the determination not to have  been  alert
      to the significance of paragraph 245DD(h). In any  event  he  made  no
      findings relevant to 245DD(h), and as such there was no reasoned basis
      to allow the appeal outright under the Rules.

  12. In such circumstances, even if the Judge's approach  and  findings  in
      respect of other matters were to be  accepted,  he  went  too  far  in
      allowing the appeal without an assessment pursuant to  245DD(h).  This
      was a material error of law.

  13. Whilst this was  not  a  ground  pleaded  by  the  Respondent,  in  my
      judgement it is a 'Robinson obvious' point because it  is  an  express
      requirement of the Rules and it  was  expressly  referred  to  in  the
      combined  Notice  of  Immigration  Decision  and  RFRL.  Whilst  I  am
      conscious that the Appellant appeared before me unrepresented and  may
      not have been 'equipped' to meet this point with legal submissions, in
      my judgement there was  no  purpose  in  affording  the  Appellant  an
      opportunity  to  seek  further  legal  advice  in   this   regard   in
      circumstances where the issue was essentially unanswerable: the  Judge
      had plainly failed to deal with a vital component of the  requirements
      of the Rules and no  amount  of  legal  submissions  could  make  that
      factual circumstance any different.

  14. As regards the matters that were considered by the Judge, I  make  the
      following observations.

(i) Mr Saunders indicated that the Respondent no longer took issue with  the
      English language requirement. Mr Saunders acknowledged that at section
      4 of the Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Application Form used by the  Appellant
      there was a 'tick-box' option for claiming points for English Language
      by "Evidence previously submitted/considered to  automatically  meet".
      When an applicant ticks this box they are directed to the next section
      of the application form in respect of  maintenance,  and  are  thereby
      routed past the sections of the application form that request  details
      and  documentation  in  respect  of  any  relevant  English   language
      qualification. It was  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  previously
      demonstrated competence in the English language by presentation  of  a
      degree certificate in support of her  earlier  successful  application
      for variation of leave as a Tier 1 (Post Study Work) migrant.  It  was
      therefore immaterial whether she had submitted her degree  certificate
      in original or copy  format,  or  at  all,  in  the  context  of  this
      particular application.

(ii) In support of her appeal the Appellant provided a letter from  the  Sri
      Lanka savings bank dated 19 August 2013 in which it was confirmed that
      the bank was regulated by the Central Bank of Sri  Lanka  (Appellant's
      bundle page 8). The Judge referred to this letter at  paragraph  5  of
      the determination. The Judge considered  that  the  omission  of  this
      information from the letter submitted with the Appellant's application
      confirming the balance in her account was something that  was  "easily
      capable of remedy" and such  remedy  could  have  been  secured  by  a
      request  in  accordance  with  the   evidential   flexibility   policy
      (determination at paragraph 8).

(iii) As regards the Appellant's occupation code  the  Judge  accepted  that
      the Appellant had omitted certain sections  of  the  application  form
      because  she  had  mis-read  the  directions,  and  indicated  himself
      satisfied in respect of the information now provided by the  Appellant
      (determination at paragraph 5). Although the Judge does not descend to
      particulars,  it  is  clear  from  the  supporting  documents  in  the
      Appellants bundle before the First-tier Tribunal that she  stated  she
      was a 'Director' and the SOC code '3534' was  applicable.  Again,  the
      Judge considered that this  was  an  omission  readily  remediable  by
      application of the evidential flexibility policy (paragraph 8).

(iv) However, such conclusions meant that the Respondent's decision was  not
      in accordance with  the  law  and  required  to  be  remitted  to  the
      Respondent. The Judge did not have jurisdiction to evaluate  the  case
      under the Rules  in  reliance  upon  the  material  presented  to  the
      Tribunal because the Tribunal is excluded pursuant to section  85A  of
      the 2002 Act from taking into account any evidence not submitted  with
      the application. The consequence is that even on the Judge's  findings
      the case should have been remitted to the Respondent, for  a  decision
      to be made on the Appellant's application in accordance with the law.

(v) At Annex A of the evidential flexibility policy (which  is  appended  to
      Rodriguez [2013] UKUT 00042 (IAC)) in identifying  documents  that  it
      might  be  appropriate  to  request  under   Tier   1   (Entrepreneur)
      applications  included  is  "missing  information  from  the  required
      letters/documents". The omission of a statement as to regulation  from
      the bank  letter  in  my  judgement  is  plainly  just  such  'missing
      information' from the 'required documents'.

(vi) I acknowledge that the omission of any reference to the job  title  and
      SOC code is less clear cut. However, in this context I note  that  the
      Appellant states that although such information was omitted  from  the
      visa application form, details of the Appellant's work -  specifically
      that she was a director of her company and was working as a  financial
      consultant - was set out in her  business  plan  which  she  says  was
      submitted with her application. The business plan was not included  in
      the  Respondent's  bundle;  however,  in   circumstances   where   the
      Respondent declined  to  evaluate  the  business  plan,  this  is  not
      indicative that the plan was not submitted with  the  application.  Mr
      Saunders confirmed that there was on the Respondent's file an envelope
      which contained the Appellant's business plan,  although  it  was  not
      immediately apparent exactly when it had been submitted. It  seems  to
      me more likely  than  not  that  it  was  indeed  submitted  with  the
      application as  claimed  by  the  Appellant.  Whilst  the  failure  to
      complete  fully  the  application  form  was  both   unfortunate   and
      unhelpful, it seems to me where the Respondent was  constructively  in
      receipt of all  of  the  relevant  information  a  fair  and  sensible
      application of the evidential flexibility policy should have  been  to
      provide the Appellant with an opportunity to make good  the  omissions
      from the application form.

(vii) In this latter respect, I do not accept Mr Saunders'  submission  that
      the evidential flexibility policy  did  not  apply  to  this  residual
      matter because there was another basis  for  refusal.  The  other  two
      matters relied upon by the Respondent  did  not  inevitably  form  the
      basis of refusal: indeed the Respondent now acknowledges that she  was
      in error in respect of the English language requirement; the  omission
      by the bank in respect of regulation was a matter that  fell  squarely
      within the policy, and so could not be said prior to an invitation  to
      provide further information pursuant to the policy to be a matter that
      would lead to a refusal in any event.


  15. However, notwithstanding my  observations  at  paragraphs  14(vi)  and
      (vii) above, in light of the observations at paragraphs  11,  12,  and
      14(iv), I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred  in
      law, and in all of the circumstances the decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal must be set aside.


Remaking the decisions

  16. I remake the decision in the appeal pursuant to the analysis  set  out
      above.

  17. Pursuant to the reasons given at paragraphs 14(vi) and (vii),  on  the
      very particular facts of this case - and acknowledging the  impact  of
      Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2 - I have reached the conclusion  that  the
      Respondent failed to have regard to, or give effect to, the evidential
      flexibility policy, and as such the Respondent's decision was  not  in
      accordance with the law.

  18. Because the Tribunal is excluded pursuant to section 85A of  the  2002
      Act from taking into account  any  evidence  not  submitted  with  the
      application, I cannot remake  the  decision  substantively  under  the
      Rules. The consequence is that the case  should  be  remitted  to  the
      Respondent, for a decision to be made on the  Appellant's  application
      in accordance with the law.

  19. In the circumstances the section 47 removal decision was premature and
      also not in accordance with the law.

  20.  Further  to  the  above  I  make  the   following   observation.   In
      reconsidering the application the Respondent will  no  doubt  want  to
      have regard to the fact that the evidence now available - which  would
      have been available to the Respondent's decision-maker had there  been
      a request for clarification and/or further documents pursuant  to  the
      evidential flexibility policy,  and  will  now  be  available  to  the
      decision-maker if the evidential policy is operated in the Appellant's
      favour - on its face appears to show that the Appellant's bank is duly
      regulated and the Appellant was working in an appropriate  occupation.
      In such circumstances, and bearing in mind the concession now made  in
      respect of the English language requirement, it  is  likely  that  the
      only remaining issue under the Rules will be that  of  245DD(h)  which
      has yet to be assessed by the Respondent.




Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of  law
      and is set aside. I remake the decision in the appeal.


  21. The appeal is allowed to  the  extent  that  it  is  remitted  to  the
      Respondent to consider the Appellant's application in accordance  with
      the law.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     11 August 2014
