
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32717/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 August 2015                    |On 8 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                             mr Sharmarke Yussuf
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Robinson, Counsel instructed by Haringey
                    Migrant Support Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge P-J  S  White  sitting  at  Richmond  on  23
    December 2014) dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to revoke his indefinite leave to remain pursuant to
    Section 76 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   The
    First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and I  do  not
    consider that the appellant requires to be accorded anonymity for these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Grant of Permission

 2. On 10 June 2015 Judge Cox granted the appellant  permission  to  appeal
    for the following reasons:

         "1.   The  Appellant  (A)  is  a  citizen  of  Somalia.   He  seeks
             permission to appeal, two days out of time, against a decision
             of First-tier Tribunal Judge White whereby  he  dismissed  his
             appeal against the Respondent's (R's) decision to  revoke  his
             indefinite leave to remain pursuant to section 76 of the  2002
             Act.  In light of the explanation  given  and  representations
             made at Part B of the application form, I extend time  in  the
             interests of justice.

         2.   I have carefully considered the decision in  relation  to  the
             grounds, settled by Counsel acting pro bono.  The  grounds  in
             essence contend that the Judge erred in law by taking the view
             that he could not interfere with R's  exercise  of  discretion
             and had no  power  to  review  the  exercise  of  a  statutory
             discretion.  Counsel for A points to section 83(3) of the 2002
             Act in support of her contentions and  distinguishes  Ukus  on
             the facts.

         3.   On consideration, I find the grounds to  be  arguable  in  the
             terms in which they are set forth.  Had the Judge accepted  he
             had  jurisdiction  to  review  the   exercise   of   statutory
             discretion,  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  might  have   been
             different and therefore the arguable error, if  it  was  such,
             was material.

         4.   The grounds disclose an arguable material error of law in  the
             decision and permission is granted."

The Factual Background

 3. The appellant's date of birth is 1 January 1982.  He entered the United
    Kingdom on 21 January 2004 and claimed  asylum  two  days  later.   The
    asylum claim was initially  refused,  but  the  appellant  was  granted
    refugee status following a successful appeal.  In accordance  with  the
    policy and practice at the time,  his  recognition  as  a  refugee  was
    coupled with a grant of ILR on 13 October 2004.

 4. On 14 September 2010 he  was  convicted  of  an  offence  of  attempted
    wounding and sentenced to two years' imprisonment.  On 28 March 2011 he
    was served  the  notice  of  intention  to  deport  him.   He  made  no
    representations in response to that.  On 4 May 2011 he was  served  the
    notice of intention to revoke his refugee status, and  notice  of  that
    intent was served on the UNHCR on 9 June 2011.  On 22  April  2014  the
    respondent informed  the  appellant  that  she  was  not  pursuing  the
    revocation of his refugee status, but was proposing to revoke his  ILR,
    pursuant to Section 76(1) of  the  2002  Act.   On  22  July  2014,  no
    response having been received, the appellant's ILR was revoked.

 5. The letter of 22  April  2014  rehearsed  the  appellant's  immigration
    history, including the fact that on 28 March 2011 he  had  been  served
    with a notice of liability to automatic deportation  which  included  a
    Section 72 warning.  He was liable to deportation,  but  could  not  be
    deported for legal reasons. So the Home Office was proposing to  revoke
    his ILR in view of the fact that Section 76(1) of the 2002 Act applied.



 6. This was reiterated in the letter dated 22  July  2014  explaining  the
    reasons for revoking the appellant's ILR. In the  same  letter  it  was
    said that the appellant  had  been  convicted  of  a  crime  which  the
    respondent  believed  to  be  sufficiently  serious  to   warrant   his
    deportation.  While he could not be deported for legal reasons this did
    not mean that his crime was not particularly  serious.   Reference  was
    made to Section 72(2) of the 2002 Act, and the respondent  quoted  from
    the judge's sentencing remarks.  In light of the above, the Home Office
    was satisfied that, subsequent to him obtaining ILR,  his  conduct  had
    been so serious that it warranted the revocation of his ILR status.

The Hearing Before, the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant was not represented before the First-tier  Tribunal,  but
    had the assistance of a McKenzie friend.

 8. The appellant gave evidence that  he  was  being  good  now,  attending
    school and college and happy with his life.  He had  given  up  alcohol
    and he was a different man.  Miss Ryan, who worked at the hostel  where
    the appellant lives (and who was operating as the appellant's  McKenzie
    friend) told the judge that the appellant had been at her hostel  since
    2012.  Living in hostels  could  be  challenging,  but  he  was  coping
    generally.  He could eventually go on to  independent  living,  and  he
    could eventually get a job with the help of their employment team.

 9. In his subsequent decision, the judge noted that the appellant had  not
    offended again since the index offence which had triggered the decision
    to revoke his ILR.  He continued:

         "13. The letters he produced  are  from  a  Key  Skills  tutor  and
             project  worker  at  St  Mungo's.   Both  indicate  that   the
             appellant has made  progress  while  there,  and  the  project
             worker in  particular  notes  that  his  previous  problematic
             behaviour was made worse by his level of alcohol use, a  point
             clearly made in the sentencing remarks.  She noted  that  over
             the last several months (her  letter  is  dated  28th  October
             2014) the appellant has not been seen drinking  or  under  the
             influence of alcohol during the day, and his alcohol use is no
             longer a problem.

         14.  I note from the sentencing remarks that the offence took place
             in a hostel for prisoners on licence, and that it was not  the
             appellant's first offence, or  indeed  his  first  offence  of
             violence.   In  2007  he  had  been  sentenced  to   2   years
             imprisonment  for  another  wounding  offence,  that  being  a
             glassing, and again committed when drunk.  It seems clear that
             the appellant has a  significant  history  of  offending,  and
             problems with alcohol, against which the improvement noted  at
             St Mungo's is clearly to his credit.

         15.  The scope of this appeal is, however, very  limited.   Section
             76 of the 2002 Act  provides  that  indefinite  leave  may  be
             revoked where a person is liable to  deportation  but  cannot,
             for legal reasons, be deported.   The  appellant  is  still  a
             Somali national.   He  has  a  conviction  for  which  he  was
             sentenced to 2 years imprisonment, which is over the threshold
             for automatic deportation set by section 32 of the Borders Act
             2007, but he retains refugee status.  He is thus shown  to  be
             within the parameters set by section 76.

         16.  Section 76 is clearly a discretionary power, and the  decision
             letter makes clear that the respondent  appreciated  that  and
             considered her discretion, concluding that the seriousness  of
             the offence justified the decision to revoke.  There might  be
             scope for an argument that, certainly by the time the decision
             was finally taken, the appellant had changed so  that  overall
             discretion could or should have been exercised in his  favour,
             although given the nature of the  offence  and  the  statutory
             presumption in section 72(2) it may be  doubted  whether  that
             argument would succeed.  This Tribunal has, however, no  power
             to review the exercise  of  that  statutory  discretion.   The
             grounds on which the Tribunal can act are set out  in  section
             84 of the 2002 Act, and are that the decision is not according
             to law (from various sources, including Immigration Rules,  or
             otherwise) or that the decision maker  should  have  exercised
             differently a discretion conferred by immigration rules.   The
             expression "immigration rules" is defined in  section  113  as
             meaning rules made under section 1(4) of the  Immigration  Act
             1971, and clearly does not extend to other statutes.

         17.  I am satisfied that the respondent has shown that the power to
             revoke indefinite leave existed in this case, and that she was
             aware that the power was discretionary and gave  consideration
             to the exercise of that discretion.  I  am  further  satisfied
             that I have no power, even if I were of the view that  it  was
             wrong, and for the avoidance of doubt I am not of  that  view,
             to review the  way  the  discretion  was  in  fact  exercised.
             Accordingly the appeal must fail."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

10. At the hearing before me, Ms Robinson developed the grounds  of  appeal
    for which permission had been granted.  With Mr  Duffy's  consent,  she
    also raised a fresh ground of appeal  based  on  the  decision  in  Ali
    (Section 6 - liable to deportation) Pakistan [2011] UKUT  00250  (IAC).
    She submitted that the ratio of Ali was that it was not sufficient  for
    an individual to meet the definition of a foreign  criminal  under  the
    Borders Act 2007.  It was also necessary for the Secretary of State  to
    deem the individual's deportation conducive to the public good pursuant
    to Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971, or there needed to have
    been a court recommendation for the person's  deportation  pursuant  to
    Section  3(6)  of  the  1971  Act.   Having  considered  the  documents
    contained in the respondent's bundle, she submitted  that  the  present
    case was all fours with Ali.  While there was a notice of liability  to
    deportation dated 28 March 2011, this did not amount to  the  Secretary
    of State deeming the appellant's deportation  being  conducive  to  the
    public good.  Moreover, there  was  no  court  recommendation  for  the
    appellant's deportation.  Accordingly the purported revocation  of  the
    appellant's ILR was unlawful, and the appellant's  appeal  should  have
    been allowed on this ground.

11. Mr Duffy accepted that the appellant had a right of appeal against  the
    revocation decision  on  the  ground  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.  But in order to bring a successful appeal  on
    that ground, the appellant needed  to  have  identified  a  failure  to
    follow or apply some underlying policy, and no such  failure  had  been
    identified.  There was nothing in the Act itself which  said  that  the
    Secretary of State had to take into account the time which had  elapsed
    since the index offence, and  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  not
    reoffended during this period.   So  the  approach  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was correct and/or did not disclose a material error  of
    law.  With regard to Ms Robinson's second ground of appeal, he accepted
    that the ratio of Ali was as stated by her.  But he submitted that  Ali
    was wrongly decided, and I should follow the subsequent decision  of  a
    Presidential panel in Bah (EO (Turkey) - liability  to  deport)  [2012]
    UKUT 00196 (IAC) where the Tribunal held as follows at paragraph [19]:

         "The present appeal does not concern  automatic  deportation  cases
         under Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 ('the 2007 Act').  If a
         person is a 'foreign criminal' as defined  in  Section  32(1),  the
         effect of Section 32 is that the deportation of the  individual  is
         conducive to the public good for the purposes of Section 3(5)(a) of
         the 1971 Act (see MK  (deportation  -  foreign  criminal  -  public
         interest) Gambia [2010] UKUT 281 (IAC)).  Accordingly, in automatic
         deportation  cases,  no  question  can  arise  as  to  whether  the
         individual is liable to deportation and/or the  lawfulness  of  the
         Secretary of State's decision to make a deportation  order  against
         him."

12. Alternatively and in  any  event  the  appellant  was  recommended  for
    deportation following his conviction  and  sentencing  for  an  earlier
    offence in 2007.  Mr Duffy  produced  the  sentencing  remarks  of  His
    Honour Judge Lyons sitting in the Crown Court at  Wood  Green  on  15th
    November 2007 which showed this.

13. In reply, Ms Robinson submitted that the Secretary of State  could  not
    reach back to the earlier conviction of  2007,  and  the  consequential
    recommendation for deportation, to  circumvent  the  decision  in  Ali,
    which was directly in point, whereas the remarks relied on in Bah  were
    obiter dicta.  On the question of whether there was a published  policy
    relating to revocation under Section 76, she asked  for  permission  to
    research the internet, and to hand in the fruits of her research  later
    in the  day.   Mr  Duffy  did  not  object  to  this  proposal,  and  I
    subsequently  received  a  copy  of  the  Home  Office  Asylum   Policy
    Instruction on Revocation of Indefinite Leave Version  3.0  dated  10th
    June 2013.

Discussion

14. Ali was a decision of Vice President Ockleton sitting  with  Designated
    Immigration Judge McCarthy.   Ali  had  obtained  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in 2006.  In November 2008  he  was  convicted  of  robbery  and
    handling stolen goods and sentenced to 21 months' detention in a  young
    offenders' institution.  The court did not recommend deportation.   But
    the appellant fell within the definition of foreign  criminal  for  the
    purposes of the automatic deportation provisions in Section 32  of  the
    UK Borders Act 2007.  Ali was invited to submit reasons as  to  why  he
    should not be  subject  to  automatic  deportation.   He  gave  written
    reasons and attended an interview conducted by a representative of  the
    Home Office. He said he had been in the UK for  nearly  fifteen  years,
    that he had ILR, and that his siblings were British citizens.

15. The Secretary of State sent a letter dated 1 October 2009 in  which  he
    said he took a serious view about his conduct and in the light  of  his
    conviction he had given careful consideration to his immigration status
    and the question of his liability to deportation.   In  the  particular
    circumstances, he had decided not to take any  action  against  him  on
    this occasion. However, notwithstanding the fact  that  there  were  no
    conditions attached to his stay here, the provisions of the Immigration
    Act 1971 as amended by the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 relating  to
    deportation continued to apply to him:

         'Under these provisions a person who does not  have  the  right  of
         abode is liable to deportation if the Secretary of State deems  his
         deportation to be  conducive  to  the  public  good  or  if  he  is
         convicted of an  offence  and  recommended  for  deportation  by  a
         court.'

16. The Secretary of State went on to give the appellant a warning that  if
    he should come to adverse notice in the future, the Secretary of  State
    would be obliged to give  further  consideration  to  the  question  of
    whether he should be deported.  If he committed a further offence,  the
    Secretary  of  State  would  also  need  to  consider   the   automatic
    deportation provisions of the UK Border Act 2007.

17. Although Ali did not commit a further offence,  in  November  2009  the
    Secretary of State informed him of  the  decision  to  revoke  his  ILR
    pursuant to Section 76(1) and to replace it with a  limited  period  of
    discretionary leave.

18. At the appeal hearing in the Upper Tribunal, Mrs Cantrell on behalf  of
    the Secretary of State conceded that the Secretary  of  State  had  not
    indicated that she deemed Ali's deportation  to  be  conducive  to  the
    public good.  Consequentially, the Tribunal held, there  was  no  scope
    for the application of Section 3(5)(b) of the 1971 Act.

19. The Tribunal went on to consider the significance of Section  32(4)  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007 at paragraph [23]:

         "The effect of s.32(4) of the UK  Borders  Act  2007  is  that,  by
         statute, his deportation is conducive to the public good; so  that,
         if the Secretary of State does (also) deem it to  be  conducive  to
         the public good, there can be no argument about the basis  for  the
         Secretary  of  State's  conclusion.   But,  as  we  see  it,  under
         s.3(5)(a)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971,  the  decision  of  the
         Secretary of State (or an officer) is a crucial requirement.   That
         paragraph cannot possibly read as if it provided  merely  that  the
         person is liable to deportation if his deportation is conducive  to
         the public good."

20. The Tribunal went on to hold that although the effect of the  statutory
    provisions was that Ali's deportation was conducive to the public good,
    he was not liable to deportation because the Secretary of State had not
    deemed his deportation to be conducive to the  public  good.   She  was
    presumably at liberty to do so but, until she did so, the provisions of
    Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971 did not apply to him,  and,
    in consequence, those of Section 76 of the 2002 Act did  not  apply  to
    him either.

21. On the particular facts of Ali's case, the Secretary of  State  had  in
    effect communicated to Ali that he was not liable  to  deportation  for
    the index offence, and that he would only become potentially liable  to
    deportation if he reoffended.  No equivalent  representation  has  been
    made to the appellant in this case.  Another  potential  distinguishing
    feature is the concession by the Presenting Officer  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal that the Secretary of State had not indicated that she  deemed
    Ali's deportation to be conducive to the public good.  This was clearly
    the right concession to make in the light of the wording of the  letter
    dated 1 October 2009 which was quoted extensively by  the  Tribunal  at
    paragraph [12] of the decision.  But I question whether the  notice  of
    liability to deportation which set the process in motion  did  not,  at
    least constructively, communicate to Ali that the  Secretary  of  State
    deemed his deportation to be conducive to the  public  good  by  making
    reference to Section 32 of the 2007 Act, and  quite  possibly  specific
    reference to Section 32(4).  The same question arises  in  the  present
    case in respect of the notice of liability to deportation served on the
    appellant in 2011 (this notice is  not  in  the  core  bundle,  so  its
    precise wording is a matter of conjecture).

22. In any event, I prefer the statement of the  law  by  the  Presidential
    panel in Bah to the statement of the law in Ali, although  I  recognise
    that the statement of the law in Bah is obiter dicta. I  consider  that
    the effect of Section 32(4) is to remove discretion from the  Secretary
    of State to deem, or not to deem, that the deportation  of  the  person
    concerned is conducive to the public good where the  person  meets  the
    definition of a foreign criminal.  Since (a) by  statute  the  person's
    deportation is conducive to the public good, and (b) the  Secretary  of
    State's discretion is fettered by statute, the Secretary of State  must
    ipso facto deem that the  person's  deportation  is  conducive  to  the
    public good -  and  a  separate  declaration  to  that  effect  is  not
    necessary to trigger a person's liability to deportation.

23. Under Section 33(1), Section 32(4) does not apply  where,  inter  alia,
    Exception 1 applies which is where the removal of the foreign  criminal
    in pursuance of the deportation order would breach -

      a) a person's Convention rights, or

      b) the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention.

24. At the stage that a person  is  first  notified  of  his  liability  to
    automatic deportation as a foreign criminal, the question of whether he
    or she can bring themselves within, inter alia, Exception 1 lies in the
    future.  Further, it is clear from the contents of Section  33(7)  that
    the application of an Exception does not mean that the  deportation  of
    the person concerned is no longer conducive to the public good.

25. In this case, the Secretary of State also has  another  string  to  her
    bow,  which  is  the  earlier  recommendation   for   the   appellant's
    deportation.  I do not consider there is any bar to  the  Secretary  of
    State "reaching  back"  to  this  recommendation  as  underpinning  the
    appellant's continuing liability to deportation.

26. In Ukus (discretion: when reviewable) [2012] UKUT 00307 (IAC) the panel
    chaired by Vice President Ockleton held that where a decision maker  in
    the purported exercise of a discretion vested in him noted his function
    and what was required to be done in fulfilling it and then proceeded to
    reach a decision on that basis, the decision is a lawful  one  and  the
    Tribunal cannot intervene in the absence of a statutory power to decide
    that  the  discretion  should  have  been  exercised  differently  (see
    s.86(3)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).

27. It is common ground between the parties that this appellant had a right
    of appeal against the  revocation  decision  on  the  ground  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law.  The  parties  diverge  on
    the next stage of the process, which is the extent to which the  First-
    tier Tribunal could review the purported exercise of the  Secretary  of
    State's discretion under Section 76, and the basis upon which the First-
    tier Tribunal could allow the appeal.

28. In Ukus, the Tribunal held at paragraph [22]:

         "There are thus four possible  situations  where  the  Tribunal  is
         considering an appeal arising from the exercise of a  discretionary
         power:

         (i)  the decision maker has failed to make a lawful decision in the
             purported exercise of the discretionary power  vested  in  him
             and a lawful decision is required;

         (ii) the decision maker has lawfully exercised his  discretion  and
             the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to intervene;

         (iii)    the decision maker has lawfully exercised  his  discretion
             and the Tribunal upholds the exercise of his discretion;

         (iv) the decision maker has lawfully exercised his  discretion  and
             the Tribunal reaches its decision  exercising  its  discretion
             differently."

29. As I understood Mr Duffy, his submission is that the appeal falls  into
    category (i), and thus it would in theory have been open to the  First-
    tier Tribunal to find that the Secretary of State had failed to make  a
    lawful decision because, for example, she had failed to follow her  own
    published policy when purportedly exercising her discretionary power.

30. Ms Robinson's submission is that  the  judge  could  have  allowed  the
    appeal in accordance with Section 86(3)(b).  Section 86(3)(b) provided:



         'The Tribunal must allow the appeal insofar as it thinks that -

         (b)  A discretion exercised in making a decision against which  the
             appeal is brought ... should have been exercised differently.'

31. I consider that Ms Robinson is wrong in her submission that this  is  a
    category (iv) case.  Section 84(1)(f) of the 2002 Act gave a  right  of
    appeal on the ground that the person taking the  decision  should  have
    exercised differently a discretion conferred by Immigration Rules.   It
    did not provide a right of appeal against  a  discretion  conferred  by
    statute.  I consider that  Section  86(3)(b)  only  applied  where  the
    appellant had a valid ground of appeal under Section 84(1)(f).  It  did
    not apply where the appeal  was  against  the  exercise  of  discretion
    conferred on the Secretary of State by  statute,  and  where  the  sole
    ground of appeal was (and is) that the decision is  not  in  accordance
    with the law.

32. So, turning to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, I find that the
    judge did not err in  law  in  treating  himself  as  being  unable  to
    substitute his own discretion for that exercised by  the  Secretary  of
    State. The judge was right not to treat  the  appeal  as  falling  into
    category (iv).

33. The judge treated the appeal as falling into category (ii).  Apart from
    not explicitly acknowledging the potential for judicial intervention if
    the decision was shown not to be in accordance with the law (and  hence
    falling into category (i) rather than category (ii)),  I  can  find  no
    fault whatsoever in his assessment.  While he acknowledged the argument
    that  the  appellant  had  so  changed  for  the  better  that  overall
    discretion could or should  have  been  exercised  in  his  favour,  he
    rightly treated this argument as being appropriate to a  category  (iv)
    type case, and not one which could trigger a judicial  intervention  in
    the type of case that was before him. The argument, even if valid,  did
    not render the exercise of discretion one which was "not in  accordance
    with the law".

34. The judge was not provided with the  policy  document  which  has  been
    produced to me, and so he cannot be said to have erred  by  failing  to
    take  its  contents  into  account.   But  since  the   appellant   was
    unrepresented before Judge White, I have reviewed the contents  of  the
    policy document de bene esse.

35. Section 4 sets out reasons for not revoking indefinite leave, and these
    reasons are: 4(1) passage of time, 4(2) genuine  mistakes/errors,  4(3)
    previously overlooked or unconsidered material, and 4(4) compelling and
    compassionate circumstances.

36. The appellant did not make any representations against  the  revocation
    of his ILR. On the topic of the passage of time, it is expressly stated
    that, for cases under Section 76(1), length of time  spent  in  the  UK
    will not constitute a bar to revocation of indefinite leave because it,
    and any other Article 8  considerations,  will  have  been  taken  into
    account  in  deciding  whether   the   person   should   be   deported.
    Accordingly, I find that the Asylum Policy Instruction on Revocation of
    Indefinite Leave does not disclose some egregious error or omission  in
    the Secretary of State's stated reasons for revoking  this  appellant's
    ILR such as to render her decision an unlawful one.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  The appellant's appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
