
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32294/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent          |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th June 2014                               |On 3rd July 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COATES

                                   Between

                           Mrs Maseera Rehman khan
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Ehsan
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on the 16th December  1975.



 2. On the 13th January 2011 the Appellant was  granted  limited  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom until the 15th October 2012 as  a  Tier  4
    Dependant Partner.  On the 5th October 2012 she applied  for  leave  to
    remain as the spouse of a person present  and  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Her application was refused by the  Respondent  on  the  13th
    July because she  had  been  unable  to  provide  an  original  English
    language test certificate in speaking and  listening  from  an  English
    Language test provider approved by the Secretary of State.  The refusal
    was under Rule  284(ix)  (a).   An  appeal  against  that  refusal  was
    dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O R Williams on the  24th
    March 2014.

 3. The Appellant relied upon a  qualification  from  EMD  (Qualifications)
    Limited.  It is recorded that the Appellant's  representative  conceded
    at the appeal hearing that this organisation  did  not  appear  on  the
    Respondent's approved list of  providers.   Therefore,  the  First-tier
    Judge concluded that the Appellant had failed to demonstrate  that  she
    met the requirements of Paragraph 284(ix) (a).

 4. The Appellant's representative did not rely on Article 8  of  the  ECHR
    but, nevertheless, the First-tier Judge  considered  the  appeal  under
    Article  8  in  accordance  with  the  well-known  five  step  approach
    advocated by the House of Lords in Razgar.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Designated  Judge  Macdonald  who
    stated as follows -

         "The grounds of application are not particularly easy to follow but
         it may be that the Appellant is suggesting (See Paragraphs  12  and
         13) that the Respondent's own policy accepted  qualifications  from
         OFQUAL which the Appellant had produced.  Permission to  appeal  is
         granted on that basis".

 6. That is the background against which the matter came before me  in  the
    Upper Tribunal for an error of law hearing on the 25th June 2014.   The
    Appellant was present.  Representation was as mentioned above.

 7. Mr Ehsan relied upon the Appellant's grounds submitted  in  support  of
    the application for permission to  appeal.   The  grounds  submit  that
    although  EMD  (Qualifications)  Limited  did  not   feature   on   the
    Respondent's approved list of English language testers,  the  Appellant
    has achieved an "OFQUAL" qualification.  This stands for the Office  of
    Qualifications and Examination Regulations.  The  grounds  also  submit
    that since the First-tier Tribunal hearing on the 18th March  2014  the
    Appellant has successfully taken a  further  English  examination  with
    Trinity College London, which is on the Respondent's list  of  approved
    providers.  As I pointed out at the  hearing,  that  is  post  decision
    evidence which I cannot take into account, although there is no  reason
    why the Appellant should not rely upon it in the  context  of  a  fresh
    application.

 8. Mr Ehsan stated that the Appellant's stance was the same as previously.
     It was accepted that EMD was not on the Respondent's approved list but
    an OFQUAL qualification had  been  obtained.   He  submitted  that  the
    Respondent's approved list is non-exhaustive.   Reference was  made  to
    Border Agency Guidance for providers for English language  courses  and
    tests, a copy of which is at  Appendix  B  in  a  supplementary  bundle
    submitted by the Appellant's representatives on the  18th  March  2014.
    This  document  is  entitled  "Information  for  Providers  of  English
    Language Courses and Tests".  This document, consisting of three pages,
    states that -

         "If a migrant wants to enter or remain in the UK under  the  Points
         Based System, or as the partner of  a  settled  person  or  British
         citizen, they may need to pass an English language test before they
         apply to us.  This English language test must be provided by one of
         our approved test providers (my emphasis).

         In early 2011 we revised our list of approved test providers.   The
         new list replaces all previous lists.  You  can  download  the  new
         list form the right side of this page".

         ESOL Test Providers for Settlement and Citizenship Applicants.

         If a migrant wants to apply for settlement or naturalisation  as  a
         British citizen, they will need to  show  that  they  have  a  good
         knowledge of the English language and of life in the UK.

         They can do this by obtaining:

         An (ESOL) at or above entry level 3,  that  includes  speaking  and
         listening, and has been regulated by the Office  of  Qualifications
         and Examinations Regulation (OFQUAL) or, ESOL Scottish Level  4,  5
         or 6 or specified English language test".

 9. Mr Ehsan  relied  upon  the  first  of  these  three  alternatives  and
    submitted that an OFQUAL qualification is sufficient for  the  purposes
    of the Respondent's guidance even if it  has  not  been  issued  by  an
    organisation on the approved list.

10. I think it should be noted that  the  three  alternatives  referred  to
    apply to applicants for  settlement  or  naturalisation  as  a  British
    citizen.  In this appeal, the Appellant  applied  for  a  variation  of
    leave to remain.

11. For the Respondent, Mr McVeety submitted that the Immigration Rules are
    abundantly clear and refer to an approved provider.  Paragraph  284  is
    as follows -

         284.  The requirements for an extension of stay as the  spouse  [or
         civil partner] of a  person  present  and  settled  in  the  United
         Kingdom are that:

         ... The applicant provides an English language test certificate  in
         speaking and listening  from  an  English  language  test  provider
         approved by the Secretary of State for these purposes which clearly
         shows the applicant's name and the  qualification  obtained  (which
         must meet or exceed level A1 of the common  European  framework  of
         reference).  A list of approved providers appears at Appendix O  to
         the Immigration Rules.

12. Mr McVeety acknowledged that the guidance document  relied  on  by  the
    Appellant's representative may be a little misleading but the  guidance
    does not override or supersede  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

13. I am satisfied that the relevant Immigration Rule is  perfectly  clear.
    The applicant is required to provide an original English language  test
    certificate from a test provider approved by the Secretary of State for
    these purposes.  The certificate provider by the Appellant was not from
    an approved provider.  Therefore the requirements of the Rules are  not
    satisfied.

14. The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.  I uphold  the  determination
    and dismiss the appeal.


No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                              Date 1st July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Coates


