

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/32266/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 11th March 2014                           |On 07th April 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        OLUWABUNMI MOTUNRAYO SHEKONI
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Smith, Counsel instructed by Wesley Gryk
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Nigeria date of birth 16th March  1987.
    On the 14th January  2014  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Buckwell)
    allowed her appeal against a refusal to  grant  her  limited  leave  to
    remain and to remove her from the United Kingdom pursuant to s47 of the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006. On the 31st January  2014
    Judge Macdonald of the First-tier Tribunal  granted  the  Secretary  of
    State permission to appeal against that decision.






 2. The Respondent has been in the United Kingdom since 2004 and throughout
    that time has had valid leave. She first entered as  a  student,  leave
    that was thereafter varied to that of Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant
    and then to Tier 1 (Post-Study Work). She studied architecture  with  a
    view to obtaining a full qualification  from  the  Royal  Institute  of
    British Architects (RIBA). That  is  a  three-part  qualification.  The
    Respondent completed her (privately  funded)  BSc,  MSc  and  then  the
    necessary work experience so that by June 2011 she had completed  parts
    1 and 2.  In order to pass part 3 she had to complete a certain  amount
    of work experience, which she had hoped to undertake during her  period
    of Tier 1 (Post Study Work) leave. Unfortunately this was not possible.
    Her leave was to expire on the 17th June 2013 and she still had a  year
    of experience to gain before she could pass part 3 RIBA.   This was the
    background to the application made  on  the  13th  June  2013  for  the
    Respondent to be granted a  further  period  of  limited  discretionary
    leave to enable her to complete her studies in the UK.


 3. The Secretary of  State  refused  the  application  with  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  Under  the  present  scheme
    that is the only provision covering 'private life'  within  the  Rules.
    The Respondent could not meet any of the alternative requirements as to
    length of residence in order to succeed under that rule.

 4. On appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the Respondent accepted  that  she
    could not meet the requirements of paragraph  276ADE  but  pursued  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds.

 5. Judge Buckwell was clearly impressed by the Respondent whom he found to
    be of good character, hardworking and gifted.   He noted at the  outset
    of his deliberations that she could not meet the  requirements  of  the
    Rules, and following the Court of Appeal decision  in  MF  (Nigeria)[1]
    properly directed himself to the 'two-stage test', in order to  conduct
    a Razgar[2] enquiry into whether Article 8 was engaged, and if it  was,
    whether the decision was disproportionate.   The  determination  states
    that the Judge had before him CDS (Brazil)[3]  and  the  Supreme  Court
    judgement in Patel[4].

 6. It was found that the Respondent had no family life in the UK but  that
    Article 8 was engaged by virtue of her well-established  private  life.
    In conducting the proportionality balancing  exercise  the  Judge  took
    account of the Respondent's success and investment in her studies;  her
    credible evidence that it was her intention to  return  to  Nigeria  in
    order to seek work once she had completed her  part  3  RIBA;  specific
    evidence from  the  Architectural  Association  School  concerning  the
    difficulties students face in completing the required  amount  of  work
    experience in a constrained time  frame,  and  to  the  fact  that  the
    Immigration Rules appear to make no provision for  these  difficulties.
    Against that the Judge "appreciated and respected" the "appropriate and
    due weight" that must be given to the Secretary of State in maintaining
    an effective system of immigration control.    However  having  weighed
    these factors in the balance the Judge concluded that the Secretary  of
    State could not show the Respondent to be a burden on the UK:  "indeed,
    the very reverse is  likely".  Having  taken  account  of  all  of  the
    evidence overall, he concluded  that  on  the  "particular  facts"  the
    decision was disproportionate and that the Respondent should have  been
    granted a limited period of discretionary leave to remain.

 7. The grounds of appeal are that the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing
    to give any or adequate reasons as to why the Respondent's private life
    rights would be breached if she had to return  to  Nigeria;  particular
    reliance is placed on the Supreme Court decision in Patel to the effect
    that there is not, in Article 8, an inherent 'right to education',  nor
    less a 'right to finish one's education'. A  second  ground  of  appeal
    complains that the Judge applied a 'near  miss'  principle  in  dealing
    with a  failed  PBS  appeal:  as  Mr  Bramble  rightly  concedes,  this
    determination is not concerned  with  a  PBS  appeal  and  contains  no
    reasoning that could be described as a 'near miss' argument.


    My Findings

 8. Mr Bramble's central point was that the Judge has allowed  this  appeal
    solely on the ground that this young lady should be given more time  to
    finish her education. He placed particular reliance upon  paragraph  57
    of Patel:


        "The opportunity for a promising student to complete his course  in
        this country, however desirable in general terms, is not in  itself
        a right protected under article 8".


 9. That point is uncontentious, with Ms Smith accepting that there  is  no
    such right protected by Article 8.   Were this the  only  factor  taken
    into account by the Judge this decision would need to be set aside.   I
    do not however find this to be the case. The Judge has set out a number
    of reasons why he feels sympathetic towards the  Respondent:  had  this
    decision been written a little later no doubt these reasons would  have
    been framed in terms of why the consequences  of  decision  would  have
    been "unjustifiably harsh" for her.   It was not simply that she needed
    more time to finish her studies: it was because the consequences of the
    decision would be particularly serious for her, taking into account all
    of the circumstances. The Judge has  also  considered  the  appropriate
    weight that is to be attached to the importance of immigration  control
    and to the Secretary of State's view as  to  how  that  might  best  be
    administered.  Importantly he has also referred, in his  reasoning,  to
    the "particular difficulties for architectural students" arising  under
    the Rules.  Those difficulties arise from the prohibition in  paragraph
    245ZX on students spending more than  five  years  studying  at  degree
    level or above. Although subsection (iii) of that rule provides for  an
    exception for architecture students (it taking no less than seven years
    to complete a course) it was apparently agreed in this  case  that  the
    exception only applies to students who have completed all  three  parts
    of the RIBA exam with the Architectural Association School.  Since  the
    Appellant undertook parts 1 and 2 with  the  Robert  Gordon  University
    (before the rule was introduced) she could not  avail  herself  of  it.
    Nor could she find a school or employer willing to  act  as  a  sponsor
    under  the  Points  Bases  System.  Hence  her  unusual,   exceptional,
    application made outside of the Rules to be given a limited  period  of
    discretionary leave to remain. This was a reasons-based  challenge:   I
    find that the determination is adequately reasoned and it is upheld.


10. A second point arose in the course of submissions. The application  had
    expressly been made outside of the  rules  and  based  on  the  unusual
    circumstances facing architecture students caught  in  the  'catch  22'
    outlined above.  This had not at  any  point  been  considered  by  the
    Respondent who had simply issued a refusal based on paragraph 276ADE of
    the Rules. In light of this Mr Bramble suggested that a  better  course
    for the First-tier Tribunal may have been to have allowed the appeal on
    the basis that the decision was not in accordance with  the  law,  thus
    leaving the discretion to grant a period of limited leave to remain  in
    the hands of the Secretary of State. I did not understand Mr Bramble to
    be seeking to amend the grounds of appeal,  nor  does  it  appear  that
    either party made this argument to the First-tier Tribunal. I note here
    for the sake of completeness that the refusal letter bore  no  relation
    to the application made in this case  and  in  those  circumstances  an
    alternative basis for this appeal to be allowed was as Mr Bramble  puts
    it.

      Decisions

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law
    and the decision is upheld.


12. The Respondent asked for an anonymity order. I have had regard  to  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013 and to Rule  14  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008 which confer upon me the power to make an
    order for the anonymity of the parties if I consider it appropriate.  I
    must do so in cases where serious harm could be caused to  a  party  by
    the disclosure of information or a  document,  or  where  children  are
    involved. I have a general discretion to do so in other cases where  it
    is necessary to protect an  individual's  human  rights.   However  the
    starting point is open justice.   There is no  satisfactory  evidential
    basis for concluding  that  the  Respondent's  human  rights  would  be
    adversely affected by her being named as a party to these proceedings.






                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             11th March 2014




-----------------------
[1] SSHD v MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192
[2] Razgar [2004] UKHL 27
[3] CDS (Brazil) [2010] UKUT 305 (IAC)
[4] Patel and Others [2013] UKSC 72

