
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/32031/2013
                                                               IA/41698/2013
                                                               IA/41710/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 6 May 2015                        |On 19 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                               MS ASMI GURUNG
                                                             First Appellant
                           MR. SAGAR KUMAR GURUNG
                                                            Second Appellant
                            MISS. AYUSHMA GURUNG
                                                             Third Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms A. Jaja
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against a determination promulgated
    on 19th January 2015 of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J.  McIntosh,  who
    dismissed their appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

 2. The Appellants attended the hearing together with the first Appellant's
    parents, the second Appellant's parents and the brother-in-law  of  the
    first Appellant.

 3. Judge McIntosh, in carrying out the proportionality assessment at  [36]
    and [37] under Article 8, applied the case of Ghising  (family  life  -
    adults - Gurkhas policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC).  We found that  Judge
    McIntosh had made an error of law by relying on this  case.   Following
    the Court of Appeal case of Gurung and others [2013] EWCA  Civ  8,  the
    case was re-decided  in  Ghising  and  others  (Gurkhas/BOCs:  historic
    wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC).  By  placing  reliance  on  the
    earlier Ghising case, we found that Judge McIntosh had taken the  wrong
    approach to the weight to be applied  to  the  historic  wrong  in  the
    Article 8 proportionality assessment.  "Substantial weight" should have
    been given to the historic wrong,  whereas  he  had  given  it  limited
    weight; see [37] in particular.  We found that this had led to an error
    of law in the proportionality assessment under Article 8, and  we  were
    satisfied that this was a material  error.   Accordingly,  we  set  the
    decision aside.

 4. We proceeded to remake the decision.  It was not in dispute  before  us
    that the Appellants did not meet the requirements  of  the  immigration
    rules or qualify for grants of leave under the Gurkha policy.

 5. It was accepted by Judge McIntosh that there was  family  life  between
    the Appellants and their extended family,  in  particular  between  the
    Appellants, and the parents of the first  and  second  Appellants.   In
    accordance with the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27,  we  were  satisfied
    that the proposed removal would be an interference in the  exercise  of
    the Appellants' right to respect for this family  life,  sufficient  to
    engage the operation  of  Article  8.   We  were  satisfied  that  this
    proposed interference would be in accordance with the law, as  being  a
    regular immigration decision taken  by  UKBA  in  accordance  with  the
    immigration rules.  The  issue  before  us  was  whether  or  not  this
    interference was necessary and proportionate.

 6. The headnote of  Ghising  and  others  (Gurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong;
    weight) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC) states

         "(3) What concerned the Court in Gurung  and  others  was  not  the
         burden  of  proof  but,  rather,  the  issue   of   weight   in   a
         proportionality assessment. The Court held that, as in the case  of
         BOCs, the historic wrong suffered by Gurkha ex-servicemen should be
         given substantial weight.

         (4) Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is  engaged  and,
         but for the historic wrong, the Appellant would have  been  settled
         in the UK long ago, this will ordinarily determine the  outcome  of
         the Article 8 proportionality assessment in an Appellant's  favour,
         where the matters relied  on  by  the  Secretary  of  State/  entry
         clearance  officer  consist  solely  of  the  public  interest   in
         maintaining a firm immigration policy.

         (5)  It can therefore be seen that Appellants in Gurkha  (and  BOC)
         cases will not necessarily succeed, even though  (i)  their  family
         life engages Article 8(1); and (ii) the evidence shows  they  would
         have come to the United Kingdom with  their  father,  but  for  the
         injustice that prevented the latter from settling here earlier.  If
         the Respondent can point to  matters  over  and  above  the  public
         interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy, which  argue  in
         favour of removal or the refusal of leave to enter,  these  matters
         must be given appropriate weight in the balance in the Respondent's
         favour. Thus, a bad immigration history and/or  criminal  behaviour
         may still be sufficient to outweigh the powerful factors bearing on
         the Appellant's side of the balance."

 7. The circumstances of the settlement of the first and second Appellants'
    parents is set out in paragraphs  [5]  and  [11]  of  Judge  McIntosh's
    decision.

 8. It was submitted by the Respondent's representative that the fact  that
    the Appellants had formed a family life in Nepal independently of their
    parents was enough to weigh against the historic  wrong.    However  it
    was accepted by the First-tier Tribunal, as above, that,  although  the
    Appellants may have formed an independent family  unit  in  Nepal  from
    2007 to 2009 when their parents were in the United  Kingdom,  they  re-
    established a family life with their parents  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Even when the Appellants were in Nepal without their parents, they were
    still  financially  dependent  on  them.   It  was  accepted   in   the
    determination of Judge McIntosh that the  Appellants  were  financially
    supported by the second Appellant's parents when they  were  living  in
    Nepal.  We find that they were living in the family home owned  by  the
    second Appellant's father.  When the first Appellant came to the United
    Kingdom as a student in 2009, her tuition fees were paid by the  second
    Appellant's father.

 9. In any event, irrespective of  the  level  of  dependence  during  this
    period, it is not in dispute that the Appellants now have a family life
    in the United Kingdom with their parents.  In our view, the  fact  that
    for a few years they lived apart from  their  parents  in  Nepal  is  a
    matter to be weighed in the proportionality assessment but not one that
    attracts  sufficient  weight  to  displace  the  "substantial   weight"
    attracting to the historic wrong to both Appellants and their families.



10. Following paragraph 4 of the headnote in Ghising, we find that, but for
    the historic wrong, the first and second Appellants would have  settled
    in the United Kingdom long ago.  We find that the Appellants  have  not
    committed any criminal offences nor do they have an adverse immigration
    history, as accepted by the Respondent.

11. The first Appellant's parents are settled in the  United  Kingdom.   In
    addition all of her three siblings are settled in the  United  Kingdom.
    They are all British citizens.  Her two elder siblings are married with
    children, who are also British citizens.   Her  younger  brother  lives
    with her parents.  The second Appellant's parents are  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He  is  an  only  child  and  so,  as  for  the  first
    Appellant, all of  his  immediate  family  are  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  We find that the Appellants do not have any immediate  family
    members living in Nepal.

12. We find that the third Appellant is the only grandchild of  the  second
    Appellant's parents.  When she was born she lived in the same  home  as
    her paternal grandparents and  continued  to  live  with  her  paternal
    grandmother when her paternal grandfather came to the United Kingdom in
    2006.

13. The Appellants live with the second Appellant's parents in  a  property
    owned by the first Appellant's parents.  Until  the  first  Appellant's
    parents  moved  out,  the  first  Appellant's   parents,   the   second
    Appellant's parents and the Appellants were all living at  one  address
    as one large family.  We find that there  is  an  unusually  close  and
    strong  family  bond  both  between  the  Appellants  and  the   second
    Appellant's parents, but also between the  parents  of  the  first  and
    second Appellants who have lived together in  a  shared  household  the
    United Kingdom.  The first Appellant's parents now let  their  property
    to the second Appellant's parents at a nominal rent.  The Appellants do
    not pay any rent to the first Appellant's parents.

14. We find that the first and second  Appellants'  parents,  having  taken
    British citizenship, have lost their citizenship of Nepal and therefore
    could not return to Nepal permanently to continue family life with  the
    Appellants there.  In our view, the effect of  the  separation  of  the
    Appellants  and  their  family  members  in  the  United  Kingdom,   in
    particular the parents of the first and  second  Appellants,  would  be
    particularly severe.  The Appellants would be the only immediate family
    members  not  to  be  living  in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  would  be
    particularly severe on the second Appellant's parents, given their  age
    and health, the fact that the second Appellant is their only child, and
    their  close  relationship  with  their  only  grandchild,  the   third
    Appellant.

15. We have considered the factors set out in section 117B of the 2002 Act.
     We find that weight is  to  be  accorded  to  the  maintenance  of  an
    effective immigration control, albeit here the Court of Appeal provides
    authority for that being balanced against the weight to be attached  to
    the historic wrong.  We find that the Appellants can speak English.  We
    find that they are financially supported by their parents.

16. We find that the matter relied on by the  Respondent  is  that  of  the
    public interest in maintaining a  firm  immigration  policy.   We  find
    that, in the absence of the Respondent being able to point  to  matters
    over and above the public interest in maintaining  a  firm  immigration
    policy, in line with Gurung and Ghising the substantial  weight  to  be
    accorded to the historical wrong outweighs matters  relied  on  by  the
    Respondent, that being  additionally  so  given  the  unusually  strong
    family life demonstrated here.  We find that the  interference  in  the
    family life of the Appellants and their parents is disproportionate  to
    the legitimate aim of maintaining effective immigration control.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error on  a  point
    of law and was set aside.

18. We re-make the appeals, allowing them under Article 8 of the ECHR.



Signed:       Date:  14th May 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
Upper Tribunal
