
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/32391/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28th May 2014  by VIDEO LINK               |On 5th June 2014             |
|with Sheldon Court Birmingham                 |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                         Ms Dionne Marjorie Francis
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Norman instructed by J M Wilson & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr J Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State although I will refer to the parties as they  were  described  in
    the First Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica  born  on  15th  March  1970  who
    applied on 14th March 2012 for a derivative right  of  residence  under
    The  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006EEA
    Regulations on the  basis  of  her  relationship  with  her  son  Sajay
    Cyvaughnie Blackwood  Martin.   The  application  was  refused  on  3rd
    January 2013.

 3. First Tier Tribunal Judge Telford allowed the appeal with regard to the
    EEA Regulations and on human rights grounds.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 4. An application for permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First  Tier
    Tribunal Judge Reid in the following terms

    'the judge's conclusions on credibility are  perverse  and  lacking  in
    reasoning especially given his remarks at paragraphs 31 and 35  of  the
    determination'.

The Hearing

 5. At the hearing Mr Richards essentially relied on the grounds of appeal.
     The judge had found that her evidence was  not  credible  and  in  the
    light of his comments it was not clear what evidence had persuaded  him
    to find in her favour. The burden of proof lay with the  appellant  not
    with the respondent and what was required was independent evidence.  To
    find she was not credible and then accept her evidence  and  allow  the
    appeal was perverse. The  determination  was  flawed  with  respect  to
    Article 8 as the judge made no reference to the Immigration  Rules  for
    an assessment.  He failed to follow Shahzad  (Art  8:  legitimate  aim)
    [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC).  He effectively found that the appellant's son
    was a British citizen and this was a  trump  card  which  absolved  the
    appellant satisfying any further requirements.

 6. Ms Norman accepted that Gulshan had not been followed. She  found  that
    the judge had allowed the matter further to the EEA  Regulations.   She
    referred to the application form drafted by the respondent and this was
    not useful in terms of what needed to be provided. There was  no  place
    on the statement as to why the son's father was not in  a  position  to
    care for his son. The issue of the whereabouts of the  father  had  not
    been addressed in the application although it was stated she had failed
    to provide information.  The passport, it  was  conceded  by  the  Home
    Office, had been provided. The absence of evidence  was  cured  at  the
    hearing. The statement of  the  appellant  was  provided  and  she  was
    subject to cross examination. The Judge did not have to accept all  she
    said and indeed she had provided letters from the  church,  the  school
    and the doctor. It was stated in the application  form  that  both  the
    father and child were British citizens.  JL  (China)  [2013]  UKUT  145
    (IAC) was not relevant. There was no sign of the father at church or at
    school. There was evidence that the child was not in the father's life.
    All the judge was saying was that he had 'this evidence' and there  was
    no evidence against it.  Mrs Norman agreed that the father did not have
    to live with the mother to be  a  primary  carer  for  the  child.  She
    confirmed that the Regulation under consideration  was  Regulation  15A
    (4A).

 7. Mr Richards submitted that the documents did not satisfy the burden  of
    proof.  The judge had made a damming finding  on  credibility  and  yet
    found that she had discharged  the  burden  of  proof.   This  was  not
    logical.

Conclusions

 8. Regulation 15A of The Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
    2006 sets out the requirements for  obtaining  a  derivative  right  of
    residence as follows:


      (1) A person ("P") who is not an exempt person and who satisfies the
      criteria in paragraph
      (2), (3), (4), (4A) or (5) of this regulation is entitled to a
      derivative right to reside in the United Kingdom for as long as P
      satisfies the relevant criteria...


      Further to the (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-
       (a) P is the primary carer of a British citizen ("the relevant
       British citizen");
       (b) the relevant British citizen is residing in the United Kingdom;
       and
       (c) the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in the UK
       or in another EEA State if P were required to leave.

 9. The burden of proof is on the appellant.  She has to satisfy all  three
    requirements listed above.   In  the  application  form  the  appellant
    identified that the father and the son were both British citizens.  She
    claimed she was the primary carer but she also stated  in  her  witness
    statement that the husband had left the UK and could not therefore care
    for the child in the UK.

10. The judge found the appellant [31] 'not particularly  credible  in  her
    evidence' and at [32] he stated 'I find that there is evidence that the
    appellant is the primary carer of the child (who the respondents do not
    deny is a British Citizen).  With credible evidence on that point alone
    I am able to find for the appellant'.  This is an error of law  because
    at this point in the determination the judge had  not  found  that  the
    husband was not in the UK.

11. Later at paragraph 32 of the determination he states 'Nevertheless  she
    has produced enough to found the basis for a case that her  husband  is
    not in the UK and has not been since 2011'.  The  judge  did  not  give
    adequate reasoning for why he found that the husband was not in the  UK
    bearing in mind the adverse credibility  findings  he  made.   He  then
    stated at [34] 'it is sufficient for her to be able to  show  that  she
    lives with the child and there is no evidence no one else does'.   This
    attempts to reverse the burden  of  proof  but  in  addition  does  not
    adequately address all the requirements listed above.

12. The judge found that the  appellant  was  not  credible  and  yet  gave
    inadequate explanation of why he found the father was not in the UK and
    had no part in the child's upbringing. The  judge  as  to  whether  the
    father was in the UK at [38] merely states that 'this  was  not  argued
    before me'.  He did not engage  with  the  evidence  from  the  church,
    school or from the doctor none of which gave any information about  the
    father.  It was not clear what the  judge  did  base  his  findings  on
    having found the appellant essentially not  credible.   Thus  it  would
    appear from the determination that the judge  reversed  the  burden  of
    proof.  Further, it is what those letters do not say rather  than  what
    they say which is of note. As the respondent noted in  the  application
    for permission to appeal the judge  also  failed  to  consider,  having
    found the appellant essentially not credible, the extent to  which  the
    evidence was dependent on information given by the appellant.

13. The judge found that the appeal could succeed under the EEA Regulations
    but also went on to allow the appeal  under  Article  8.   He  made  no
    findings under the  immigration rules, made no reference  to   'Gulshan
    (Article 8) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) or Shahzad (Art  8:  legitimate  aim)
    [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC)] and gave no reason as to  whether  there  were
    arguably good grounds to consider the appeal  outside  the  immigration
    rules.

14. Even if this case did not need to address the immigration rules  as  it
    was an EEA appeal he based his  findings  with  regards  Article  8  on
    evidence, which as can be seen from  above  was  in  itself  based  the
    appellant's own evidence and the judge himself stated that she 'was not
    particularly credible'.  He did not engage with the evidence  from  the
    church doctor or school and to what extent it was reliable  as  it  was
    informed by the appellant herself.

15. I therefore find that there was inadequate engagement with the evidence
    and, if there was, this is not reflected in the determination.

16. As such there were errors of law in particular in the treatment of  the
    evidence which is at  the  heart  of  this  appeal.  I  set  aside  the
    determination and I find the matter should be  remitted  to  the  First
    Tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.

Signed                                             Date 28th May 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington







