
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(First Tier Tribunal and Asylum Chamber)     Appeal Number: IA/32737/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On  11th November 2014               |On 17th November 2014                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE IAN FRENCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MS YAO ZHU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr E Tufan , Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr A Mahmood, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  determination
    promulgated on 18 June 2014 by the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Miller)
    allowing an appeal by the claimant against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    refusal to issue her a derivative residence card on the basis that  she
    is a third country national upon whom a British Citizen is dependent in
    the UK, in line with the case of Ruiz Zambrano  (European  Citizenship)
    (2011) EUECJ C-34/09. In order to avoid any confusion we shall refer to
    the  parties  as  "the  Secretary  of   State"   and   "the   Claimant"
    respectively. At the end of the hearing we reserved our decision, which
    we now provide with our reasons.

 2. There is no dispute that in order to qualify for a  residence  card  by
    that route the Claimant had to establish that she fulfils the  criteria
    set out paragraph 4A of Regulation 15A  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations") which  reflects
    the Zambrano principles. She had to establish, to the  civil  standard,
    that she was the "primary carer" of a British citizen under the age  of
    18, that the relevant British citizen resides in the UK, and  that  the
    relevant British citizen would be unable to reside  in  the  UK  or  in
    another EEA State if she were required to leave.   "Primary  carer"  is
    defined by paragraph 7 of Regulation 15A as a direct relative or  legal
    guardian who is the person who  has  primary  responsibility  for  that
    person's care.

 3. It was accepted by both  the  parties'  legal  representatives  at  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal (and recorded in paragraph 18 of
    its determination) that the paucity of the documentation submitted with
    the application meant that the original decision by  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse the residence card was justified. However the  Claimant
    submitted additional evidence in support of her appeal.

 4. The Claimant is a citizen of China. She first  came  to  the  UK  as  a
    student in September 2000 and has remained here  ever  since.  She  has
    been married since March 2012 to a man  who  has  dual  Hong  Kong  and
    British nationality and who has been lawfully in the UK for  around  25
    years. Her husband is the proprietor and manager  of  a  restaurant  in
    Oxford which is open every day from 12 noon to 11pm. He  employs  seven
    staff, and apart from being present throughout opening hours,  he  does
    all the shopping for the restaurant. His mother is an elderly widow who
    lives in Cheltenham. The Claimant's only relatives in the  jurisdiction
    are her brothers, aged 12 and 16, who are both at school.

 5. The couple have a son who was born on 11 September 2008, a month  after
    the Claimant's visa ran out. He  is  now  six  years  old  and  in  the
    reception  class  at  school.  The   Claimant   had   fallen   pregnant
    unexpectedly when she was studying at Oxford  Brookes  University.  The
    First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  it  was  only  the  fact  that   she
    accidentally became pregnant that led  to  the  Claimant  stopping  her
    studies, and that she was in a normal marriage  relationship  with  her
    husband. The  Tribunal  also  accepted  the  evidence  of  the  couple,
    supported by a letter from the child's school, that the Claimant  is  a
    full time carer for their son, and that she is the person who takes him
    to school and collects him at the end of the day.

 6. The Tribunal found in  paragraph  21  of  the  determination  that  the
    Claimant has primary responsibility for the child. That finding is not,
    nor could it be challenged. However the  Secretary  of  State  contends
    that the  Tribunal  misdirected  itself  in  law  in  relation  to  the
    application of Regulation 15A(4)(c)  and that  there  was  insufficient
    evidence to establish that the child would be unable to remain  in  the
    UK or EEA if the Claimant were required to leave.

 7. On behalf of the Secretary  of  State,  Mr  Tufan  submitted  that  the
    existence of a British citizen parent who would be able to  assume  the
    responsibility for caring for the child, but chooses  for  economic  or
    other reasons not to, excludes  the  Claimant  from  qualifying  for  a
    derivative right under Regulation 15A. It is insufficient to show  that
    the father is working long hours and sleeps in the morning, or that  he
    feels he cannot leave his staff to manage the business in  his  absence
    because they "rely on him" (see paragraphs 12, 15 and 17 of the  First-
    tier Tribunal's determination).

 8. Mr Tufan relied on the decision in MA and  SM  (Zambrano:  EU  Children
    outside EU) Iran [2013] UKUT 00380 and in particular upon what was said
    in paragraph 41, adopting and agreeing with the summary of the relevant
    principles to be derived from Zambrano and subsequent decisions of  the
    CJEU and the domestic courts set out by  Hickinbottom  J  in  Sanneh  v
    Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2013] EWHC 793 (Admin):

         "... the rights of an EU child will not be infringed if he  is  not
         compelled  to  leave.  Therefore  even  where  a  non-EU  ascendant
         relative is compelled to leave EU territory, the article 20  rights
         of an EU child will not be infringed if there is another  ascendant
         relative who has the right of residence in the EU and who  can  and
         will in practice care for the child.

         It is for the national courts to determine, as a question  of  fact
         on the evidence before it, whether an EU citizen would be compelled
         to leave the EU to  follow  a  non-EU  national  upon  whom  he  is
         dependent.

         Nothing less than such compulsion will engage articles 20 and 21 of
         the TFEU. In particular, EU law will not be engaged  where  the  EU
         citizen is not compelled to leave the EU, even if  the  quality  or
         standard of life of the EU citizen is diminished as a result of the
         non-EU national upon whom he is dependent   [being]  (for  example)
         removed .. although... such actions as removal... may result in  an
         interference with some other right, such as the  right  to  respect
         for family life under article 8 of the European Convention of Human
         Rights."

 9. Moreover, in paragraph 56 of  MA and SM, when  considering  the  second
    appeal, that of SM, the Upper Tribunal observed that:

    "the mere fact that the sponsor cannot be as economically active as  he
    would wish, because of his care responsibilities to [the  children]  is
    not sufficient to support a conclusion that  [the  children]  would  be
    denied the genuine enjoyment of their EU citizenship rights, nor  would
    this be  the  case  if  the  sponsor  were  required  to  stop  working
    altogether. The right  of  residence  is  a  right  to  reside  in  the
    territory of the EU. It is not a right to  any  particular  quality  of
    life or to any particular standard of living."

10. Mr Mahmood, on behalf of the Claimant, pointed out that the facts of SM
    were very different from the present case, in particular because one of
    the children was already living in the  UK  with  their  father  whilst
    their mother was seeking leave to  enter.  In  such  circumstances,  he
    submitted it would have been well-nigh impossible  for  the  mother  to
    show that the child would be compelled to leave/unable to remain in the
    EU if she was refused entry into the UK to join the rest of the family.

11. That is of course true, but it does not follow  that  the  observations
    made in paragraph 56, still less the principles adumbrated in paragraph
    41 of MA and SM, do not apply with equal force to the present case. The
    appeal in MA was allowed because the father had  mental  health  issues
    which meant that he did not have the capability of  looking  after  the
    child without posing a significant risk to the child's well-being.  The
    father in SM, by contrast, was capable of looking after  not  just  one
    but both the children, including the child  who  was  currently  living
    with his wife in Thailand, and even if caring for them  meant  that  he
    would have to stop working altogether, that would  not  mean  that  the
    Zambrano test (or the test under Regulation  15A  (4A)(c)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations) was met.

12. There is no finding in the determination by the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the present case that the child would be  compelled  to  leave  if  his
    mother was removed from the UK. The Tribunal does  not  even  expressly
    address the test in Regulation 15A(4A)(c), namely,  would  the  British
    citizen be "unable to remain" in the UK if his mother were required  to
    leave? Insofar as any relevant fact-findings  are  made,  the  Tribunal
    appears to accept that the child could remain with and be cared for  by
    his father, see paragraph 21, but  "alternatively"  he  would  have  to
    travel with his mother to China.

13. In his skeleton argument for the appeal and  in  his  oral  submissions
    before us Mr Mahmood focused upon the phrase "can and will in  practice
    look after the child". He sought to persuade us that the  Tribunal  had
    made a finding of fact that the father would not in practice be able to
    care for the child because if Mr Tam were left to care  for  the  child
    then he would, in  reality,  have  to  give  up  his  restaurant  "with
    dramatic consequences".

14. We are unable to read those findings into  the  determination.  However
    even if the First-tier Tribunal had concluded that Mr Tam would have to
    give up work to look after the child, which it did not, that would have
    been insufficient, for the reasons stated in paragraph 56 of MA and SM.
    There was no evidence to support a finding that Mr Tam would  not  make
    the effort to look after his son and adjust his working practices if he
    had no choice but to become his sole carer, and  no  such  finding  was
    made by the Tribunal. On the contrary, as we have already pointed  out,
    the findings in paragraph 21 of the determination appear to be premised
    on an acceptance by the Tribunal that if the Claimant  were  forced  to
    leave, the child could remain in the UK with his father  and  be  cared
    for  by  him,  or  else  leave  with  his  mother.  In  terms  of   the
    practicalities both options seem  to  have  been  regarded  as  equally
    possible.

15. The fact that the decision as to which parent cared for the child was a
    matter of choice appeared at one stage to be common ground. Paragraph 7
    of the document entitled "Further Statement of the Appellant"  dated  2
    October 2014 which purports to  be  a  response  to  the  Secretary  of
    State's Notice of Appeal under Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal Rules), and which was settled by counsel previously instructed
    on behalf of the Claimant, states as follows:

    "In the circumstances there was no evidence  of  unwillingness  by  the
    husband to care for the child. On the contrary, at paragraph 17 [of his
    witness statement] the husband said he spent all his  free  time  as  a
    united family but if he was to run his business properly he  needed  to
    be away from the family home on a regular basis for  long  hours  at  a
    time."

16. In our judgment the First-tier Tribunal plainly made a  material  error
    of law in the determination because it failed to address  the  relevant
    test under Regulation 15A (4A)(c). Had it turned its mind to the proper
    criteria, it would have concluded that  the  child  would  be  able  to
    remain in the UK, and therefore the Claimant does  not  qualify  for  a
    derivative residence card under Regulation 15A of the EEA  Regulations.
    To that extent the Secretary  of  State's  appeal  in  respect  of  the
    refusal to grant the Claimant a residence card  under  the  Regulations
    must succeed.

17. However, Mr Mahmood  contended  that  even  if  that  were  right,  the
    Claimant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  had  to
    succeed under Article 8 in any event. That gave rise to the interesting
    question whether there was a live issue under  Article  8,  and  if  so
    whether we were bound to  address  it  in  our  determination  of  this
    appeal. Our instinctive reaction was to answer those questions  in  the
    negative, but  it  transpired  that  the  position  was  not  quite  as
    straightforward as might have first appeared.

18. In the letter dated 23 July 2013 setting out the Secretary  of  State's
    reasons for refusal of the Claimant's  application,  there  is  express
    reference to the changes to the Immigration  Rules  that  were  brought
    into effect in July 2012, which are  intended  to  unify  consideration
    under the Rules and Article 8.  Article 8 considerations  are  now  set
    out in Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Rules, although they are
    not exhaustive and cases which do not meet the criteria set out in  the
    new Rules may still engage Article 8 outside the Rules  -  see  Gulshan
    (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640. The  letter
    states:

      "You may wish to rely on family or private life established in the  UK
      under Article 8 of the ECHR.... If you wish the UK  Border  Agency  to
      consider an application on this basis you must make a separate charged
      application using  the  appropriate  specified  application  form.....
      Since  you  have  not  made  a  valid  application   for   Article   8
      consideration, consideration has not been given  as  to  whether  your
      removal from the UK would breach Article 8 of the  ECHR.  "  (emphasis
      added)

      The letter goes on to explain that if removal  directions  are  served
      there will be  an  opportunity  for  the  Claimant  to  make  separate
      representations against her proposed removal.

19. Article 8 was mentioned by the Claimant  for  the  first  time  in  the
    original grounds of appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision,
    where it is referred to (without elaboration) as an  additional  ground
    of appeal. It is difficult to see how it could be argued that a failure
    by the Secretary of State to address Article 8 when no claim  had  been
    made on human rights grounds amounted to  an  error  of  law  in  these
    particular circumstances. Thus the complaint must be that the  decision
    to refuse the residence card  infringed  the  Claimant's  rights  under
    Article 8.

20. Article 8 is  not  referred  to  at  all  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination. This may have been for the very  good  reason  that  the
    decision of the Secretary of State which was the subject of the  appeal
    was made purely under the EEA Regulations,  and  was  confined  to  the
    question whether or not to grant the Claimant  a  derivative  residence
    card. Despite this, the Tribunal  did  address  s.55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  and  made  a  finding  that  the
    removal of the Claimant without her being accompanied by her son  would
    be in breach of the Secretary of State's duty under that  section.   We
    infer that the Tribunal was not addressed on Article 8, because  it  is
    unlikely to have considered  s.55  but  not  considered  Article  8  if
    arguments were made to it on both.

21. In the document containing the Claimant's Rule 24 response, to which we
    have already referred  in  Paragraph  15  of  this  determination,  the
    Claimant's then counsel submitted that:

    "Article 8 of the ECHR may not have been fully considered [by the First-
    tier Tribunal] as there was no need to do so when a clear acceptance of
    the Appellant as the primary carer was accepted [sic] by the IJ."  [our
    emphasis].

    The document then goes on to say that "If, however Art  8  should  have
    been considered then it is clear from the evidence that  the  Appellant
    is part of a happy and coherent family" [again, our  emphasis]  and  it
    proceeds to set out various reasons in support of that submission.

    We find the way in which the matter is put in  that  document  somewhat
    curious. It does not suggest in that Article 8 was ever raised  by  the
    Claimant as a live issue before the First-tier Tribunal, and it falls a
    long  way  short  of  criticizing  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for   not
    considering or making findings about Article 8  in  the  determination.
    There is no contention that the First-tier Tribunal made  an  error  of
    law in failing to consider Article 8.

22. Mr Tufan drew our attention to the fact that under paragraph 400 of the
    current Immigration Rules,  the  Secretary  of  State  is  entitled  to
    require a person who makes an application under Article 8 (or  Appendix
    FM) to do so  by  filling  in  the  appropriate  form  and  paying  the
    appropriate fee. This requirement may be waived (as  we  were  told  it
    generally is in asylum cases) but in the present case the Secretary  of
    State had made it clear in the refusal letter that  she  was  requiring
    that any such application by the Claimant be made by the  formal  route
    and that she would not consider the application otherwise.

23. That being so, Mr Tufan submitted that it was not open to the  Claimant
    to circumvent the requirements of paragraph  400  merely  by  adding  a
    paragraph referring to Article 8 in the  notice  of  appeal  against  a
    decision to refuse her a residence card. The decision of the  Secretary
    of State did not address Article 8 and that was a position that she was
    legally entitled to adopt because it was not a live issue -  there  was
    no application before her based  on  human  rights  grounds.  Thus  the
    failure to address Article 8 is not an error of law in  the  underlying
    decision, the FTT was not obliged to consider Article 8, and it  is  no
    proper basis for allowing the Claimant's appeal if  she  fails  on  the
    residence card point. Even if the Claimant had a really strong claim to
    be  granted  leave  to  remain  because  her   removal   would   be   a
    disproportionate interference with her Article 8 rights or those of the
    dependent child, that is no reason for reaching the conclusion that the
    First-tier Tribunal's erroneous decision that she should be  granted  a
    residence card under the EEA Regulation should stand.

24. Mr Mahmood submitted that Article 8 was engaged and  was  relevant.  He
    relied on the decision of the Court of Appeal in  JM  (Liberia)  [2006]
    EWCA Civ 1402, although at  the  time  of  the  hearing,  we  were  not
    supplied with a copy of that case.

25. JM (Liberia) concerned a person who, having entered the UK lawfully  as
    a visitor, claimed asylum and simultaneously made a claim under Article
    8 ECHR. A preliminary issue was raised about the  jurisdiction  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal ("AIT")) to entertain the latter claim.
    The argument advanced was that as the appeal was only against a refusal
    to vary the appellant's leave, which did not then entail  his  imminent
    removal, the tribunal had no jurisdiction  to  hear  or  determine  the
    Article 8 claim.   The  AIT  agreed  with  that  submission,  but  gave
    permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.

26. The sole issue that the Court of Appeal had to  determine  was  whether
    the human rights claim could lawfully be determined by the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (AIT) in the absence  of  an  imminent  threat  of
    removal from the UK. That in turn depended on the construction  of  the
    relevant statutory provision which conferred jurisdiction on  the  AIT,
    s.84(1)(g) of the Nationality Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  The
    question was whether the refusal  to  vary  leave  was  an  immigration
    decision "in consequence of which" the  appellant's  removal  would  be
    unlawful. The Court of Appeal decided that it was,  and  construed  the
    statute as conferring jurisdiction on the AIT. In consequence  the  AIT
    was able to determine the appeals in respect of  the  refusal  of  both
    claims at the same time.

27. One of the factors that influenced the Court of Appeal's  decision  was
    that the contrary view would  have  obliged  the  unsuccessful  asylum-
    seeker to commit a criminal offence by remaining  in  the  jurisdiction
    until removal directions were set, in order to  be  able  to  have  his
    Article  8  claim  considered  (see   paragraph   18).   The   contrary
    construction of s.84(1)(g) also meant that there was at least one class
    of case in which it was possible that  the  human  rights  claim  could
    never be adjudicated upon in the UK (paragraph 20).

28. JM Liberia is a case which  is  solely  about  the  jurisdiction  of  a
    Tribunal to hear and determine a claim which has been raised before it.
    It is not authority for the wider proposition that a decision to refuse
    someone a visa (let alone a residence card)  will  automatically  raise
    human rights issues even if no human rights claim  has  been  made.  It
    also concerned the refusal of a claimed right  to  remain  in  the  UK,
    which is quite distinct from the refusal of a residence card.

29. Mr Tufan submitted that there have been many substantial changes to the
    legal landscape and to the Immigration Rules since 2006, including most
    pertinently the introduction of the requirements of paragraph  400.  It
    would be unsafe to assume that the same reasoning would  apply  against
    that very different background.

30. In response to those submissions, Mr Mahmood drew our  attention  to  a
    decision of the Upper Tribunal (Lang J and Upper Tribunal Judge Storey)
    in Ahmed (Amos; Zambrano; reg 15A (3)(c) 2006  EEA  Regs)  [2013]  UKUT
    00089. That was a case concerning a third country  national  woman  who
    was seeking rights of residence  following  her  divorce  from  an  EEA
    national by whom she had two children,  both  of  whom  were  also  EEA
    nationals. One of the central issues in that case was whether she had a
    derived right of residence under a different  paragraph  of  Regulation
    15A of the EEA Regulations or under article 12 of  Regulation  1612/68.
    It was held that  she  had  a  right  of  residence  under  the  latter
    Regulation, even though she did not qualify under Regulation 15A.  That
    part of the determination was recently upheld by the  Court  of  Appeal
    [2014] EWCA Civ 995, but the Article 8 issue raised in the case was not
    the subject of appeal.

31. The Article 8 issue in the Ahmed case was formulated as  being  whether
    the fact that the appellant's children were EEA  nationals  meant  that
    the decision refusing to grant her a residence card violated her  right
    to respect for family life under  Article  8  ECHR.  As  to  that,  the
    submission made to the Upper Tribunal (recorded in paragraph 14 of  its
    determination) was that the appellant was entitled to  succeed  in  her
    appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds on the basis that she had been in  the
    UK since March 2004 and the eldest of her two children had been in  the
    UK for 7  years  (and  thus  would  satisfy  EX  1(a)  of  the  current
    Immigration Rules) as well as Art 8 on the basis of the leading cases.

32. In Ahmed the First-tier Tribunal had actually considered a  claim  made
    under Article 8. It is less clear from the report whether the Secretary
    of State had done so at the time of making  the  original  decision  to
    refuse the residence card; but it appears to have  been  common  ground
    between the parties that there was a live claim under Article 8 by  the
    time the  matter  reached  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  There  was  also
    sufficient material before the First-tier Tribunal to enable both  that
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal to make a full Article 8  evaluation  -
    including a consideration of whether the appellant met the requirements
    of the new Immigration Rules.

33.  Moreover, the Secretary of State expressly accepted  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge had erred  in  his  treatment  of  Article  8  (see
    paragraph 24 of the Upper Tribunal determination). As paragraph  43  of
    the  determination  made  clear,  the  appellant  in  that   case   had
    strengthened her claim under Article 8 in the two years that had passed
    since the original decision to refuse her a residence card.  There  was
    even an express acknowledgment by the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    that the Article 8 claim was "very strong".

34. Further, in being persuaded to consider  the  Article  8  arguments  in
    Ahmed the Upper Tribunal appears to have been strongly influenced by  a
    concession made by the Presenting Officer  that  it  should  treat  the
    refusal of a residence card as "indicative of an intention  to  remove"
    or that the appellant's removal was a  "putative  consequence  of  that
    decision" (see e.g. Paragraphs 43, 69 and 79 of the determination,  all
    of which make express reference to JM (Liberia)).

35. In FK (Kenya) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010]  EWCA
    Civ 1302 the  Court  of  Appeal  was  considering  the  refusal  of  an
    application for a permanent residence card under the  EEA  Regulations.
    The  refusal  letter  indicated  that  if  the  claimant's  appeal  was
    unsuccessful  and  the  claimant  did  not   leave   the   jurisdiction
    voluntarily, he would be  removed  to  Kenya.  The  claimant  therefore
    argued on appeal that although the decision was not a removal decision,
    it had the same effect as a removal decision and  therefore  it  was  a
    "disproportionate interference with  his  family  right."  Sullivan  LJ
    (with whom Maurice  Kay  and  Lloyd  LJ  agreed)  disagreed  with  that
    analysis at paragraph 13:

    ".. when considering the merits of the appellant's appeal on Article  8
    grounds against the determination,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision which was under appeal was not a  removal
    decision. All that the Secretary of State had done  was  to  refuse  to
    issue the appellant with a permanent residence card. Strictly speaking,
    the  question  is  whether  that  decision   was   a   disproportionate
    interference with  the  appellant's  Article  8  rights.  However,  the
    Immigration Judge can be forgiven for approaching the Article  8  issue
    as she did because it was being submitted on behalf  of  the  appellant
    that the  decision  to  refuse  him  a  permanent  residence  card  was
    tantamount to a removal decision".

36. He went on to say in paragraph 17 that it was "very doubtful whether it
    was appropriate for the Article 8 issues raised  by  the  appellant  to
    have been resolved at  this  stage  when  there  had  been  no  removal
    decision" and that it was "at best premature for  the  Tribunal  to  be
    asked to consider the Article 8 issue in this  appeal."  The  Court  of
    Appeal nevertheless went on to uphold the Tribunal's  decision  on  the
    Article 8 issues in that case, which was unfavourable to the appellant.



37. There was no point taken in Ahmed about a failure by the  appellant  to
    adhere to the formal requirements for making a claim under  Article  8,
    in the face of a specific direction that she must do so, or  about  the
    impact  of  the  introduction  into  the  immigration  rules  of   such
    requirements on the approach  taken  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  JM
    (Liberia).

38. We do not regard the  decision  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Ahmed  to
    consider the article 8 arguments when urged to do so by both parties in
    the peculiar circumstances of that case, obliges us to follow suit,  or
    sets any precedent in that regard.  Ahmed  is  not  authority  for  the
    proposition that the Upper Tribunal is obliged to determine a  putative
    human rights claim in the context of an  appeal  relating  to  the  EEA
    Regulations, especially when it  has  neither  been  addressed  in  the
    original decision of the Secretary  of  State  nor  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The Upper  Tribunal  in  Ahmed  considered  the  argument  in
    respect of Article 8 because it was invited to,  and  nobody  suggested
    that it would be inappropriate for it to do so: on  the  contrary,  the
    representative of the Secretary  of  State  positively  encouraged  its
    consideration.

39. The situation in the present case  is  far  removed  from  that  in  JM
    (Liberia)  and  the  issue  before  us  is  not  one  relating  to  our
    jurisdiction.  The fact is that the claimant did not make an Article  8
    application or an application under Appendix FM  when  she  sought  her
    residence card. She was told in the decision letter  how  to  go  about
    making such an application. She could have made such an application but
    did not. She is not obliged to wait for removal directions  to  be  set
    before she makes that application.  Moreover, a successful  application
    for leave to remain under Article 8 or Appendix FM  would  not  entitle
    her to a residence card. The two routes are distinct, and although some
    of the criteria may overlap in  a  case  such  as  this,  they  involve
    different and separate considerations.

40. In JM (Liberia) the Court of Appeal observed  (in  paragraph  28)  that
    once a human rights point is properly before the AIT, they are  obliged
    to deal with it. In our judgment there can be no such obligation  in  a
    case where the Article 8 claim is not properly before  the  Tribunal  -
    because it was never made to the Secretary  of  State  and  thus  quite
    understandably the decision under appeal to the First-tier Tribunal did
    not touch upon it. Matters might well be different if the Secretary  of
    State is content for the First-tier Tribunal to consider Article 8,  or
    if the underlying claim is for asylum or  humanitarian  protection.  In
    any event, we consider that it would be wrong  in  principle  for  this
    Tribunal, which is an appellate Tribunal, to  make  the  one  and  only
    determination of a substantive human rights claim  that  has  not  been
    considered by  the  Secretary  of  State  or  even  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, in circumstances where it cannot be argued (and has not  even
    been argued by the Claimant) that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law
    by failing to consider it.

41. That is especially true when the Claimant has been  expressly  told  by
    the Secretary of State that if she  wants  a  claim  to  remain  to  be
    considered under Article 8 or Appendix FM she must  follow  the  proper
    procedures and pay the appropriate fee as mandated  by  the  Rules.  JM
    (Liberia) was decided long before those requirements were introduced.

42. If the First-tier Tribunal (and the Upper Tribunal)  were  to  consider
    the appeal under Article 8 even though no claim  has  been  made  under
    Article 8 (and thus the Secretary of State has never considered such  a
    claim) on the artificial presumption that  the  decision  to  refuse  a
    residence card on the legitimate  basis  that  the  claimant  does  not
    qualify under the EEA Regulations is to be equated with a  decision  to
    remove her that has not yet been made (and may  never  be  made),  then
    that would be tantamount to  giving  those  in  the  position  of  this
    Claimant carte  blanche  to  avoid  making  a  proper  application  for
    consideration under Article 8/Appendix  FM  on  the  correct  form  and
    accompanied by payment of the fee and all  the  relevant  documentation
    relied on.

43. In any event, even if Article 8 was and is a live issue on this appeal,
    we prefer Sullivan LJ's analysis in FK(Kenya) to the approach that  the
    Upper Tribunal was persuaded to adopt in Ahmed. If and  to  the  extent
    that any Article 8 considerations even arise at this juncture, they  do
    so purely by virtue of the mention of  Article  8  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision. The question that  we
    would have to address is therefore the one formulated by  Sullivan  LJ,
    namely,  whether  the  refusal  of  a  residence  card  amounts  to   a
    disproportionate interference with the Claimant's right to family life.
    It is not whether her enforced  removal  from  the  jurisdiction  would
    amount to such a disproportionate interference.

44. We consider that it would be wrong in principle to equate a decision to
    refuse the Claimant a residence card, because she  fails  to  meet  the
    relevant criteria, with a decision to refuse her the right to remain in
    the jurisdiction. The decision not to grant the Claimant  a  derivative
    residence card on the lawful grounds that she fails to qualify for  one
    under  the  relevant  EEA  Regulations,  cannot  be  regarded   as   an
    interference, let alone a disproportionate interference, with her right
    to family life under Article 8 ECHR.  If and to  the  extent  that  the
    Upper Tribunal decided otherwise in Ahmed we respectfully disagree with
    it.

45. No decision has been taken, as yet, to remove the Claimant from the  UK
    with or without the child or to refuse her leave  to  remain.   If  and
    when such a decision is made, the Claimant will have the opportunity to
    raise arguments  under  Article  8.  The  Claimant  can  also  make  an
    application for leave to remain under  Article  8  and/or  Appendix  FM
    without waiting for such a decision. That claim may very well  succeed.
    Although she may have remained within the jurisdiction in breach of the
    immigration laws, on  the  face  of  it  she  appears  to  fall  within
    exception EX1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules.  She  may  well
    qualify under other provisions of the Rules. Nothing that we have  said
    in this determination is to  be  interpreted  as  precluding  her  from
    raising Article 8 in such  circumstances.  Our  decision  is  expressly
    confined to rejection of the argument that  refusing  her  a  residence
    card in and of itself engages Article 8 or, if we are wrong about that,
    that the decision to  refuse  her  the  residence  card  amounts  to  a
    disproportionate interference with her right to a family life.

Decision

46. There was a material error of law in the determination  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in respect of the Secretary of State's decision to refuse
    the Claimant a residence card.

47. We set  aside  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under
    Regulation 15A of the EEA Regulations and re-make the determination  by
    dismissing the Claimant's appeal on all grounds.

Signed  [pic]Date  14th November 2014

Mrs Justice Andrews

