

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32885/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 2 March 2016                        |On 27 May 2016                      |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                           MONABEN NALINKANT PATEL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Awan, of Mayfair Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an unfortunate case, in  which  the  judge  was  misled  by  an
    acceptance by the Presenting Officer of a misstatement of  law  by  the
    appellant's  representative  (who  appeared  also  before   us).    The
    appellant, having entered the United Kingdom  as  a  student,  she  was
    granted further leave, due to expire on 25 August 2014.  The college at
    which she was studying had its licence revoked on 5 October  2012.   It
    appears that the appellant's leave fell to be curtailed and  (according
    to the Secretary of State) a notice of  curtailment  was  sent  to  her
    indicating that her leave would expire on 3 February  2013:  that  gave
    her the usual 60 days to find another college.  It is  said  that  that
    notice of curtailment was not received.


 2. On 24 May 2013 the Secretary  of  State  received  a  letter  from  the
    appellant acknowledging her difficulties in relation to the college and
    seeking "a 60 calendar day leave curtailment letter".  On review of the
    appellant's file the Secretary  of  State  noted  that  the  leave  had
    apparently previously been curtailed, but that the Secretary  of  State
    could not say  that  the  curtailment  had  been  duly  served  on  the
    appellant.  A new notice was sent out curtailing  leave  from  28  July
    2013.  That letter was sent by recorded delivery.

 3. On 17 July 2013 the appellant wrote again to the Secretary of State  on
    the same matter, and it was apparent that  she  had  not  received  the
    second letter either.  Investigation showed that there was no  evidence
    that this recorded delivery letter had been delivered to her.  A  third
    letter was therefore sent, dated 22 July 2013.  That gave a further  60
    days and curtailed  the  appellant's  leave  so  as  to  expire  on  20
    September 2013.  A covering letter stated as follows:-

          "Please find attached a copy of our letter curtailing your  leave.
          This was originally sent to you back in May but it appears that it
          has not been delivered by Royal  Mail  so,  in  the  circumstances
          please find attached a new letter giving you  60  days  to  either
          submit a further application or leave the UK."

 4. On 7 August 2014 the appellant applied  for  further  leave.   On  that
    date, if her original leave had not been curtailed, it had  some  weeks
    to run; but if it had been curtailed she  was  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without leave.  The application was refused on 7  August  2014  on  the
    basis that "on 24 May 2013 your further leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant was curtailed until 23 July 2013".  In  those
    circumstances the Secretary of State contended that the  appellant  was
    not at the date of  her  most  recent  application  a  person  with  an
    "established presence" studying in the United  Kingdom  and  needed  to
    meet more stringent requirements of the immigration rules  in  relation
    to maintenance, which she did not meet.  As she had no extant leave  at
    the time of her application the effect of  the  decision  was  not  the
    termination of her leave, and she accordingly had no right of appeal.

 5. Undaunted, the appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    ground that she had not had effective notice of the curtailment  issued
    on 24 May 2013  and  taking  effect  on  23  July  2013  and  that  she
    accordingly did have leave to remain at the time  of  her  application,
    was a person with  an  establish  presence  as  student,  and  met  the
    relevant requirements of the Rules.

 6. At the hearing of the appeal before Judge Miles, the full  "curtailment
    history", including the third letter dated 22 July 2013,  was  provided
    by the Presenting Officer  and  not  disputed  by  Mr  Awan.  Mr  Awan,
    however, relied on authority to demonstrate that  leave  had  not  been
    validly curtailed.  The decision upon which he particularly relied  was
    a judgment of Mr Neil Garnham QC (as he then was) in R (Javed)  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWHC 4426 (Admin).  In his judgment Mr Garnham reviewed previous
    authorities and concluded that the Secretary of State had the burden of
    proving receipt of a curtailment notice.  Faced with that argument, and
    the decision in Javed, Mr Bassi, the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,
    said that he could not establish that any of  the  curtailment  notices
    had been received.  He accordingly accepted that Mr Awan's grounds  had
    merit and that the appeal should be allowed.  In the circumstances  and
    during the hearing the judge accepted that too and  indicated  that  he
    would be allowing the appeal.

 7. As his determination records, however, it was when he came to write  it
    up that he read Javed in full, including the reference in that judgment
    at [16]  to  amendments  to  the  relevant  statutory  instrument,  the
    Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) Order 2000, taking effect on 12
    July 2013.  That amendment was not  relevant  on  the  facts  in  Javed
    itself, but it is difficult to see why Mr Awan did not bring it to  the
    attention of Mr Bassi and  Judge  Miles,  given  the  accepted  history
    including a curtailment notice in the present case sent after  12  July
    2013.  As the determination notes, the judge carefully  considered  the
    position.  It was clear to him that, contrary to what had  been  agreed
    at the hearing, the third curtailment  notice  appeared  to  have  been
    effective; that meant that (although not for precisely the reason given
    in the notice of refusal) the refusal was necessarily correct and there
    was no right of appeal to the Tribunal and he had no jurisdiction.   As
    his determination also  records,  Judge  Miles  considered  whether  to
    reconvene the hearing,  but  concluded  that  there  was  no  point  in
    reconvening a hearing before a judge who had no jurisdiction, in a case
    in which the result was inevitable.

 8. Mr Awan's grounds of appeal to this Tribunal, on  the  basis  of  which
    permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Holmes,  are  twofold.   The
    first is that it was unfair for the judge to dismiss the appeal without
    hearing further from the parties, when he had indicated at the  hearing
    that he would allow it and the parties were agreed that  he  should  do
    so.  The second ground is that the curtailment notice of 22 August 2013
    (meaning presumably 22 July 2013)  could  have  no  effect  because  it
    specifically referred to  being  given  under  the  provisions  of  the
    Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations  2003  rather  than  those  of  the
    Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) Order 2000.

 9. Prior to the hearing before us, Mr Deller on behalf of the Secretary of
    State put in a skeleton argument referring to another case in the  same
    list and indicating that he had guessed that the matter was to be heard
    before the Vice President and Judge  Dawson.   That  skeleton  argument
    produced a response from Mr Awan asserting lack of procedural fairness,
    requiring the Tribunal to indicate why information on the  constitution
    of  the  panel  was  disclosed  to  the  Home  Office,  disclose  other
    correspondence, and consider that "it is impossible for this appeal  to
    be justly determined" in the circumstances.
10.  At  the  hearing  Mr  Deller  confirmed  that  his  reference  to  the
    constitution of the panel was "an informed guess".  There is simply  no
    basis  for  suggesting  any  illegitimate  correspondence  between  the
    Secretary of State and the Tribunal.

11. Mr Awan  addressed  us  on  the  grounds.   He  reminded  us  that  the
    Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003 did not apply to the decision if
    it was one that carried no right of appeal.  He said that the  22  July
    decision had no effect because of the reference to the 2003 Regulations
    and because it purported to be a re-sending of a decision already made,
    which was  itself  ineffective.   He  told  us  (without  adducing  any
    evidence) that Mr Bassi had specifically had the amendment to the  2000
    Order drawn to his attention  and  had  confirmed  his  view  that  the
    amendment did not apply.  Mr Awan did  not  tell  us  why  the  judge's
    attention was not drawn to  that  aspect  of  the  matter.   Mr  Deller
    submitted that the content of the 22 July 2013  letter  made  it  clear
    that although there had been a previous history of attempts to  curtail
    leave, a new decision was now being made.  That was  evident  from  the
    date of the decision and the date of the curtailment,  60  days  later.
    He also submitted that  the  reference  to  the  wrong  regulations  in
    respect of service made no difference to the  validity  of  the  notice
    itself.  It appears to us that  on  both  those  issues  Mr  Deller  is
    clearly right.  Nevertheless, Mr Deller went on to say that it was  his
    view that it was particularly unfortunate that the appellant had had  a
    determination dismissing her  appeal  following  a  hearing  in  which,
    because she thought the appeal  was  being  allowed,  she  had  had  no
    realistic opportunity to take part.

12. In  response,  Mr  Awan  insisted  that  the  reference  in  the  third
    curtailment letter to the re-sending of the second might be  sufficient
    to remove the third letter from the ambit of the amendment to the  2000
    Order.

13. A number of aspects of this appeal cause concern.  No doubt the  issues
    would have been clear to everybody if the person  making  the  decision
    against which the appellant seeks to appeal had been aware of the third
    curtailment notice.  If the reference in the decision had been to that,
    rather than to the ineffective  second  notice,  everybody  would  have
    appreciated that a decision had been sent after the 2000 Order had been
    amended.   It was not open to Mr Awan and Mr Bassi to  agree  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal  had  jurisdiction:  that  was  a  matter  for  the
    Tribunal.  It was not open to Mr Awan to draw an issue of  law  to  the
    attention of Mr Bassi, to seek his agreement on it, and to present  the
    appeal to Judge Miles without detailed reference to that issue.  In the
    circumstances, the outcome, including  the  rethinking  of  the  matter
    following the close of the hearing,  is  no  grounds  for  surprise:  a
    careful judge worked through the matter in a way that, apparently,  the
    parties before him were not prepared to  do.   Unfortunately,  however,
    the way the hearing had been conducted had deprived the judge  of  full
    argument on the terms of the third letter.

14. Before  us  Mr  Deller  accepted  that  setting  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination and remitting the matter for rehearing in  the
    First-tier Tribunal so that those arguments  could  be  aired  in  full
    would be an appropriate  outcome.   We  are  naturally  cautious  about
    accepting yet another concession by a Presenting Officer in this  case.
    That is particularly so because, if the appellant's leave  was  validly
    curtailed, she has no right of appeal and the First-tier  Tribunal  has
    no jurisdiction to determine one.   But  we  have  concluded  that  the
    particular circumstances of this case are so likely to give rise  to  a
    feeling of unfairness that the appropriate course of action is to do as
    suggested.

15. We will therefore set aside the determination of  Judge  Miles  on  the
    ground that, having indicated that the  appeal  would  be  allowed,  he
    should have reconvened the hearing before dismissing it.  We remit  the
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by  a  judge  other  than
    Judge Miles.  We direct that the issue of  jurisdiction  be  determined
    first, recognising that if the curtailment decision  of  22  July  2013
    took effect, the decision on the later application carried no right  of
    appeal.  Only if the Tribunal is satisfied  that  it  has  jurisdiction
    should it proceed to consider the merits.


















                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 28 April 2016
