
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32307/2014
                                                               IA/32316/2014
                                                               IA/32319/2014
                                                               IA/32325/2014
                                                               IA/32328/2014
                                                               IA/32331/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th November 2015                        |On 9th May 2016               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                       FUNMILAYO ADEWOLE AJELARA  (1)
                        FATAI BABATUNDE AJELARA  (2)
                         OPEYEMI MAIZAT AJELARA  (3)
                     AMEERAT ABIODUN AYOKA AJELARA  (4)
                    ROKIBAT ALARONKE IBIJOKE AJELARA  (5)
                      FRIDAAUZ OLASUNKANMI AJELARA  (6)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Ojo; Solicitor, Graceland Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS



    1. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Rowlands promulgated on 26th January 2015 in which  he
       dismissed the appeals against the decisions made by the Secretary  of
       State on 28th July 2014 to refuse applications for leave to remain in
       the UK on human rights grounds and to give directions  under  s10  of
       the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 for removal of Mrs  Ajelara,  her
       husband and their four children from the UK.


 Background


    2. The composition of the family and their immigration  history  is  set
       out at paragraphs [1] to [2] of the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Rowlands.  Insofar as is material, Mrs Ajelara claims  to  have
       arrived in the UK in  July  2004,  illegally,  with  the  two  eldest
       children.  Her husband claims to have arrived in the  UK  before  Mrs
       Ajelara, but again in or about July 2004.  The  eldest  two  children
       were born in Nigeria.  The eldest was aged 2 when she arrived in  the
       UK, and the other was 3 months old.  The remaining two children  were
       born in the UK.


    3. Between 2010 and 2013 Mrs Ajelara made two applications for leave  to
       remain in the UK.  Both applications were refused and in  July  2013,
       she and her husband made a joint application for leave to  remain  in
       the UK as a family.  That application was refused and  that  refusal,
       together with the decision  to  give  directions  under  s10  of  the
       Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 for removal gave rise to  the  appeal
       before the First-tier Tribunal.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands


    4. It was accepted, as recorded in paragraph [14] of the decision,  that
       the appellants' are unable to fulfil any  of  the  immigration  rules
       regarding family or private life. The Judge notes:


             "...Essentially it is  accepted  that  the  first  and  second
             Appellant do not fulfil any of the immigration rules regarding
             family or private ljfe the reality is it is the claim  of  the
             children, in particular the third and fourth Appellants, which
             is the strongest part of the claim and which effectively makes
             it unreasonable  and  unfair  for  them  all  to  be  removed.
             Although there is some family life with the  first  Appellants
             mother and brother being here that  in  itself  would  not  be
             sufficient. "


    5. The live issue was whether it is reasonable to expect the children to
       return to Nigeria with their parents.


    6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands heard evidence from the first  and
       second appellants' and at paragraphs [4] to [9] of his decision  that
       evidence is set out.  The  findings  and  conclusions  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Rowlands are set out at paragraphs [15] to [18] of the
       decision, and it is useful to set them out:


             "15. I have  considered  all  of  the  evidence  in  the  case
             including that to which I do not specifically refer and  reach
             the  following  conclusion.   The  first  point  to  be   made
             regarding the six Appellants is that they will  of  course  be
             together wherever they are, either in the United Kingdom or in
             Nigeria.  It is  of  course  in  the  best  interests  of  the
             children that they remain together with their parents. It  has
             been accepted by the Appellants  that  neither  the  first  or
             second Appellant fulfils any of the immigration rules  as  far
             as their private or family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  is
             concerned.   What appears to be really argued is that it is in
             the best interests of the children that they remain here.  The
             argument in favour of the children is that so far as the third
             Appellant is concerned she fulfils one of the requirements  of
             the immigration rules in that she is under the age of  18  and
             has lived continuously in the  United  Kingdom  for  at  least
             seven years. She has possibly been here since 2004. Of course,
             that ignores the second part of the rule which  says  that  at
             the same time  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the United  Kingdom.  So  far  as  that  is
             concerned it would appear that the same  would  apply  to  the
             fourth Appellant in terms of the time spent here. Both of them
             were very young children when they first arrived and I do  not
             believe  that  the  first  possibly  couple  of  years  should
             necessarily count as being time when  they  were  settled  and
             making roots here.   However,  it  is  clear  that  the  other
             length of time has been fairly substantial.    Notwithstanding
             that I am not satisfied  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  to
             expect all six of these Appellants including the two  children
             who have been here for relatively long period of  time  to  be
             returned to Nigeria.   The  fifth  and  sixth  Appellants  are
             small children and can easily adapt to life in Nigeria  and  I
             am sure that  they  have  been  brought  up  in  a  "Nigerian"
             household.   The second Appellant put it quite bluntly when he
             conceded that in reality he and his family  had  come  to  the
             United Kingdom so that the British people could care for them.
             It is clearly not the responsibility of the British people  to
             care for them nor to educate their children and I am sure that
             they will do well with the benefit of the education that  they
             have had hitherto, but the reality is  that  no-one  in  their
             family has any basis to be here. They have remained here for a
             long period of time and taken advantage of the  education  and
             health system and there is no reason why they  cannot  now  go
             back to Nigeria.


             16.  The Appellants try to argue  that  their  best  interests
             automatically means that they should be allowed to stay in the
             United Kingdom, that clearly ignores the fact that Nigeria has
             an education system as well as hospitals and medical  services
             that they can use.   It is, in my view  in  the  interests  of
             Nigerian children to grow up in Nigeria amongst  their  family
             and there is nothing unreasonable about expecting them all  to
             return there.


             17.  None  of  the  Appellants'  fulfil  the  requirements  of
             paragraph 276ADE and there is nothing exceptional about  their
             circumstances that raises the need to consider their right  to
             a family or private life outside the immigration rules.  Their
             family will continue together in Nigeria.


             18.  In  addition  I  have  considered  Section  117A(3)  this
             requires that  where  a  Tribunal  is  required  to  determine
             whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts breaches  a
             person rights to respect for private  and  family  life  under
             Article 8. That in considering the public  interests  question
             the Court must have regard to considerations listed in Section
             117B  and  that  "the  public  interest  question"  means  the
             question of whether an interference with  a  person  right  to
             respect for private and family life is justified under Article
             8((2)."


The Grounds of Appeal


    7. The grounds of appeal are lengthy and although they  appear  to  have
       been settled with the assistance of legal advice, they were filed  by
       the appellants without  representation.   Broadly  put,  the  grounds
       allege that the Judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the  relevant
       authorities that provide guidance as to the evaluation  of  the  best
       interests of children. The appellants' state that the requirements of
       paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) are met and that  in  any  event,  the  Judge
       failed to carry out a step by  step  assessment  of  the  appellants'
       Article 8 rights.


    8. Permission to appeal was refused on the papers by First-tier Tribunal
       Judge Grimmett on 14th May 2015, but  was  granted  by  Deputy  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Archer on 21st July 2015.  In so doing, he noted;


             "...The best interests consideration appears at  paragraph  15
             of the decision. There is a considerable body of  recent  case
             law on the section 55 duty but the judge has not  referred  to
             that case law. In particular, there is  no  reference  to  the
             case law in paragraph 15.  I find that it is arguable that the
             judge erred in law  by  failing  to  consider  the  individual
             circumstances of the children and their best interests  before
             considering whether those interests  were  outweighed  by  the
             force of other  considerations  and  failed  to  carry  out  a
             careful examination of all relevant  factors  given  that  the
             best interests of the children were involved in the Article  8
             assessment (TO and others (section  55  duty)  Nigeria  [2014]
             UKUT 00517 (IAC)).


             The reference to the children being brought up in a "Nigerian"
             household is arguably unclear and  it  is  arguable  that  the
             judge has failed to carry out any assessment of the extent  of
             the  children's  private  lives  outside  the  family.  It  is
             arguable that  the  judge  has  failed  to  properly  consider
             whether it is reasonable to  expect  the  third  appellant  to
             leave  the  UK  given  the  very  limited  assessment  of  her
             individual circumstances... "


    9. The matter comes before me to consider whether or not the decision of
       the Tribunal involved the making of a material error of law,  and  if
       the decision is set aside, to re-make the decision.


 The hearing before me


   10. At the hearing before me, the appellants' were represented by  Mr.  T
       Ojo, of Graceland Solicitors, who now act for the  appellants'.   Mr.
       Ojo relied upon the Grounds of Appeal and submitted  that  the  judge
       had erred in  his  consideration  of  the  duty  under  s55  Borders,
       Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 ("s55").  He submitted that both
       the respondent in her original decision, and the Judge following  the
       hearing of the appeal, failed to carry out any proper  assessment  of
       the private lives of the children.  Mr. Ojo initially submitted  that
       the Judge had failed to take account of all of  the  evidence  before
       him, but when pressed, could not identify what  evidence  was  before
       the First-tier Tribunal that the Judge had failed to have regard  to.
        In the end, Mr Ojo confirmed that the appellants' do  not  say  that
       there was documentary evidence in the bundle  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal that the Judge has failed to have regard to.


   11.  Mr.  Ojo  submitted  that  the  Judge  was  aware  of  the  relevant
       authorities but did  not  apply  the  relevant  legal  principles  in
       reaching his decision.  Mr Ojo submits that the children have been in
       the UK for a  very  considerable  period  and  that  the  two  eldest
       children have spent the formative years of their lives in the UK.  He
       submits that the Judge did not give adequate weight to the fact  that
       the children have spent the formative years of their lives in the UK,
       and that had the judge considered such matters, the appeal would have
       been allowed.


   12. In reply, Mr Avery on behalf  of  the  respondent  submits  that  the
       appellants' grounds and submissions amount to  nothing  more  than  a
       disagreement as to the findings made by the Judge.  He  submits  that
       the failure to refer to the relevant  authorities  in  the  decision,
       does not disclose a material error of law and that a careful  reading
       of the decision, establishes that the Judge properly  considered  the
       best interests of the children as a primary consideration. He submits
       that in reality, there was very  little  evidence  before  the  Judge
       concerning the children and that in reaching his decision, the  Judge
       had in mind the length of time that the children have been in the UK.
         He submits that it was open to the Judge to reach the decision that
       he did, upon the evidence before him.


   13. In the event that I find there to be an  error  of  law,  no  further
       evidence has been adduced by the appellants.  No application has been
       made under Rule 15(2A) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
       Rules 2008.


Decision as to 'Error of Law'


   14. It is common ground between the parties that the issues in the appeal
       before the First-tier Tribunal were confined to paragraph  276ADE  of
       the immigration  rules  and  s55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
       Immigration  Act  2009.   The  essential  issue  was  whether  it  is
       reasonable to expect the children to return  to  Nigeria  with  their
       parents.


   15. It is as well at this stage to set out the relevant legal  framework.
       Paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules sets out  the  requirements
       to be met by an applicant for leave  to  remain  on  the  grounds  of
       private life. Insofar as  is  relevant  to  this  appeal,  the  rules
       provide:


         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the
         date of application, the applicant:


             ....


             (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously
             in the UK for at least 7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK; or


         ....


   16. S55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 requires the
       respondent to make arrangements for ensuring that  her  functions  in
       relation to immigration, asylum or nationality are discharged  having
       regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare  of  children
       who are in the UK.


   17. Finally, the relevant provisions of ss.117A-117B of the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") are as follows:


         117A: Application of this Part


         (1)  This part applies where a court or  Tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Act -


             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and


             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  Section  6  of  the
             Human Rights Act 1998.


         (2)  In considering the  public  interest  question  the  court  or
         Tribunal must (in particular) have regard -


             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  Section
         117B, and


             ...


         (3)  In sub-Section (2), "the public interest question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).


         117B: Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
       cases


         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.


         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English -


             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons -


             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


         (4)  Little weight should be given to -


             (a)  a private life, or


             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


         That is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.


         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -


             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.


   18. In  Azimi-Moayed  &  Others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
       appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal in considering the
       case law in relation to decisions affecting children stated;


         "13. It is not the case that the  best  interests  principle  means
         that it is automatically in  the  interests  of  any  child  to  be
         permitted to remain in the United  Kingdom,  irrespective  of  age,
         length of stay, family background or other circumstances. The  case
         law of the Upper Tribunal has identified the  following  principles
         to assist in  the  determination  of  appeals  where  children  are
         affected by the decisions:


             i) As a starting point it is in the best interests of children
             to be with both their parents and if both  parents  are  being
             removed from  the  United  Kingdom  then  the  starting  point
             suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part  of
             their household unless there are reasons to the contrary.


             ii) It is generally in the interests of children to have  both
             stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision
             and the benefit of growing up in the  cultural  norms  of  the
             society to which they belong.


             iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state  of
             origin  can  lead  to  development  of  social  cultural   and
             educational ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in
             the absence of compelling reason to the contrary. What amounts
             to lengthy residence is not clear cut  but  past  and  present
             policies have identified seven years as a relevant period.


             iv) Apart from the terms of published policies and rules,  the
             Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is likely to  be
             more significant to a child that  the  first  seven  years  of
             life. Very young children are focussed on their parents rather
             than their peers and are adaptable.


             v) Short periods of residence, particularly ones without leave
             or the reasonable expectation of leave  to  enter  or  remain,
             while claims are promptly considered,  are  unlikely  to  give
             rise to private life deserving of respect in  the  absence  of
             exceptional factors. In any event, protection of the  economic
             well being of society amply justifies removal in such cases."


   19. In  E-A (Article 8- best interest of child) Nigeria [2011]  UKUT  315
       (lAC) it was held that the correct starting point in considering  the
       welfare  and  best interest of a young child would be that it  is  in
       the best interest of a child  to live with and  be brought up by  his
       or her parents, subject to any very strong  contra-indication.  Where
       it is in the best interest of a child to live with and be brought  up
       by his or her parents, then the child's removal with his parents does
       not involve any separation of  family  life.  However,  absent  other
       factors, the reason why a period of substantial residence as a  child
       may become a weighty consideration  in  the  balance  of    competing
       considerations is that in the course of such time roots are put down,
       personal identities are developed, friendships are formed  and  links
       are made with the community outside the family unit.  The  degree  to
       which these elements of private life are  forged  and  therefore  the
       weight to be given to the passage of time will depend upon the  facts
       in each case.  This authority  goes  on  to  suggest  that  during  a
       child's very early years he or she will be primarily focused on  self
       and the  caring parents or  guardian.   Long residence once the child
       is likely to have formed ties outside the family is  likely  to  have
       greater impact on his or her wellbeing.   This authority also goes on
       to suggest that those who have their families with    them  during  a
       period   of study in the United Kingdom must do so in  the  light  of
       the expectation of return. The Supreme Court  in ZH (Tanzania) [2011]
       UKSC 4 was not ruling  that  the ability of a young child to steadily
       adapt to life in a new  country was an   irrelevant  factor,   rather
       that  the  adaptability of the   child   in   each   case   must   be
       assessed and is not a conclusive consideration on its own.


   20. In EV (Philippines) and  Others v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874,  the
       appellants were a family from the Philippines whose  application  for
       indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom had  been  rejected.
       The First-tier Tribunal found that, although it was in the children's
       best interests to continue their education in the UK,  removal  would
       be proportionate to the legitimate aim of  immigration  control.  The
       Upper  Tribunal  upheld  that  decision.  The  Court  of  Appeal,  in
       dismissing the family's appeal, issued guidance on how tribunals were
       to approach the proportionality exercise where it had concluded  that
       continuing education in the UK would be in the best interests of  the
       children:


         "32.   There is a danger in this field of moving from looseness  of
         terms   to semantics.   At the same time there could  be  said   to
         be a tension  between (a) treating the best interests of the  child
         as a primary consideration which could   be  outweighed  by  others
         provided that  no other  consideration was  treated  as  inherently
         more  significant; and  (b)  treating the  child's   best interests
          as a consideration which  must   rank   higher  than   any   other
         which  could   nevertheless  be  outweighed  by  others.     It  is
         material, however, to note that Lord Kerr, as he made   clear,  was
         dealing  with a case of children who  were  British  citizens   and
          where   there  were  very  powerful other factors - see [41] below
         -in favour of not removing them ('the best interests of  the  child
         clearly favour a certain course'/ 'the  outcome of  cases  such  as
         the present').   He also agreed with the  judgment  of  Lady  Hale.
         In those circumstance we should, in my judgment, be guided  by  the
         formulation which she adopted.


          33.      More important for present purposes is to know  how   the
         tribunal should approach the  proportionality exercise  if it   has
         determined that  the  best interests of the child  or children  are
         that  they  should  continue  with   their  education  in  England.
         Whether or not it is in the  interests of a child  to continue  his
            or    her    education   in    England  may    depend   on  what
         assumptions one makes as to what  happens to the  parents.    There
         can be cases where it is in the child's  best interests  to  remain
         in education in the UK, even though one or  both  parents  did  not
         remain  here.  In the present case,  however, I  take   the   FTT's
         finding   to  be  that  it  was  in  the   best  interests  of  the
         children to continue their education in England with  both  parents
         living here.  That assumes that both parents  are  here.   But  the
         best interests of the child are to be determined  by  reference  to
         the child alone without reference to the  immigration  history   or
         status of either  parent.


          34.      In determining whether or not, in a  case  such   as  the
         present, the need  for  immigration  control   outweighs  the  best
         interests of the  children,  it  is  necessary   to  determine  the
         relative  strength of the factors which   make  it  in  their  best
         interests to remain  here;  and   also  to  take  account   of  any
         factors that point the other way.


         35.  A decision as to what  is in the best  interests  of  children
         will depend on a number  of factors  such  as (a) their   age;  (b)
         the  length of time that  they have been  here; (c) how long   they
         have been  in  education;  (c)  what   stage  their  education  has
         reached;    (d)  to  what   extent   they   have   become distanced
         from  the  country to  which  it  is  proposed  that  they  return;
         (e) how  renewable their connection with it may  be;  (f)  to  what
         extent  they will have linguistic, medical  or other   difficulties
         in adapting to life in that  country;  and   (g)  the   extent   to
         which  the  course  proposed will   interfere  with   their  family
         life or their rights  (if they have any) as British citizens.


          36. In a sense the tribunal is concerned with   how   emphatic  an
         answer falls to be given  to the  question:  is  it  in  the   best
         interests of the child to remain? The longer  the  child  has  been
           here,   the   more  advanced  (or  critical)  the  stage  of  his
         education, the looser his ties with the country  in  question,  and
         the more  deleterious the consequences of his return,  the  greater
         the weight that falls into one side   of  the  scales.   If  it  is
         overwhelmingly in the child's best interests  that  he  should  not
         return, the need to maintain immigration control may well  not  tip
         the balance.   By contrast if it is in the child's  best  interests
         to remain, but  only  on balance  (with   some   factors   pointing
         the other  way), the result may be the opposite.


          37. In the balance on the  other  side  there  falls  to  be taken
          into  account  the strong weight  to be given   to  the  need   to
         maintain immigration control in pursuit  of  the   economic   well-
         being of the  country  and   the  fact   that,  ex  hypothesi,  the
         applicants have  no entitlement to remain.  The immigration history
         of the parents may also be relevant e.g. if they  are  overstayers,
         or have acted deceitfully."


   21. In MK  (section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone  [2015] UKUT  223
       (lAC) it was held that:


         "(i)   Where  it is contended that  either  of the duties enshrined
         in section  55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009
         has been breached, the onus rests  on   the   appellant  and    the
         civil  standard   of   the   balance    of  probabilities  applies.
         There is no onus on the Secretary of State.


         ii)    As regards the second  of the statutory duties  [the need to
         have   regard  to  statutory   guidance    promulgated    by    the
         Secretary  of  State],  it  is  not  necessary   for  the  decision
         letter  to make specific reference to the statutory guidance.


         (iii)   The statutory guidance  prescribes a series of factors  and
          principles which case workers and decision makers  must consider.


         (iv)   Where  the  Tribunal   finds   that   there   has   been   a
         breach  of either  of  the section 55 duties, one  of  the  options
         available  is   remittal    to   the   Secretary   of   State   for
         reconsideration and fresh decision.


         (v)    In  considering the  appropriate  order,   Tribunals  should
         have  regard  to their  adjournment and   case  management  powers,
         together with  the overriding   objective.      They    will   also
         take    into    account    the    facilities  available    to   the
         Secretary   of   State   under    the   statutory   guidance,   the
         desirability of finality and  the  undesirability of  undue  delay.
         If deciding not to remit  the Tribunal  must   be  satisfied   that
         it is sufficiently  equipped to  make  an  adequate  assessment  of
         the  best  interests of  any  affected child."


   22. Finally, in JO and  Others (Section  55 duty)   Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT
       00517 (lAC) the Tribunal said that the duty imposed by  s55  requires
       the  decision  maker  to  be properly informed of the  position of  a
       child  affected  by the discharge of an  immigration  etc.  function.
       Thus  equipped,  the  decision   maker  must   conduct    a   careful
       examination of all relevant information and factors. Being adequately
        informed  and   conducting  a  scrupulous  analysis  are  elementary
       prerequisites to  the inter-related tasks of identifying the  child's
        best interests  and   then   balancing   them  with  other  material
       considerations.  The question whether the duties imposed by s55  have
       been duly  performed  in  any  given  case  will  invariably  be   an
       intensely  fact  sensitive  and a contextual one.   In the real world
       of litigation,  the   tools  available  to  the   court  or  tribunal
       considering  this  question  will  frequently  be  confined  to   the
       application or submission made to the  Secretary  of  State  and  the
       ultimate letter  of decision.


   23. Having set out the relevant legal framework at some length, I  return
       to the findings and conclusions set out by the  Judge  at  paragraphs
       [15] to [18] of the decision.  I reject the submission  made  by  Mr.
       Oko that the Judge did not give adequate weight to the fact that  the
       children have spent the formative years of their lives in the UK, and
       that had the judge considered such matters,  the  appeal  would  have
       been allowed.  At paragraph [15] of the decision the Judge  expressly
       notes that "..The argument in favour of the children is that  so  far
       as  the  third  Appellant  is  concerned  she  fulfils  one  of   the
       requirements of the immigration rules in that she is under the age of
       18 and has lived continuously in the  United  Kingdom  for  at  least
       seven years. She has possibly been here since 2004.".  He goes on  to
       note "..it would appear that the  same  would  apply  to  the  fourth
       Appellant in terms of the time spent here. Both  of  them  were  very
       young children when they first arrived and I do not believe that  the
       first possibly couple of years should necessarily count as being time
       when they were settled and making roots here.   However, it is  clear
       that the other length of time has been fairly substantial.".


   24. The Judge plainly had in mind the lengthy period of time that the two
       eldest children had remained in the UK.  Before me, Mr Oko was unable
       to identify any evidence that had been placed before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal that had been disregarded by the  Judge.    The  appellants'
       bundle before the First-tier Tribunal comprised of  some  132  pages.
       Of that bundle, the first 97 pages comprised of general documents not
       specific  to  the  children.   The  remaining  documents   were   the
       children's' school documents.  Beyond the evidence of the children's'
       school documents there was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal
       of any wider roots put down by the children, evidence of the personal
       identities developed, or other links with the community  outside  the
       family unit.


   25. It was open therefore to the Judge, on the  evidence  before  him  to
       find that he was not satisfied that "..it would  be  unreasonable  to
       expect all six of these Appellants including  the  two  children  who
       have been here for relatively long period of time to be  returned  to
       Nigeria.".


   26. As noted by the Judge, the appellants' would be returning to  Nigeria
       as a family unit.  Whilst this may involve a degree of disruption  to
       their private life, it was open to the  Judge  to  find  that  to  be
       proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of   maintaining   effective
       immigration control.


   27. The two eldest children have been in the UK for more than 7 years and
       they are present within the  UK  education  system.  The  eldest  two
       children have spent more than 7 years in the UK from  the  age  of  4
       years'.  They are both in secondary education.  Each of the  children
       are in good health and have no special needs. Nothing to the contrary
       has been suggested by the appellants'.


   28.  In  my  judgement,  whilst  not  making  express  reference  to  the
       authorities, the Judge considered the best interests of the  children
       as a primary consideration and concluded that it  is  in  their  best
       interests to remain with their parents.  He considered the third  and
       fourth appellants' length of residence in the UK, and weighed against
       that, that this family would be returning  to  Nigeria  as  a  family
       unit.


   29. The Judge considered the public interest considerations  set  out  in
       s.117 of the 2002 Act.


   30. I  accept  the  submission  made  by  Mr.  Avery  on  behalf  of  the
       Respondent.  The matters advanced on behalf of the appellants' amount
       to nothing more than a disagreement with the findings of  the  Judge.
       The Court of Appeal in R & ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982 held
       that a finding might only be set  aside  for  error  of  law  on  the
       grounds of perversity if it was irrational  or  unreasonable  in  the
       Wednesbury sense, or one that was wholly unsupported by the evidence.
        In my judgment the findings of the Judge were properly open  to  him
       on the evidence and the appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

   31. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       stands.


   32. No anonymity direction is made.  Although four of the appellant's are
       children, no application was made for anonymity before me.  The First-
       tier Tribunal made no anonymity direction.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

