
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/32034/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


| Heard at Manchester                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1st May 2015                                 |On 6th May 2015            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                              Miss Sabir Tahir
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Zahoor of Prestige Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Miss Sabir Tahir date of birth 16th August  1989,  is  a
    citizen of Pakistan.  Having considered  the  circumstances  I  do  not
    consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mulvenna promulgated on 14th November 2014  whereby
    the judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decision of  the
    Respondent dated 22nd July 2014. The decision by the Respondent was  to
    remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom.

 3. The appellant came to the UK in 2004. It  appears  that  she  travelled
    with a person not her parent and was travelling  as  a  child  of  that
    person. The appellant travelled  as  his/her  child  on  that  person's
    passport. Thus the appellant clearly  entered  on  a  false  basis,  as
    acknowledged in the appellant's statement. At the time of her entry her
    mother and four siblings were already in the UK. They had  entered  two
    years earlier. Whilst entering on visit visas the mother  and  siblings
    were intending to stay permanently. The mother had claimed  asylum  but
    her claim for asylum had been refused and  her  appeal  dismissed.  The
    mother and the children had remained in the UK.

 4. Ultimately the mother and the siblings had been  granted  discretionary
    leave under the legacy policy. However as the appellant was not part of
    the original asylum claim and had never been  part  of  the  claim,  it
    appears that she was not entitled to the benefit of the legacy  policy.
    She was not part of the application to be considered under  the  legacy
    policy. The appellant has complained as noted by the judge that lawyers
    failed to include her in the application.

 5. The appellant's father had remained in Pakistan with the  appellant  in
    2002 and even after the  appellant  came  to  the  UK  he  remained  in
    Pakistan.

 6. On the 5th March 2012 the appellant made  an  Article  8  human  rights
    application, ultimately that was refused and a decision made to  remove
    the appellant from the UK. The appeal against that decision  was  heard
    by Judge Mulvenna, who dismissed the appeal.

 7. By decision made on the 12 January 2015 leave to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted. Thus the matter appears before me to determine in
    the first instance whether or not there is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    original determination.

 8. The leave granted suggests that the judge has made material  errors  of
    fact  and specifies those in the following terms:-

        "2. In his grounds for onward appeal, the  appellant  asserts  that
        the judge has made a material errors of fact in  that  contrary  to
        the judge's findings that she was to come  to  the  United  Kingdom
        with her father, she was to follow her mother and siblings  due  to
        the problems that she was having with her father in Pakistan.

        3. It is arguable that the making of, what appears to be, an  error
        of fact, at paragraphs 14 and 15, and may have contributed  to  the
        judge's findings on credibility and been central to his decision to
        dismiss the appeal.

 9. In Paragraph 14 and 15 of the Decision Judge  Mulvenna  refers  to  the
    fact that the appellant's mother and her four younger children came  to
    the United Kingdom in September  2002.  The  judge  then  continues  by
    referring to the fact that the  appellant  the  eldest  child  and  the
    father had remained in Pakistan. The judge then says that it was  clear
    that they were intending to follow the  other  family  members  to  the
    United Kingdom as soon as funds were available.  In  paragraph  15  the
    judge points out that despite what the appellant's mother says when the
    appellant came to the United Kingdom she did not have a valid visa  and
    the appellant entered unlawfully. The judge also  refers  to  the  fact
    that the mother had claimed that  she  had  been  ill  treated  by  her
    husband before she left Pakistan and that the father had not cared  for
    the appellant whilst they were left in Pakistan  together.  The  father
    allegedly had made the appellant unwelcome and did not care for her.

10. The circumstances in which the appellant came to the United Kingdom are
    set out  in  her  statement  at  D9  of  the  bundle.  The  appellant's
    representative sought to rely upon  the  oral  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant and the appellant's mother. She was seeking to argue that the
    evidence disclosed that the mother came to the United Kingdom to  claim
    asylum by reason of an abusive relationship with the father. First  and
    foremost the judge noted that the asylum claim had been refused.

11. In her statement, at D9 paragraph 7 and 8 the appellant had stated that
    the mother could not afford visit visas for all the family. The  father
    had decided to stay in Pakistan and the  appellant  had  remained  with
    him.

12. I also draw attention to the letter written by  the  solicitors  acting
    for the appellant at the time. [page D3 appellant's bundle]. There  the
    solicitors state as part of the background that   "  Due  to  financial
    problems, Miss Tahir remained in Pakistan with her father  while  funds
    were raised to arrange their travel to the UK."

13. The  appellant's  representative  sought  to  argue  that  this  was  a
    typographical error and that the evidence otherwise  given  before  the
    judge confirmed the abusive relationships.

14. Returning to the  appellant's  statement  paragraph  11  the  appellant
    refers fact that life in Pakistan was difficult, she missed her  mother
    and siblings and her father was rarely at home. He was always out  with
    his friends and the appellant was left alone.

15. The references by the judge in the summary of the evidence appear to be
    an accurate reflection of the evidence in the  statements  before  him.
    The  judge  was  entitled  to  take  that  evidence  into  account   in
    determining the appeal. The judge clearly took into account the  claims
    made with regard to the abusive relationship by the father against  the
    daughter and the evidence given in that regard.

16. There is no error in  the  facts  as  recorded.  It  may  be  that  the
    representative would want to ignore the appellant's statement  but  the
    judge has accurately recorded what is set out therein and there  is  no
    factual error.

17. Otherwise it has to be noted that the mother on the death of her father
    returned to Pakistan and stayed in Pakistan for a  period  of  a  month
    with her sister without any problems. Whatever else  can  be  said  the
    appellant has a father and other family members in Pakistan.

18. The judge in determining the appeal has properly recorded parts of  the
    evidence given before him and was entitled to  act  on  that  evidence.
    There is no error of law arising out of  the  judge's  summary  of  the
    facts.

19. With regard to the second ground there is reference to paragraph 69 and
    77 of the decision. As the decision by Judge Mulvenna runs to  only  31
    paragraphs the ground is not focused on the decision made.  In  essence
    it seems to be argued that as the appellant  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2004, the judge has failed to take into account the  fact
    that she has been in the United Kingdom for that period of time.

20. The grounds of appeal go on by referring to the best interests  of  the
    child. This appellant is an adult. This appellant  entered  the  United
    Kingdom whilst a child but was aware that she was coming  on  a  wholly
    false and fraudulent basis. Her mother who had had an asylum claim  had
    been refused asylum and was only  granted  leave  subsequently  on  the
    basis of the legacy policy. The family brought the appellant  into  the
    United Kingdom knowing that they had no basis for staying at that  time
    and brought her in on false documentation

21. The judge assessed  all  the  evidence  including  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had had three solicitors seeking to assist her. The judge has
    a  final  matter  concluded  that  the  decision  was   proportionately
    justified taking into account the fact that the  appellant  had  family
    members in Pakistan, including a father, and all of  the  circumstances
    advanced.

22. The judge has given ample reasons for coming to the conclusions that he
    did. The judge has given justifiable  reasons  for  concluding,  taking
    account of the standard set within the  Immigration  Rules  and  taking
    account of  section  117  of  the  2002  Act,  that  the  decision  was
    proportionately justified. The judge has properly  assessed  the  facts
    and  given  valid  reasons  for  the  conclusions   reached.   In   the
    circumstances there is no arguable error of law in the decision.

23. There is a no material error of law in the determination.  I uphold the
    decision to dismiss this appeal on all grounds.



Signed        Date 1st May 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
