
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/32088/2014
                                                               IA/32091/2014
                                                               IA/32099/2014
                                                               IA/43792/2014
                                                               IA/43793/2014
                                                               IA/43794/3014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |      Decision & Reasons         |
|                                             |Promulgated                      |
|On 17 December 2015                          |      On 4 January 2016          |
|                                             |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                          Mr tUSHAR kANTilaL PATEL
                       MRS KAUSHIKABAHEN TUSHAR PATEL
                        mASTER YUG TUSHARKUMAR PATEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr David Clarke, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R. Akhter of Counsel



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

  1. This is an appeal by Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (the
     'Secretary of State') against a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
     allowing the appeals of the  claimants  who  had  appealed  against  a
     decision taken on 16 October 2014 to  refuse  their  applications  for
     further leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

  Background Facts

   2. The first claimant was born on 12 May 1976. The  second  claimant  is
      his wife born 22 July 1979. The third claimant is their son  born  on
      27 April 2005. They are all citizens of India. On 20 October 2010 the
      first claimant was granted leave to enter the UK as a Tier 1 (General
      student) until 21 January 2013. On 18 November 2013  he  was  granted
      leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) student until 7 April 2014.

   3. On 7 April 2014 the first claimant made an application for  leave  to
      remain in the UK as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  Migrant  under  the
      Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended)(the 'Immigration Rules') and for
      a Biometric Residence permit. The second  and  third  claimants  made
      applications as the first claimant's dependants.

   4. The first claimant's application was refused because the Secretary of
      State concluded, based on evidence obtained from Educational  Testing
      Services ('ETS'),  that the first claimant had obtained his  Test  of
      English  for  International   Communication   ('TOEIC')   certificate
      fraudulently.  As  deception  had  been  used  in  relation  to   the
      application, the application was refused under paragraph  322(1A)  of
      the Immigration Rules.

  The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

   5.  The  claimants  appealed  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal.    In   a
      determination promulgated on 8 May 2015,  Judge  Chamberlain  allowed
      the claimants' appeals.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
      Secretary of State had not shown that the TOIEC certificate had  been
      obtained by deception. The First-tier  Tribunal  judge  accepted  the
      first claimant's evidence that he had attended the  test  centre  and
      had personally taken the test. On the basis that the  first  claimant
      should  have  been  awarded  the  points  for  his  Confirmation   of
      Acceptance for  Studies  ('CAS')  the  judge  found  that  the  first
      claimant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules.



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

   6. The Secretary of State sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal.  On 25  June  2015  designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Garratt refused permission to appeal. An  application  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal for permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge
      Gleeson on 18 August 2015.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

  Summary of the Submissions

   7. The grounds of appeal assert

      Ground one: Making a material misdirection of law

          . The First-tier Tribunal has made a material misdirection of  law
            in  applying  an  impermissibly  high  standard  of   proof   in
            determining the deception issue. When considering  the  evidence
            the First-tier Tribunal applies a standard far more onerous than
            the balance of probabilities.

          . At paragraphs 11 and 12 the First-tier Tribunal seems to require
            further documentation from the Secretary of State  such  as  the
            "significant  evidence"  referred  to  in  the  refusal   letter
            [paragraph 12, First-tier Tribunal determination]. In  requiring
            further  evidence,  and  failing  to  properly  reason  why  the
            documentary evidence provided does not discharge  the  requisite
            standard of  proof,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  imposed  an
            unacceptably high standard of proof.

          . In applying an impermissibly high standard of proof  the  First-
            tier Tribunal has erred in the consideration of the case;

    Ground two: Failing to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  finding  on  a
    material matter

          . The First-tier Tribunal has failed to provide  adequate  reasons
            for its finding that the evidence is inadequate in demonstrating
            that the appellant's English language certificate  was  obtained
            by deception;

          . The Secretary of State provided at appeal a number of  documents
            in support of the allegation including a witness statement  from
            Mr Peter Millington, a witness statement from Ms Rebecca Collins
            (sic) and an  ETS  spreadsheet  document.  The  ETS  spreadsheet
            document  indicates  that  the   appellant's   test   has   been
            categorised by ETS as "invalid". The witness statements from  Mr
            Peter Millington and Ms Rebecca Collins  (sic)  clearly  provide
            that the tests  are  categorised  as  "invalid"  where  ETS  are
            certain  that  there  is  evidence  of  proxy   test-taking   or
            impersonation -

              i) "ETS described that  any  tests  categorised  as  cancelled
                 (which later became known as invalid) had  the  same  voice
                 for multiple tests takes. On questioning they advised  that
                 they were certain that there was evidence  of  proxy  test-
                 taking or impersonation in those cases"

                 [paragraph 28, witness  statement  of  Ms  Rebecca  Collins
                 (sic)]

             ii) "...Following comprehensive investigations ETS provided the
                 Home Office with lists of  candidates  whose  test  results
                 show 'substantial evidence of invalidity'. The Home  Office
                 was provided with the background to the process used by ETS
                 to reach that conclusion"

                 [paragraph 6, witness statement of Mr Peter Millington]

            iii) "...Where a match has been identified their approach is  to
                 invalidate the test result.  As  set  out  in  the  witness
                 statement of Rebecca Collings, ETS has  informed  the  Home
                 Office that there  was  evidence  of  invalidity  in  those
                 cases"

                 [paragraph 46, witness statement of Mr Peter Millington]

       . Taking into account of this evidence it is clear that in  order  to
         be categorised as "invalid" on the spreadsheet provided to the Home
         office that case has  to  have  gone  through  a  computer  program
         analysing speech and then two independent voice  analysts.  If  all
         three are in agreement that a proxy has been  used  then  the  test
         would be categorised as "invalid";

       . In light of the evidence it is clear that the  Secretary  of  State
         reasonably concluded that the appellant had used deception in their
         application and that the First-tier Tribunal has erred  in  finding
         that the evidence was inadequate in demonstrating deception.

   8. Mr Clarke relied on the grounds of  appeal.  He  submitted  that  the
      judge had applied a higher standard of  proof  than  the  appropriate
      standard which was the balance of probabilities.  He  also  submitted
      that the judge failed to give adequate reasons why the  evidence  was
      insufficient to discharge the burden of  proof.  He  referred  me  to
      paragraph 28 of R (on the application of Gazi) v Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department (ETS - judicial review) IJR [2015] UKUT 00327
      (IAC) ('Gazi'). He submitted that the argument advanced was that  the
      Secretary of State had relied on evidence that was insufficient  when
      taken in  conjunction  with  the  Secretary  of  State's  Enforcement
      instructions and Guidance ('EIG') to satisfy  to  a  high  degree  of
      probability the assessment that the  appellant,  in  that  case,  had
      procured the TOEIC certificate by deception. The  Upper  Tribunal  in
      Gazi was satisfied, at para 35, that the evidence was  sufficient  to
      warrant the assessment and was satisfied that the evidence was robust
      enough to a high degree of probability. The judge was not correct  to
      say that there was no significant evidence because  the  evidence  in
      the form of the witness statements was held in Gazi to meet the  test
      of high probability. There was  evidence  of  what  happened  at  New
      London College as it was set out in the witness statements  what  the
      processes were. Gazi shows that there  is  a  high  probability  that
      fraud occurred where ETS record the test as invalid.



   9. In Paragraphs 11 -13 of the First-tier Tribunal  decision  the  judge
      sets out disdain for the evidence. The judge  did  not  approach  the
      evidence in the correct way. The judge viewed the evidence  as  being
      of such little weight that in effect she applied a higher standard of
      proof. At paragraph 13 the judge's approach was clearly at odds  with
      what the President found to be evidence of  sufficient  weight.  With
      regard to the judge's approach to the sheet annexed  to  the  witness
      statement of Mr Sartorius Mr  Clarke  submitted  that  the  judge  by
      referring to the document as 'alleged' is clearly applying  a  higher
      standard. The sheet was supported by a witness statement of a  senior
      caseworker. This was a signed statement with a  statement  of  truth.
      Effectively the judge is asserting  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
      witness is untruthful  but  no  reasons  are  given  for  this.  This
      underscores the submission that a higher standard of proof was  being
      applied. Mr Clarke submitted that it is irrational for the  judge  to
      consider that if the same document were produced by ETS  rather  than
      the Home Office that would be more cogent evidence. The judge  should
      have engaged with that evidence. At paragraph 12 of the decision  the
      judge's critique doesn't engage with the  evidence  contained  within
      the witness statements. The witness  evidence  of  Mr  Millington  at
      paragraph 45 confirms  that  the  approach  mitigates  against  false
      positives. The judge found that  the  evidence  was  of  such  little
      quality that it does not discharge the burden of proof. What the Gazi
      case does require of the fact finding exercise  is  consideration  of
      whether it is rebutted by other evidence.  The  evidence  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal in the witness statement at paragraphs 8-18  sets
      out the ETS test details etc. The judge ought to  have  engaged  with
      that evidence and considered if it does rebut the other evidence.  At
      paragraph 12 there is a reference to a picture having been taken.  It
      would have  been  helpful  for  the  claimant  to  approach  ETS  for
      confirmation of him going to the test  centre.  Mr  Clarke  submitted
      that the judge adopted an improper approach.  There  was  not  enough
      evidence to rebut the evidence of the Secretary of State.

  10. A rule 24 response was  served  by  the  claimants.  Essentially  the
      response  asserts  that  the  judge  considered  fully  the  evidence
      submitted by the Secretary of State and concluded that  the  evidence
      was not sufficient - two witness  statement  relate  to  a  different
      application and in one witness statement an annexe was alleged to  be
      from ETS but as no confirmation was given of this by ETS.  The  judge
      applied the correct standard of proof. Reliance  was  placed  on  the
      case of Miah (Interviewers' comments:  disclosure:  Fairness)  [2014]
      UKUT 515 (IAC) arguing that the judge was correct to find that in the
      absence of evidence from ETS evidence from the Secretary of State was
      required specifically describing what ETS claims to  have  discovered
      about the particular candidate. It is asserted that the  judge  quite
      clearly set out the burden and standard of proof to be  applied.  The
      evidence of the judge was detailed as to why he did not consider  the
      evidence was sufficient to prove that  the  appellant  had  submitted
      false documents. Reference is made  to  the  report  of  Dr  Harrison
      submitted in the case of Gazi  and  the  conclusions  reached  by  Dr
      Harrison.

  11. Ms Akhter submitted that the Gazi case is not on all fours  and  does
      not assist on the facts of this case. She referred me to paragraph 14
      of Gazi and the criticisms of the witness statement of Mr  Millington
      who has no expertise.  She  submitted  that  the  Tribunal  can  only
      interfere if the First-tier Tribunal's decision is plainly wrong. The
      First-tier Tribunal judge set out at paragraph 10  all  the  evidence
      provided. The  judge  heard  oral  evidence.  The  judge  records  at
      paragraph 12 that the claimant  was  cross  examined  and  the  judge
      preferred the evidence of the claimant. The Secretary  of  State  had
      referred to significant evidence but the judge found that none of the
      evidence was significant - there were generic witness  statement  and
      one statement which purported to confirm the evidence from  ETS.  The
      Secretary of State could have obtained a  statement  from  ETS  about
      this particular claimant.  The judge had the benefit of assessing the
      claimant at first hand. He was tested by cross examination.

Discussion

  12. The First-tier Tribunal judge was particularly concerned that she did
      not have evidence from the Secretary of State  in  relation  to  this
      specific claimant. This theme occurs throughout her analysis  of  the
      evidence. At paragraph 10 she states, 'The first two  of  these  were
      made in connection with a judicial review  in  the  case  of  another
      applicant'. At paragraph 12 she finds 'I  have  nothing  to  indicate
      that ETS discovered that on this day there were other people  in  the
      room...there is no  evidence...describing  what  ETS  claim  to  have
      discovered about what happened on 28th November 2012  at  New  London
      College. I would expect to see evidence relating to  this  particular
      candidate, this particular college and this particular  date....I  do
      not have anything specific'. At paragraph 13 she  found,  'I  do  not
      find that it is enough for the respondent to state that a  proxy  was
      used by the appellant ...I find that the  provision  of  two  witness
      statements which relate to an entirely separate applicant ...does not
      satisfy the burden of proof'.

  13. It is through this lens that the judge  has  considered  the  witness
      evidence. The First-tier Tribunal  judge  has  ascribed  very  little
      weight to the evidence contained in those statements on  this  basis.
      It is clear that  the  generic  witness  statements  provided  by  Ms
      Collings and Mr Middleton describe the  processes  through  which  an
      individual will be identified by ETS. To that extent they do not need
      to be specific to the individual  claimant.  That  lack  of  specific
      detail does not render them of little  weight.  As  submitted  by  Mr
      Clarke, as set out in the case of Gazi the same generic evidence  was
      considered sufficient to warrant an assessment  that  an  applicant's
      TOIEC has been procured by deception. His  submission  was  that  the
      Upper Tribunal  set out and considered the EIG which provided

         The evidence must always prove to a high degree of probability that
         deception had been used to  gain  the  leave,  whether  or  not  an
         admission of deception is made.  The  onus  -  as  always  in  such
         situations - is on the officer making the assertion  to  prove  his
         case."

  14.  At paragraph 35 the Upper Tribunal held:

          'In my view, taking into  account  Chapter  50  of  the  EIG,  the
         Respondent's  evidence,  summarised  in  Chapter  II   above,   was
         sufficient to warrant the assessment that the Applicant's TOEIC had
         been  procured  by  deception  and,  thus,  provided  an   adequate
         foundation for the decision made under section 10 of the 1999  Act.
         True it is that,  at  this  remove  and  with  the  benefit  of  Dr
         Harrison's report, there may be grounds for  contending  that  said
         evidence is not infallible. And there may  be  sufficient  material
         for a lively debate about its various  ingredients.  However,  this
         Tribunal, as emphasised above,  must  evaluate  and  determine  the
         Applicant's improper purpose challenge by reference to the material
         presumptively considered by or available to the decision maker when
         the impugned decision was made. I find no clear  or  logical  basis
         for distinguishing between the first tranche of decisions and those
         made later. Furthermore, while the policy  evidential  requirements
         enshrined in the EIG are  strict,  they  require  neither  absolute
         certainty nor infallibility. For the purpose of disposing  of  this
         ground of challenge and bearing in mind that the jurisdiction being
         exercised is one of supervisory review rather than  merits  appeal,
         its suffices for this Tribunal to be satisfied  that  the  evidence
         upon which the impugned decision was  made  has  the  hallmarks  of
         care,   thoroughness,   underlying   expertise    and    sufficient
         reliability. The cornerstone of the Applicant's case  is  that  the
         evidence  was  insufficient  for  this  purpose.  I   reject   this
         challenge.'

  15. As Ms Akther submitted the background in Gazi was that the  challenge
      was made by way of judicial review and was an  improper  purpose  and
      procedural unfairness challenge. At paragraph 21 the court set out:

         The grant of permission expressly limited the Applicant's challenge
         to two  grounds,  which  are  reflected  in  the  ultimate  amended
         pleading:

             (i) The Secretary of State's most  recent  decision  (see  [3]
             supra) is vitiated by improper purpose, in that  she  knew  or
             ought to have known that there was no or insufficient evidence
             that the Applicant had engaged in deception.

             (ii) The impugned decision is further vitiated  by  procedural
             unfairness  in  that  the  Applicant  was  not   afforded   an
             opportunity  to  make  representations  before  the   original
             determination of 25 July 2014, he was not  provided  with  the
             material upon which the decision was made and the case made by
             him in the context of these proceedings  was  not  taken  into
             account in the making of the more recent decision.

  16. The background to the finding of the Upper Tribunal at  paragraph  35
      is that the applicants had a high hurdle to overcome  to  demonstrate
      improper purpose. The Upper Tribunal set out:

         34.     My conclusions in respect of the Applicant's  first  ground
         of challenge are, fundamentally, twofold. First,  I  consider  that
         improper purpose has not been established. There is, of course,  no
         primary evidence of this contaminant. Rather, the Applicant invites
         the Tribunal  to  infer  this  vitiating  factor.  This  ground  of
         challenge can succeed only if the Applicant  establishes  that  the
         purpose for which the Secretary of State invoked the  discretionary
         power under section 10 of the 1999 Act was motivated  by  a  design
         other than furthering the policy and objects of  the  statute  (the
         Padfield principle). The quest to establish improper motive in  the
         context of  this  challenge  engages,  in  my  view,  a  relatively
         elevated threshold. Improper purpose,  or  motive,  is  not,  as  a
         general rule, easily proved. Furthermore, I consider that it is not
         to be lightly inferred. An inference on the part of  any  court  or
         tribunal that a public law power  has  been  misused  in  this  way
         requires a solid  and  persuasive  evidential  foundation.  In  the
         present case, this directs attention to the evidence  in  existence
         at the time of the impugned decision, namely the decisions  of  the
         FtT allowing appeals and the Secretary of State's generic evidence.
         It is appropriate to highlight, in this context, that Dr Harrison's
         report postdated the impugned decision of the Secretary  of  State.
         Neither it nor anything comparable existed at the material time...

         38.     Finally, mindful that "bad faith" is the terminology  found
         in certain  places  in  the  Applicant's  submissions,  I  add  the
         following. In contemporary  public  law,  bad  faith  and  improper
         motive  are   sometimes   interchangeable   terms,   or   concepts.
         Fundamentally, both denote the misuse of power. See, generally,  De
         Smith's Judicial Review (7th Edition), para  5  -  087.  In  SCA  v
         Minister of Immigration [2002] FCAFC  397,  bad  faith  is  defined
         uncontroversially as "a lack of an honest  or  genuine  attempt  to
         undertake the task and involves a personal attack on the honesty of
         the decision maker": see [19]. The authors of De Smith continue, at
         paragraph 5 - 089:

         "Bad faith is a serious allegation which attracts a heavy burden of
         proof."

         In practice, bad faith typically (though  not  invariably)  denotes
         conduct on the part of a public official  which  is  dishonest.  It
         "always involves a grave charge": per Megaw  LJ  in  Cannock  Chase
         District Council v Kelly [1978] 1 WLR 1  at  6.  Furthermore,  this
         serious allegation requires, in every case,  ample  advance  notice
         and detailed particularisation.

  17. Mr Clarke's submissions suggested that the finding (at paragraph  35)
      in the Gazi case creates a rebuttable presumption that  the  evidence
      demonstrates that where an invalid  result  is  communicated  to  the
      Secretary of State by ETS the test result was obtained by  deception.
      His submission was that 'What the Gazi case does require of the  fact
      finding exercise is consideration of whether it is rebutted by  other
      evidence'. As set out above the context of the finding  at  paragraph
      35 in Gazi was an allegation of improper purpose. The sufficiency  of
      the evidence relied on by the Secretary of State in that  context  is
      what the Upper Tribunal  was  considering.  The  task  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal was  not  to  determine  if  the  generic  witness  evidence
      discharged the burden of proof that the applicants in that  case  had
      used deception to obtain their TOEICs. It is  clear  that  the  Upper
      Tribunal  did  not  accept  without  question  the  evidence  of   Mr
      Millington and Ms Collings. At paragraph 37 the tribunal referred  to
      several comments and questions it had raised, 'In my consideration of
      the evidence in Chapter II above I have, in  several  places,  raised
      questions and made observations.'

  18. There is no  rebuttable  presumption.   Having  considered  that  the
      supervisory function of  the  judicial  review  process  was  not  an
      appropriate forum the task of the First-tier Tribunal is, as set  out
      in Gazi, to:

         36. ... I consider it appropriate to highlight what  this  judicial
         review hearing lacked: there was no examination in chief  or  cross
         examination of the Applicant or any witness on his behalf; nor  was
         there any live evidence from any witness on behalf of the Secretary
         of  State;  and  there  was  no  examination  in  chief  or   cross
         examination of Dr Harrison or any  other  expert  witness.  All  of
         these missing factors arise in a litigation context  in  which  the
         bona fides and character of the  Applicant  are  important  issues.
         However, there was  no  opportunity  to  evaluate  the  Applicant's
         demeanour or to assess his performance under cross examination...

         40. ...Secondly, the  present  case  illustrates  that  every  case
         belonging to this field will be unavoidably  fact  sensitive.  Each
         litigant  will  put  forward  his  or   her   individual   disputed
         assertions, agreed facts, considerations and  circumstances.  These
         will be evaluated by a fact finding tribunal, to be contrasted with
         a court or tribunal of supervisory jurisdiction. This analysis  is,
         in my view, amply confirmed by the growing number of FtT  decisions
         in this sphere. Within these one finds emphasis  on  self-evidently
         important issues such as the appellant's evident  English  language
         ability, demeanour and previous life  events.  Furthermore,  it  is
         trite  that  the  assessment  of  each  appellant's  demeanour  and
         credibility will be carried out on a case by case basis.

  19. In K Mehmood & Anor, R (On the Applications of) v Secretary of  State
      for the Home Department [2015] EWCA  Civ  744  the  Court  of  Appeal
      confirmed at paragraph 22:

        This is not a case where there is no evidence whatsoever in support
        of the Secretary of State's decision. There is evidence in the form
        of the statements of Ms Collings and Mr Millington. The question of
        its adequacy was not considered by the  Deputy  Judge  and  is  not
        properly before the court in these proceedings.  It  is  noteworthy
        that in Gazi's case, where the evidence about the tests was largely
        the same as that in this case, with Ms Collings and Mr Millington's
        statements criticised by Dr Harrison, it was  decided  (see  [2015]
        UKUT 00327 (IAC) at [6] and [36] - [37]) that it would be difficult
        to  resolve  the  differences  between  them  in  judicial   review
        proceedings which are not designed for  live  evidence  and  cross-
        examination.

  20. I do not accept that there was any rebuttable presumption created  by
      the finding in the Gazi case that the generic witness evidence of  Ms
      Collings and Mr Millington is evidence that deception was used unless
      rebutted by other evidence.

  21. It should also be noted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  decided  this
      case before the decision in Gazi was released.

  22. I do consider, however, that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  in  this
      case erred by failing to engage with or undertake any  evaluation  of
      that evidence, discarding the evidence seemingly solely on the  basis
      that it was not specific to the claimant. The judge  failed  to  give
      adequate reasons as to why, based on lack of  specific  reference  to
      the claimant, that evidence was insufficient.

  23.  With regard to the witness statement of Mr Sartorius it  is  evident
      that the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  doubts  the  veracity  of  the
      evidence. It cannot be said that the judge failed to engage with  the
      evidence as she  set  out  the  essential  contents  of  the  witness
      statement in paragraph 11 of the decision. In evaluating the evidence
      at paragraph 11 the judge states, 'There is nothing on this  document
      to indicate that it has come from a spreadsheet provided by ETS'  and
      at paragraph 12, 'All that the respondent has  provided...is  a  line
      said to be taken form a spreadsheet...I do not have confirmation from
      ETS...'At  paragraph  13  the  judge  refers  to  the  annex  to   Mr
      Sartorius's witness statements as 'alleged to be evidence from ETS'.

  24. Mr Sartorius is a senior case worker and has  been  employed  by  the
      Home Office since 2006. The witness statement contains a statement of
      truth and is signed by Mr Sartorius. He asserts that the Home  Office
      were notified by way of an entry in a spreadsheet of  cancelled  test
      results by ETS. He  exhibits  an  excerpt  from  the  spreadsheet  in
      respect of the claimant. Whilst  more  information  could  have  been
      provided the judge has clearly doubted the evidence of  Mr  Sartorius
      but has not  explained  why  he  doubts  that  ETS  have  provided  a
      spreadsheet and that the exhibit is an excerpt from that spreadsheet.
      The judge has erred by failing to provide sufficient  reasons  as  to
      why the veracity of Mr Sartorius is to be doubted.

  25. With regard to the submission that a higher  standard  of  proof  was
      applied I do not accept that the judge did impose a higher  standard.
      When referring to significant evidence and substantial  evidence  the
      judge is making reference to the assertion of the Secretary of  State
      that she had significant and substantial evidence. The  judge  simply
      did not accept that the evidence was substantial and significant.  In
      requiring further evidence the judge is not  necessarily  imposing  a
      higher standard of proof. As I have decided that the judge  erred  in
      failing to engage with and to evaluate the evidence  this  would  not
      take the respondent any further in any event.

  26. However, in this  case  I  do  not  consider  that  the  errors  were
      material. The first claimant gave a very detailed account both in his
      witness statement and in oral evidence of his  journey  to  the  test
      centre, where he attended to take his test,  specific  details  about
      what happened at the centre and how the test was conducted. The judge
      had the opportunity to consider his tested evidence at first hand. He
      was able to assess the first claimant's demeanour and credibility. It
      was accepted by Mr Clarke  that  there  is  a  possibility  of  false
      positives in the ETS results and that the evidence is not necessarily
      conclusive. I therefore conclude that the First-tier  Tribunal  judge
      would not have arrived at a  different  conclusion  even  if  he  had
      engaged and appropriately evaluated the evidence of the respondent.

  27. In the grant of permission reference is made to the case of  Doody  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [1994] 1 AC  531  and  the
      principles from that case set out in  the  Gazi  case.  The  Rule  24
      response referred  to  the  case  of  Miah  (Interviewers'  comments:
      disclosure: Fairness) [2014] UKUT 515 (IAC). No specific challenge to
      the procedural fairness of the Secretary of State's decision was made
      to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  cannot  be
      criticised for failing to take either the Doody principles  of  other
      aspects of fairness into consideration. In any event the scope of the
      appeal is limited to the  grounds  seeking  permission  as  no  other
      applications have been made by either party.

  28. I have considered whether any parties require the  protection  of  an
      anonymity direction. No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously.
      Having considered  all  the  circumstances  and  evidence  I  do  not
      consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction

   Decision

  29. There was no material errors of law such that  the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal should be set aside.





Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 31 December 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw










