
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32411/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 July 2015                               |On 20 August 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                               JADWINDER SINGH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Byrne, Counsel, instructed by Drummond Miller
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This appeal concerns a challenge to a decision of Designated First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Murray dated 17 November 2014.  The judge had  dismissed
    the appeal by the appellant, a citizen of India born  15  October  1972
    against a decision to remove him from the United Kingdom dated 31  July
    2014.

 2. The appellant had entered this country unlawfully in 2005.   On  3  May
    2011 he married  Margaret  Hoare  with  Home  Office  permission.   The
    parties' previous marriages had ended in divorce.  The  appellant  made
    application in July 2011 to  remain  as  a  spouse  which  was  refused
    without right of appeal.   A further application dated 25 October  2013
    met the same fate.

 3. According to the Secretary of State, the appellant was encountered on 3
    May 2014 at restaurant premises in Kilmarnock. When he was apprehended,
    he attempted to abscond.  He initially gave a  false  identity.   On  5
    August 2014 he was served with the decision to remove him dated 31 July
    2014 which gave rise to the right of  appeal  the  appellant  exercised
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. DFtTJ Murray heard evidence from the appellant and his wife  Ms  Singh.
    She found the latter  to  be  credible  but  not  the  appellant.   She
    accepted  the  parties  had  a   subsisting    relationship   but   had
    reservations about the appellant's intentions when the couple  married,
    observing that he had two young children in  India  from  his  previous
    wife from whom he had divorced in 2009.   The judge did not believe the
    appellant's claim that he  had  not  been  working  in  the  Kilmarnock
    restaurant or that he had not given a false name  and  date  of  birth.
    She took the view that the appellant on being  served  with  notice  of
    liability to removal should have returned to India and made application
    for entry clearance.

 5. The judge was invited to consider the case under  Appendix  FM  Section
    EX1(B) of  the  Rules  on  the  basis  that  there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles to the appellant and his wife going to live  in  India.   She
    found there were none, noting the presence there of the appellant's two
    children and his parents.  As to the appellant's wife, the judge  noted
    the factors  relied on to demonstrate insurmountable obstacles in these
    terms:

         "40. With regard to the appellant's wife, she  is  working  in  the
             United Kingdom but is hoping to cut back on  her  hours.   She
             has a problem with her neck but seems  to  be  receiving  very
             little treatment for this.  Her mother and father are  getting
             old and her father is not well but she is  not  his  principal
             carer and although she would like to be there for her parents,
             which is only natural, she has to make the choice  of  whether
             to remain or go to India with her husband.  She has  two  sons
             in the United Kingdom but they are adults  and  I  have  heard
             nothing to indicate that there is more than a normal emotional
             relationship between them and their mother.

         41.  I have also noted there would be medical  treatment  available
             for the appellant's wife in India.

         42.  With regard to Margaret's father requiring care  it  is  clear
             that as Margaret works the care she gives him is limited.   If
             her mother is unable to look after him there is care available
             through the local authorities and the social worker department
             in Kilmarnock.

         43.  I find that the terms of Appendix FM  of the Rules  cannot  be
             satisfied and that EX.1 does not apply."

 6. The evidence before the judge was that the appellant's wife has  muscle
    spasms in her neck as a consequence  of  a  lifting  injury  whilst  an
    auxiliary nurse in Cross House Hospital fourteen years previously.  She
    had not received compensation for this injury and is  now  employed  by
    British Telecom.  Her father is elderly.  She is an only child and  was
    concerned that her father would worry about what  will  happen  to  his
    wife when he dies.

 7. An additional witness, an uncle of  Ms  Singh,  gave  evidence  and  he
    described her father as being very ill. A letter from Dr  Tommy  Miller
    of Frew Terrace Surgery in Irvine dated 8 February 2013  explains  that
    Ms Singh's father who was born in July 1930, has a significant  history
    of ill health with end stage heart failure, ischemic heart disease  and
    five  previous  myocardial  infarctions.  In  addition  he  has  atrial
    fibrillation  postural  hypotension  as  well  as  osteoarthritis   and
    osteoporosis.  He described Mr  Birkley  as  having  a  poor  prognosis
    although he was unable to quantity the  timescale.   He  concluded  "He
    obviously requires  some  care  at  home  which  results  in  increased
    pressure on his wife and family".

 8. Having disposed the appeal under the Rules, the judge turned to Article
    8 beginning  with her consideration under paragraph 276ADE  noting  the
    ties that the appellant still had in India. She directed herself as  to
    part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and reached
    this conclusion on proportionality,

         "45. ... When proportionality is  assessed  nothing  has  been  put
             before me to make me believe that  this  appellant  should  be
             allowed to circumvent the Rules.  Although the  appellant  has
             been in the United Kingdom for some  time  he  has  never  had
             leave to remain.  Public interest is  now  all  important  and
             public  interest  includes  the   maintenance   of   effective
             immigration control.  The appellant speaks English but  he  is
             not financially independent, he  is  dependent  on  his  wife.
             Section  117B  states  that  a  relationship  formed  with   a
             qualifying partner, which is established by a person at a time
             when the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully, should be
             given little weight. That is the case here. The  appellant  is
             seeking to stay in the United Kingdom but does  not  meet  the
             requirements of immigration control as set out in  the  Rules.
             The usual policy considerations apply in this case.

         46.  I have noted the delay on the part of the Home Office but  the
             appellant has known since he arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom
             that he had no right to stay.  He made applications  after  he
             married Margaret which were refused but he made no attempt  to
             return.  I do not find that the delay  merits  greater  weight
             being  awarded  to  the  appellant  in   the   proportionality
             assessment.

         47.  I have considered the appellant's wife's human rights and  the
             human rights of her family.  It is clear  that  his  wife  did
             what she was told to do by the  immigration  advisor  but  she
             knew the appellant was in the United  Kingdom  illegally.   In
             spite of this she married him.  I believe she thought she  was
             doing the right thing but  she  now  has  to  make  a  choice.
             Whether to go to India with the appellant either to live there
             or to support him in his application to return to  the  United
             Kingdom or to remain in UK without the appellant and await the
             outcome of any application he may make to return.

         48.  I find that there is nothing exceptional in this case.   There
             is no good reason  for  considering  the  appeal  outside  the
             Immigration Rules."

 9. First-tier Tribunal Judge Pirotta refused permission to appeal.   Upper
    Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  granted  permission  however  on  a   renewed
    application in these terms:

         "1.  The appellant's ball point appears to be that his wife  cannot
             join him in India because she would not then be able  to  care
             for her parents in the United Kingdom and  that  therefore  he
             should be allowed to remain.

         2.   I have little confidence in the appeal being allowed to remain
             for that reason but I  am  persuaded  that  it  is  reasonably
             arguable  that  the  determination  does  not  show  a  proper
             application of the Rules or proper application  of  the  point
             indicated above.

         3.   I give permission to appeal on all grounds relied on."

10. Five grounds of challenge are relied on as follows:

         Ground 1

         Ms Singh's father's illness presented  an  insurmountable  obstacle
         because of the humanitarian consequences for her  and  her  parents
         rather than that it presented a care deficit for which there  would
         be no provision.  The  judge's  decision  failed  to  identify  the
         nature of this obstacle and take it  into  account  as  a  material
         factor.

         Ground 2

         The judge had not addressed EX.2 in substance or form at any point;
         the test that had been  applied was EX.1 rather than  as  explained
         by EX.2.

         Ground 3

         The statement by  the  judge  that  'public  interest  is  now  all
         important' shows an error of  law  indicating  the  judge  did  not
         envisage  any  scope  for  the  nature  and  significance   of   an
         interference to outweigh the public interest.

         Ground 4

         The consideration by the judge when applying EX.1 did  not  address
         whether Ms Singh enjoyed family life with her parents, particularly
         her father. The care she provided prima facie constituted more than
         emotional ties between adult children and their parents.

         Ground 5

         The  decision  of  the   judge   insofar   as   she   relied   upon
         'insurmountable obstacles' to family life being enjoyed abroad as a
         relevant test in determining the proportionality  of  spouses  from
         British nationals is wrong in law. The correct test is  whether  it
         would be reasonable for the couple to be expected to travel to  the
         third country national's country of origin.

ANALYSIS

11. Although he did not retreat from any of his grounds, the  focus  of  Mr
    Byrne's submissions was on ground 5. He placed reliance on the  opinion
    of the Inner House of the Court of Session in Mirza v SSHD [2015]  CSIH
    28 regarding the impact  of  Ms  Singh's  British  citizenship  in  the
    proportionality exercise and the weight that was to  be  given  to  it.
    Both representatives accepted that Lord Eassie had not referred to part
    5A of the 2002 Act.  It also appears that his attention was  not  drawn
    to the decision of Aikens LJ in MN & Ors, R (on the application  of)  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985, in particular the dicta  at  [138]  in  which
    Aikens LJ concluded that there was nothing in the Immigration Act  1971
    or common law that grants a "constitutional" right to British  citizens
    to live in the UK with non-EEA partners without the right of abode.  He
    concluded "There is no absolute right to marry and found  a  family  in
    the UK if it involves marriage to a non-EEA citizen who then wishes  to
    reside in the UK."

12. I also gave Mr Byrne the opportunity of  considering  the  most  recent
    decision of the Court of Appeal in  England  and  Wales  regarding  the
    interplay between the Rules and Article 8: SS (Congo) and Others v SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

13. It is not in  dispute  that  the  appellant  could  not  succeed  under
    Appendix FM  in the light of his unlawful presence unless the  criteria
    in s.EX is satisfied.  That provision in  force  at  the  time  of  the
    immigration decision is in these terms:

         "Section EX: Exceptions to  certain  eligibility  requirements  for
         leave to remain as a partner or parent

         EX.1. This paragraph applies if -

             (a)  ...

             (b)  the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with a partner  who is in the UK and is a
                  British citizen, settled in the UK or in the UK with
                  refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and there are
                  insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
                  continuing outside the UK.

         EX.2.  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  'insurmountable
         obstacles' means the very significant difficulties which  would  be
         faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their  family
         life together outside the UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or
         would entail very serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their
         partner."

14. Ground 5 appears to challenge the lawfulness of the Tribunal's decision
    on the basis that reliance  had  been   placed  on  the  insurmountable
    obstacles test in assessing the proportionality of removal  of  spouses
    of British nationals.  This assertion is misplaced  in  my  view.   The
    judge carried out an assessment of the case under Section  EX  and  was
    unarguably correct in considering  whether  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to the couple continuing their family life  outside  the  UK.
    She then turned to Article 8. Although the proportionality exercise  is
    slightly  unstructured,  there  is  no  suggestion   that   the   judge
    impermissibly imported the insurmountable obstacles test  in  assessing
    proportionality.  The judge correctly directed herself with  regard  to
    part 5A  of the 2002 Act which relevant to the issues in this appeal is
    in these terms:

         "117B Article 8: Public interest considerations applicable  in  all
             cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration  control  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic wellbeing  of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English -

             (a)  are less of a burden on tax payers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic wellbeing  of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons -

             (a)  are not a burden on tax payers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society

         (4)  Little weight should be given to -

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully

         (5)  ...

         (6)  ..."

15. Section 117D includes a qualifying  partner  as  a  partner  who  is  a
    British citizen.

16. The Court of Session in Mirza was concerned with  a  challenge  to  the
    Secretary of State's decision between a British citizen and  a  citizen
    of Pakistan who had remained without leave on  expiry  of  his  working
    holidaymaker visa in March 2005.  Here too  the  petitioner  could  not
    meet the requirements of Appendix FM because of his unlawful status but
    for the possibility of succeeding under s.EX or on Article  8  grounds.
    The focus of argument before the court was on  the latter.  Lord Eassie
    observed at [16] that the right to marry and to found a  family  was  a
    fundamental  right  protected  by  Article  12  of  the  Human   Rights
    Convention.  He also explained at [18] that a principle to be borne  in
    mind is that a British citizen cannot be required to leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  As to the impact of that citizenship, he concluded at [19]:

          "19.    ... But it did mean  that the right of  residence  in  the
             United  Kingdom,  and  all  that  went  with  such  residence,
             included the benefits of citizenship of  the  European  Union,
             weighed heavily on the assessment of  proportionality  of  the
             interference  with  the  couple's  human  rights  to   cohabit
             together as spouses.  The assessment had to  be  conducted  on
             the basis of separation of the couple; it was not open to  the
             Secretary  of  State  to   contend   that   any   incompatible
             interference with the couple's Article 8 rights  could  simply
             be avoided by stating that the couple might  move  to  another
             country."

17.  Lord Eassie also observed at [20]  that  "...  when  it  comes  to  an
    assessment of proportionality, it is not appropriate to apply a test of
    whether there might be an 'insurmountable obstacle' to the petitioner's
    wife being able to join him in  Pakistan".    He  considered  that  the
    Secretary of State had applied the  wrong  test  in  assessing  whether
    refusal  of  leave  to  remain  would  lead  to  "unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences".  Lord Eassie also noted that approval for  marriage  had
    been granted without qualification or any question being raised  as  to
    the petitioner's precarious immigration status.  These matters led  him
    to quash the decision of the Secretary of State.

18. Mr Matthew submitted that  the  approach  to  proportionality  by  Lord
    Eassie found echo in SS (Congo). At [33] Sales LJ held:

         "33. In our judgment, even though a test of exceptionality does not
             apply in every case falling within the scope of  Appendix  FM,
             it is accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the
             sorts of special contexts referred to above is that compelling
             circumstances would need to be identified to support  a  claim
             for grant of LTR outside the new Rules in Appendix FM. In  our
             view, that is a formulation which is not as strict a  test  of
             exceptionality or a requirement of 'very  compelling  reasons'
             (as referred to in MF (Nigeria) in the context  of  the  Rules
             applicable to foreign criminals), but which gives  appropriate
             weight to the focused consideration of public interest factors
             as finds expression in the Secretary of State's formulation of
             the new Rules in Appendix FM. It also reflects the formulation
             in Nagre at para. [29], which has been tested and has survived
             scrutiny in this court: see, e.g., Haleemudeen  at  [44],  per
             Beatson LJ."

19. Sales LJ had observed earlier at [29]:

         "(29) It is clear, therefore, that it cannot  be  maintained  as  a
             general proposition that LTR or LTE  outside  the  Immigration
             Rules should only be granted in exceptional cases. However, in
             certain specific contexts, a proper application of  Article  8
             may itself make it clear that the legal test for grant of  LTR
             or  LTE  outside  the  Rules  should  indeed  be  a  test   of
             exceptionality. This has now been identified to be  the  case,
             on the basis  of  the  constant  jurisprudence  of  the  ECtHR
             itself, in relation to applications for LTR outside the  Rules
             on the basis of family life (where no children  are  involved)
             established in the United Kingdom at a time when the  presence
             of one or other of the partners was known  to  be  precarious:
             see Nagre, paras. [38]-[43], approved  by  this  court  in  MF
             (Nigeria) at [41]-[42]."

20. A possible weakness of Judge Murray's decision may be that she embarked
    on a proportionality exercise outside the Rules and concluded [48]

         "I find that there is nothing exceptional in this case.   There  is
         no good reason for considering the appeal outside  the  Immigration
         Rules."

21. It is not easy to reconcile this concluding sentence with the Article 8
    analysis that had begun earlier.  Even so it cannot be  said  that  the
    judge applied the insurmountable obstacles test to the  proportionality
    exercise.  Whilst the judge may have overstated the public interest  in
    identifying that it was "all important", the  very  substantial  hurdle
    that the appellant had to overcome was the impact of  the  relationship
    having been developed during his unlawful presence and the  requirement
    in primary legislation of the little weight that the relationship could
    be afforded as a  consequence.   To  that  extent  the  proportionality
    scales were preloaded by this factor. The relationship was the basis on
    which the appellant had sought leave to  remain.   With  little  weight
    being given to that relationship, the other  considerations  which  are
    dependent upon that relationship continuing acquire less  significance.
    Accordingly, any error by the judge in the proportionality exercise  is
    not material.

22. Returning to the remaining grounds, it is understandable why  Mr  Byrne
    did not wish to develop those further before  me.   It  is  clear  when
    considering s.EX the judge had in mind Ms Singh's relationship  to  her
    father and her consequent concerns.  The  judge  earlier  recorded  the
    evidence regarding the father's worry and there is no reason to believe
    she did not factor these matters into her assessment of  the  obstacles
    to the relationship continuing abroad.

23. The complaint made in ground 2 is not developed in the grounds.  It  is
    difficult on the evidence to see how the definition in EX.2. could have
    resulted in a different outcome. As to ground 3, I do not consider  any
    error by the judge could have material impact.  Ground 4 challenges the
    judge's failure to make a finding on  whether  there  was  family  life
    between Ms Singh and her parents.  I do not  find  any  error  on  this
    account absent further evidence the fact of some care being provided by
    Ms Singh to her parents is not of itself to establish family life.  The
    judge was clearly aware of the  nature  of  the  relationship  and  its
    strong expression as part  of  her  private  life.  But  such  matters,
    however, were dependent upon a relationship which  primary  legislation
    has required the judge to give little weight.  The adverse impact on Ms
    Singh's relationship with her parents would only come about if she felt
    compelled to leave the United Kingdom  in  respect  of  a  relationship
    which could be afforded little weight.

24. I am not persuaded  that  the  judge  made  a  material  error  in  her
    decision. For the above reasons the appeal is dismissed.

Signed   [pic]
     Dated 17 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

