
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number: IA/32565/20i5


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 August 2017                             |On 16 August 2017            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                             Hassaan iqbal malik
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr M Rana, of Counsel, instructed by Stifford Legal
                 Advice Centre
For the Respondent: Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The respondent challenges the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         A W Khan to allow the appeal of the appellant under the Immigration
         Rules by way of a determination promulgated on  15  December  2016.
         For convenience, I continue to refer to the parties  as  they  were
         before the First-tier Tribunal.


      2. The appellant is a Pakistani national born on 11 December 1983.  He
         arrived here as a Tier 4 Migrant on 17 January  2011  and  obtained
         further leave until 25 November 2015. On 12  March  2013,  however,
         that leave was curtailed until 11 May 2013 as the sponsor's licence
         was revoked. On 10 May 2013,  the  appellant  applied  for  further
         leave using the ETS TOEIC certificate as  evidence  that  he  could
         meet the language requirements and he was granted leave  to  remain
         until 19 December 2014. On 2 September 2014, he applied  for  leave
         to remain as the  spouse  of  Sarah  Smith.  That  application  was
         refused on 24 September 2015 on the basis that  the  appellant  did
         not meet the suitability requirements of the rules in that the  ETS
         certificate  he  had  previously  relied  on  had   been   obtained
         fraudulently and that his  test  scores  had  been  cancelled.  The
         respondent considered that his presence was not  conducive  to  the
         public good and  further  that  he  had  not  met  the  maintenance
         requirements.


      3. The appeal came before Judge Khan at Harmondsworth on  16  November
         2016. The judge found that the documentary evidence  relied  on  by
         the respondent did not demonstrate whether a proxy  had  taken  the
         test on the appellant's behalf and that it was unclear how she  had
         concluded  that  the  appellant  had  fraudulently   obtained   his
         certificate. He considered that the evidence was unclear  and  that
         the respondent had not shown that the appellant had used deception.
         He then considered the appellant's evidence as to the test  taking.
         He found there were some  problems  with  it  but  giving  him  the
         benefit of the doubt concluded that  he  had  genuinely  taken  the
         test. He also found that the maintenance requirements had been met.
         Accordingly, the appeal was allowed.



      4. The respondent sought and obtained permission to appeal on 21  June
         2017 on the basis that the judge had arguably failed  to  apply  SM
         and Qadir where the Tribunal had held  that  the  generic  evidence
         sufficiently discharged  the  respondent's  evidential  burden.  In
         granting permission, Judge Ransley also noted that  the  judge  had
         expressed  doubts  about   the   appellant's   evidence;   in   the
         circumstances, it was arguable that he had erred in concluding that
         the appellant had taken the test himself.



         The hearing

      5. At the hearing before me on 10  August  2017,  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe
         relied on the grounds for permission and submitted that  the  judge
         had failed to grasp the nature of the evidence. She  accepted  that
         the statements  of  Mr  Millington  and  Ms  Collings  did  not  in
         themselves raise a prima facie case against the appellant,  as  the
         judge found at paragraph 21, but she argued  that  there  had  been
         additional  evidence  and  the  judge  had   not   understood   its
         significance. She maintained that whilst the judge  had  repeatedly
         observed that there was no evidence to show a proxy test taker  had
         been involved, the evidence which also consisted  on  the  look  up
         tool, a report from Professor French, the statement of Leslie Singh
         and a specific report on the college where the test had been  taken
         cumulatively   demonstrated   that   the   certificate   had   been
         fraudulently obtained. She argued that the court had held in SM and
         Qadir that the two generic statements, the look  up  tool  and  its
         accompanying statement sufficiently discharged the burden of  proof
         on the respondent. The judge therefore erred when he found that the
         evidence was inadequate to make out the allegation  of  fraud.  She
         submitted that the judge's erroneous belief that it  had  not  been
         shown whether a proxy had been used had infected the  remainder  of
         his findings. She submitted that the various statements adduced  by
         the respondent clearly showed the process  by  which  test  results
         were deemed to be invalid and the scores were cancelled; the  judge
         was wrong to find that this had not been  explained  and  wrong  to
         find there was no link between eth evidence and the appellant.  She
         submitted that in this case the judge had even more  evidence  than
         the court had seen in SM and Qadir.  She submitted there  had  been
         no consideration of the French report of  the  college  report  and
         that the issue impacted upon the question of whether the  appellant
         met the suitability requirements. The decision was unsustainable.


      6. In response Mr Rana took me through the determination and submitted
         that the judge had set out all  the  evidence,  was  aware  of  the
         issues, summarised and analysed the evidence, applied  the  correct
         legal test and properly found that the appellant  had  provided  an
         innocent explanation. He had considered the  evidential  and  legal
         tests and had considered the evidence the  appellant  gave  at  the
         hearing. He submitted that whilst another judge may have reached  a
         different conclusion, this judge's conclusions were  not  perverse.
         He was entitled to give the appellant the benefit of the doubt  and
         to conclude that he had taken the test himself. He  submitted  that
         the respondent's grounds did not disclose any errors of law in  the
         determination and the appeal should be dismissed.



      7.  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  replied.  She   pointed   to   the   judge's
         "assumption" at paragraph 28 and submitted that no finding had been
         made. The evidence had established a link to the  appellant  having
         used a proxy test taker and the judge should have started from that
         standpoint.  If the correct approach had been  taken,  the  outcome
         could have been materially different. She  questioned  whether  the
         judge would have given the appellant the benefit of the doubt if he
         had properly understood the evidence.



      8. At the conclusion of the hearing, I reserved my determination which
         I now give.



      9. Conclusions



     10. It is of concern that the judge  repeatedly  maintained  throughout
         his findings that the respondent's evidence had failed to establish
         a link between the appellant and a proxy test  taker.  As  such,  I
         concur with Ms Willocks-Briscoe that his  starting  point  for  the
         assessment of whether there was an innocent explanation was  flawed
         and that this infected the remaining conclusions.



     11. The respondent relied on several items of evidence  in  support  of
         her allegations; the statements of  Peter  Millington  and  Rebecca
         Collings, the Look Up Tool with  the  accompanying  statement  from
         Leslie Singh, the report from Professor French,  a  report  on  the
         substantial  fraud  perpetrated  at  Elizabeth  College  where  the
         appellant had taken his test, the ETS SELT source date and the  CID
         notes. I accept that the judge has set out  this  evidence  in  his
         determination but the difficulty is that he made no  clear  finding
         that the respondent's evidence  was  sufficient  to  discharge  the
         burden on her and, indeed at paragraph 28, he appears to proceed on
         an assumption. He sets out the difficulties  with  the  appellant's
         oral evidence as regards the test (at 8, 9, 28  and  29),  observes
         that he has reservations about the evidence but  then  proceeds  to
         give the appellant the benefit of the doubt because the  respondent
         had failed to make out her case. Ms Willocks-Briscoe  is  right  to
         argue  that  had  the  judge  proceeded  on  the  basis  that   the
         respondent's evidence did link the appellant to  the  invalid  test
         and did show that  a  proxy  had  sat  the  test,  the  appellant's
         "innocent explanation" would have  been  evaluated  in  the  proper
         context and the judge may not have so readily given  the  appellant
         the benefit of the doubt.



     12. For these reasons, I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal. As regards disposal, Ms Willocks-Briscoe  suggested  that
         the matter be retained by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  view  of  other
         findings that had been made but Mr Rana asked for the matter to  be
         remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  fresh  credibility
         findings to be made.  I, therefore, set aside the decision  in  its
         entirety and remit it  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
         hearing on all issues.



     13. Decision


     14. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law such that  the  decision
         is set aside. It shall be re-heard afresh by a different  judge  of
         that Tribunal at a date to be arranged.



     15. Anonymity



     16. There has been no request for an  anonymity  order  and  I  see  no
         reason to make one.

    Signed




       Upper Tribunal Judge
       Date: 11 August 2017
