
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32344/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 27 October 2015                   |On 22 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                            mrs purnakali khatri
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M McTaggart, Counsel instructed by RP Crawford &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal born on 2 June 1971.  She  came  to
    the UK on 27 April 2012 with leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  2  partner.
    After a grant of further leave, she applied on 11 March 2014 for  leave
    to remain on Article 8 grounds.

 2. On 31 July 2014 a decision was made to refuse to vary leave to  remain,
    with a decision to  remove  the  appellant  under  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The  appellant  appealed
    that decision and her appeal came  before  First-tier  Judge  Alis  who
    determined  the  appeal  'on  the  papers',  whereby  the  appeal   was
    dismissed.  Permission to appeal having been granted by a judge of  the
    Upper Tribunal, the appeal came before me.

    The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The First-tier Judge noted that the appellant and her husband have four
    children aged 19, 16, 14 and 11, and that her husband and children  all
    have  indefinite  leave  to  remain  granted  on  26  June  2014.   The
    appellant's husband obtained ILR having come to the UK as a work-permit
    holder and having lived in the UK for over six years.

 4. Judge Alis concluded that the appellant does not meet the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.  Her application  was  considered  under  the
    transitional arrangements that govern paragraph 284  of  HC  95,  which
    require her to have an  approved  English  language  certificate.   The
    appellant did not have the relevant English  language  certificate  and
    there was no guarantee that she  would  have  obtained  it,  which  was
    relevant to 'evidential flexibility'.  There was no evidence before the
    judge that the appellant had obtained that qualification.  Although the
    appellant claimed that the respondent had her  passport  and  therefore
    she was unable to book a test, the judge concluded  that  he  had  been
    given no evidence that she had made any request for her  passport.   In
    terms  of  the  appellant's  lack  of  the  relevant  English  language
    qualification, the respondent's decision was found to be correct.

 5. So far as the Article 8 Immigration  Rules  are  concerned,  the  judge
    noted that when the appellant made her application for leave to  remain
    neither her children nor her  partner  had  settled  status,  but  that
    situation changed on 26 June 2014.

 6. The judge concluded that the appellant did  now  meet  the  eligibility
    requirements of the Rules as set out in Section  E-LTRP  because,  with
    reference to E-LTRP1.2(b), her husband now has settled status.

 7. Furthermore, it was not suggested by the respondent that the  appellant
    cannot meet the financial requirements of the  Rules.   In  any  event,
    they had provided evidence of their income which indicated  that  those
    requirements were met.

 8. On the other hand, the appellant was  not  able  to  satisfy  E-LTRP4.1
    because she did not have an approved English language test certificate.
     Accordingly, the appellant would have to establish that  she  met  the
    requirements  of  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM,  according  to  E-LTRP4.1(ix)
    (although he probably meant to refer to E-LTRP4.1 (d)).

 9. After referring to various authorities on the issue of  "insurmountable
    obstacles", the judge noted at [19] that the appellant and her children
    only came to the UK in April  2012  and  have  therefore  only  enjoyed
    family life in the UK for a short period of time, not  having  come  to
    the UK when the appellant's husband  came  to  work  in  the  UK.   She
    remained in Nepal with the children.  It was concluded that there  were
    no insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Nepal.

10. So far as paragraph 276ADE is concerned, in terms of private life,  the
    conclusion was  that  there  are  no  "significant  obstacles"  to  her
    integration in Nepal were she to be returned.

11. A further conclusion was that there were no exceptional  or  compelling
    circumstances which required consideration of the  appeal  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, and under Article 8.

    The grounds and submissions

12. The grounds make complaint about the respondent having failed  to  give
    the appellant the opportunity to obtain the relevant  English  language
    qualification.  It is further argued that the judge's conclusions under
    the Rules in terms of family life, and under Article 8 proper, in terms
    of the proportionality of removal are flawed.

13. The submissions made before me reflected the fact  that  permission  to
    appeal was granted on limited grounds only, with permission having been
    refused in terms  of  the  appellant's  failure  to  meet  the  English
    language requirement of the Rules.  It was said to be arguable that the
    First-tier Judge had failed  to  factor  into  his  assessment  of  the
    proportionality of removal the fact that the appellant's four  children
    have indefinite leave to remain in the UK.

14. In submissions it was pointed out  that  EX.1(a)  does  not  deal  with
    minors who have ILR, although EX.1(b) does, in the sense that it refers
    to a partner  who  is  a  British  citizen  or  "settled"  in  the  UK.
    EX.1(a)(ii) includes the requirement that it would not be reasonable to
    expect the child to leave the UK.  In other  words,  it  was  submitted
    that that  was  a  much  lower  threshold  to  be  satisfied  than  the
    requirement to be settled.

15. The children in this case do not come within EX.1(a) in terms  of  sub-
    paragraph (i) which is what the judge concluded at [16].

16.  In  considering  insurmountable  obstacles  with  reference   to   the
    appellant's partner, it was submitted that the judge had not dealt with
    what the insurmountable obstacles are  in  this  case.   The  Rules  at
    EX.1(b) do not deal with the issue  of  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and her partner and children.  The judge had  not  identified
    the practical issues  in  terms  of  relocation  with  the  appellant's
    husband and children, the matter only having been dealt with briefly at
    [19]-[20].  There was no appreciation of, and no weight given  to,  the
    fact of the children having ILR.

17. Although at [11] the judge had noted that the appellant's  husband  and
    children have ILR, that was not sufficient.  There was no consideration
    of circumstances which indicated that a consideration under  Article  8
    outside the Rules was required.

18. Family life in this case was established lawfully.  Both the  appellant
    and her partner are in employment and are not a burden  on  the  state.
    These are factors relevant in terms of Section 117 of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act").   There  is  no
    allegation of any criminal conduct in this case.

19. The appellant's husband would have to go back to Nepal and give up  all
    the benefits of living in the UK, for example in terms  of  employment,
    he having established himself lawfully.  The practical possibilities of
    relocation are issues relevant to insurmountable obstacles.

20. There are four children, three of whom are still minors who have  lived
    with their mother all their lives.  The judge did not consider that  in
    any proportionality exercise.

21. Mrs Saddiq submitted that it was apparent from [11] that the judge  did
    take into account that the children have ILR.  However, as was  pointed
    out at [19], they have only been in the UK since April 2012.  The judge
    set out the family's circumstances.  They had established  family  life
    in the UK for only a very short period of time.  The issue of  ILR  was
    correctly factored into the question  of  insurmountable  obstacles  at
    [20] where the judge said that the appellant  and  children  have  only
    been "settled here" for a limited period of time.

22. In any event, it was submitted  that  there  was  no  evidence  of  any
    insurmountable obstacles given the short timescale since their arrival.
     No evidence on this issue was put before the judge and  he  could  not
    therefore be criticised for not taking into account material  that  was
    not before him.  There was no need for an assessment  under  Article  8
    outside the Rules, which the appellant was not able to meet.

23. In reply, Mr McTaggart submitted that the phrase "settled here" at [20]
    could not realistically be taken to mean a reference to ILR given  that
    that phrase was used with reference to the appellant and  her  children
    being settled here.  The appellant, of course, does not have ILR.  That
    phrase in reality therefore only meant to refer to length of time  that
    they had been in the UK.

    My assessment

24. Although arguably outside the ambit  of  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  it  was  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that the judge's decision  does  not  demonstrate  a  legally
    adequate assessment of  the  issue  of  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to
    family life between the appellant and her husband outside the  UK.   It
    was argued that  that  assessment  not  only  failed  to  identify  the
    insurmountable obstacles in the circumstance of  this  case,  but  also
    failed to take into account the fact of the children's ILR.

25. I am prepared  to  assume  for  present  purposes  that  the  grant  of
    permission did not exclude argument  on  the  issue  of  insurmountable
    obstacles, although it is stated in the grant  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge that there was no arguable error of law in the judge's assessment
    of  the  appellant's   failure   to   meet   the   Immigration   Rules.
    Nevertheless, the argument on behalf of the appellant  is  misconceived
    insofar as it suggests that the judge did not  identify  insurmountable
    obstacles.  The fact is that the judge did consider the issue and found
    that there were no such insurmountable  obstacles,  because  none  were
    identified by the appellant.

26. Reference was made to the length of time that the  appellant  (and  her
    children) had been in the UK, since April 2012, and that family life in
    the UK at least was relatively recent.  At [20] the  judge  noted  that
    the appellant and the children had spent the majority of their lives in
    Nepal and were supported by  the  appellant's  husband  whilst  he  was
    working in the UK.

27. I do not accept the contention that the judge failed to have regard  to
    the fact that the appellant's husband and children have ILR.  Under the
    subheading "My Findings" at [11] the judge started  his  assessment  by
    giving the ages of the appellant's husband and their four children.  In
    the very next sentence he stated that they each have ILR granted on  26
    June 2014, noting that they were  granted  ILR  after  the  appellant's
    application.  In the final sentence  of  that  paragraph  there  is  an
    explanation of how the appellant's husband was granted ILR.   The  very
    first paragraph of the judge's assessment is  all  concerned  with  the
    fact of the appellant's husband and children having ILR.  It could  not
    be said therefore, that this was an  issue  that  was  not  taken  into
    account in the judge's assessment.

28. Furthermore, again at [15] the judge stated  that  when  the  appellant
    submitted her application neither her  children  nor  her  partner  had
    settled status, but that since 26 June 2014 that situation had changed.
     It is noted that the respondent did not consider this when looking  at
    the appellant's application.   This  further  reference  to  their  ILR
    reinforces my conclusion that the judge did have this in mind.

29. At [20] the judge stated that there  was  no  evidence  that  had  been
    presented  to  support  the  claim  that  there   were   insurmountable
    obstacles, and that whilst removal would  be  an  interference  he  was
    satisfied that it was  proportionate  "having  regard  to  the  [short]
    period of time the appellant and children had been settled here and the
    length of time they lived in Nepal."  It was submitted on behalf of the
    respondent that the reference to "settled here" is indicative again  of
    the judge's having taken into account the  ILR  of  the  children.   On
    behalf of the appellant it was argued that this could not be so because
    the phrase includes "the appellant and children"  having  been  settled
    here, and the appellant does not have ILR.  It was  therefore,  only  a
    reference to the length of time of  their  physical  presence,  it  was
    submitted.

30. Whether or not that passage is an explicit reference to the ILR of  the
    children, it is  nevertheless  recognition  of  a  significant  factor,
    namely the length of time that the children have been in  the  UK.   At
    the time of the judge's determination, that was a period  of  just  two
    and a half years.  I do not consider  that  the  phrase  used  in  that
    paragraph rules out a further demonstration of the  judge's  cognisance
    of the ILR of the children, but  in  any  event  in  my  view  that  is
    adequately demonstrated with reference to the other passages to which I
    have referred.

31.  I  am  satisfied  that  in  the  assessment  of  whether  there   were
    insurmountable obstacles to the continuation of family life  in  Nepal,
    the judge did take into account the fact of the ILR of the  appellant's
    husband and children.  Indeed, the  argument  before  me  was  only  in
    relation to a failure to factor in  the  children's  ILR.   Whilst  the
    question  of  insurmountable   obstacles   will   necessarily   involve
    consideration of all factors having a bearing on that issue,  I  cannot
    see on the basis of the evidence presented to the judge that  there  is
    any error in his assessment of that issue.  It may  be  that  a  better
    case on the issue of insurmountable obstacles could have been  advanced
    before the judge, but the evidence upon which he based  his  conclusion
    was such that he was entitled to conclude as he did.

32. Similarly, I am satisfied  that  the  conclusion  that  there  were  no
    compelling circumstances such as to require consideration of Article  8
    outside the Rules is a conclusion that was similarly open to the judge,
    on the basis of the evidence put before him.  Whilst I have doubt about
    the conclusion at [23] that the Rules in the appeal before him  "are  a
    complete code", no argument was advanced before me on  that  issue  and
    any error in this respect is not in any event material.

33. It is important to remember that there was not and could not have  been
    any decision to remove the children, who have ILR.  The judge concluded
    that  had  the  appellant  provided  the   correct   English   language
    certificate she would have met the requirements of  the  Rules  without
    difficulty.   He  found  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  she  had
    approached the respondent for her passport so that  she  could  take  a
    further English language test.

34. Even if it could be said that  because  the  Rules  do  not  cater  for
    circumstances in which children have ILR and that the judge should have
    gone on to consider Article 8 proper and conduct a full proportionality
    assessment, it is impossible to see how, on the basis of  the  evidence
    put before the judge, the result could have been a  conclusion  in  the
    appellant's favour.  The only other factor not contemplated within  the
    Rules is the ILR of the appellant's children.  Whilst to some extent it
    can be taken as read that if they had to leave with the appellant  they
    would suffer some disadvantage, I cannot see that on the basis  of  the
    material put before the judge the mere fact of the ILR of the children,
    or of the appellant's husband for that matter, could have  resulted  in
    an outcome in the appellant's favour.

35. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that there is any error of law  in  the
    judge's decision and the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  therefore
    stands.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.  Accordingly, the decision to  dismiss  the  appeal
stands.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  20/01/16
