
IAC-AH-cj-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32070/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 8th April 2015                             |On 17th April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                         mrs Saulat Adelarin Yusuff
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Olubisose (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Napthine, promulgated on 31st December 2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 4th December 2014.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of  Mrs  Saulat  Adelarin  Yusuff.   The  Respondent
    Secretary  of  State,  subsequently  applied  for,  and  was   granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen  of  Nigeria  who  was  born  on  8th
    October 1949.  She appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 25th July 2014, refusing her application for leave to  remain  in
    the UK under Article 8 ECHR on the basis  of  her  family  and  private
    life.  There is also a decision dated 31st July 2014 for removal of the
    Appellant.

The Judge's Finding

 3. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant's four  children  and  from
    one of her grandsons, that she had visited the UK  a  number  of  times
    prior to her last visit in 2005, when she came to see her children, and
    because of events which occurred during that visit, she was  unable  to
    return to Nigeria.  She had ceased to work in  2001.   She  was  living
    with her husband.  All her children had migrated to the UK.  They  were
    settled there with their families.  However, at some point her  husband
    found another woman and that woman moved into the matrimonial home (see
    paragraphs 16 to 17).  It was in these circumstances that the Appellant
    arrived in the UK in 2005, and claimed to have no home  to  return  to,
    and no social or financial support in Nigeria.  She had been  supported
    by her children ever since her arrival.  She had not been a  charge  on
    the state.  She had suffered some ill health, largely  depression  over
    the last three years, but also a broken leg from a fall.  She is now 65
    years of age and cannot rebuild her life back  in  Nigeria.   Moreover,
    she is living in the midst of her family in the UK with their love  and
    support both emotional and practical as well  as  financial  (paragraph
    23).

 4. The judge found that the Appellant could not meet the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE.  She did have two brothers still living in Nigeria as
    well as cousins and families.  She was not without ties there.   It  is
    true she had been involved in the life of a church in this country  but
    "the Appellant would find a church in Nigeria which would  welcome  her
    as a member" (paragraph 34).  She spoke English  and  another  Nigerian
    language.  It is true that she had spent ten years in the  UK  but  she
    spent 55 years of her life in Nigeria.  She also had family in  Nigeria
    and no doubt friends there (paragraph 35).

 5. With respect to Article 8, the judge gave consideration to Section 117B
    of the 2014 Act with respect to the public interest considerations that
    applied in a case such as this.  It was observed that there had  to  be
    particularly close links between adult children and  their  parents  as
    had been established by Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 (see  paragraph  52
    of the determination).

 6. In the case of ZB (Pakistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 834, it was said that  the
    Appellant's close family was in the UK and she "is wholly  or,  largely
    dependent upon her sons in the UK for financial assistance" as well  as
    being dependent upon the family for her day-to-day care.  In that  case
    Aikens LJ stated (at paragraph 47) that "the focus is  on  the  parent,
    the issue must be: how dependent is the older relative on  the  younger
    ones in the UK and does that  dependency  create  something  more  than
    emotional ties?" (see paragraph 53 of the determination).

 7. It was in this context, that the judge held that:

         "This Appellant is wholly financially dependent upon  her  children
         in the UK.  She has lived with one or another  of  them  since  her
         arrival in September 2005.  She has  been  totally  dependent  upon
         them for her accommodation  and  maintenance.   She  has  no  other
         source of income." (See paragraph 54)

 8. The judge went on to hold that:

         "She is very involved in her children's family lives, looking after
         grandchildren  and  entry  into  Qotidian  family  life.   She  has
         rendered such assistance since she came to the UK as a  visitor  in
         2005.  It was not her intention to remain, however, whilst here  it
         became apparent that her husband had found a new woman to share his
         life with and he had moved her in to take the  Appellant's  place."
         (Paragraph 58)

 9. A feature of this appeal was that Mr Hurley, who appeared on behalf  of
    the Respondent Secretary of State, had made it quite  clear  that  "the
    Appellant does appear to be financially dependent on her children"  and
    that "the Home Office position is that the proper application should be
    made and an application should be made outside the UK.   The  Appellant
    should go back to Nigeria and make an application" (see paragraph  60).



10. It was in these circumstances, that the  judge  referred  to  Chikwamba
    [2008] UKHL 40.  In Hayat (Pakistan) [2011] UKUT, a further  refinement
    was added to Chikwamba.  It was now made clear that:

         "In appeals where the only matter weighing on the Respondent's side
         of an Article 8 proportionality balance is  the  public  policy  of
         requiring an application to be made  under  the  Immigration  Rules
         from abroad, that legitimate objective will usually  be  outweighed
         by factors resting on the Appellant's side of the balance."

    The judge expressly referred to this principle (at paragraph  61)  with
    its relevance that the  principle  is  not  confined  to  an  Appellant
    seeking to remain with someone who has settled status in the UK.

11. Yet, the judge was equally clear that the Appellant did  not  have  any
    serious health issues as  to  engage  Article  3  ECHR,  and  that  she
    suffered from depression and had some physical impairment, but this was
    not major (see paragraph 62).

12. Given this background, that the judge concluded that it  would  not  be
    reasonable to remove the Appellant in  order  for  her  to  apply  from
    outside the UK because, "she has no-one to support her in Nigeria,  she
    has no place to live in Nigeria, she would be  largely  left  alone  to
    fend for herself whilst awaiting the outcome of  any  application"  and
    that "there is no certainty" that any  of  her  relatives  there  would
    render her with meaningful assistance (see paragraph 63).   As  against
    that unpredictability in Nigeria, her situation in the UK was that "all
    of her needs are catered for with the financial assistance  offered  by
    her family and the home she has with her son and his family" (paragraph
    64).

13. This led the judge to enquire rhetorically, "what would be the  purpose
    in sending this somewhat vulnerable 65 year old woman back  to  Nigeria
    simply  to  apply  for  entry  clearance  as  a  dependent   relative?"
    (paragraph 65).  The judge asked this  question  in  the  light  of  Mr
    Hurley's clear acceptance  that,  "the  Appellant  does  appear  to  be
    financially dependent on her children" (see paragraph 66).  The  Razgar
    principles would then apply (paragraph 67) and the appeal  was  allowed
    under Article 8.

Grounds of Application

14. The grounds of application state that the judge misconstrued the import
    of Chikwamba and has "embarked on a freewheeling  Article  8  analysis,
    unencumbered by the Rules" (see Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640).

15. On 11th February 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

16. Thereafter, a Rule 24 response was entered by  those  representing  the
    Appellant.

Submissions

17. At the hearing before me on 8th April 2015, Mr  Kandola,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary  of  State,  stated  that  he  would
    fundamentally rely upon Ground 2 of the application in that  the  judge
    had failed to direct himself to the relevant test  outside  the  Rules,
    namely, that compelling  circumstances  would  be  required  before  an
    appeal could be allowed.  He also, however, stated that the judgment in
    Chikwamba had been misunderstood because that judgment only applied  in
    cases where an applicant stood to succeed under the  Immigration  Rules
    in an in-country appeal, but was then being asked to go abroad,  simply
    in order to make an application, which would  in  any  event  otherwise
    have succeeded.  This was not the case here.  The Appellant  could  not
    succeed under any of the Immigration Rules.

18. For his part, Mr Olubisose submitted that the judge did take everything
    into account, and made proper findings  of  fact  in  relation  to  all
    matters that were in issue, and the determination went far  wider  than
    simply the application of the Chikwamba principle that a  person  could
    not be required to go overseas simply in order to make  an  application
    to re-enter.  One only had to  look  at  the  wide  ranging  Article  8
    findings that the judge had made here.

19. In reply, Mr Kandola submitted that the reference to  Chikwamba,  in  a
    way in which it was wholly  unwarranted,  had  tainted  the  Article  8
    analysis, such that the only proper course of  action  was  to  make  a
    finding of an error of law, and to remit the matter back to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a redetermination.

No Error of Law

20. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  judge  does  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.  First, although Chikwamba is referred to, the  judge  does
    not do so in the context of suggesting  that  because  a  rule  of  law
    cannot be met through an in-country appeal by the Appellant,  it  would
    be wrong to ask her to apply from her country of  origin  by  returning
    there.  Rather, the judge uses the case of Chikwamba, to draw attention
    to the principle  that,  even  where  the  Secretary  of  State  has  a
    "legitimate objective" this "will  usually  be  outweighed  by  factors
    resting on the Appellant's side of the balance" in an appropriate  case
    (see paragraph 61).

21. It is the Appellant's case that the Appellant should return to  Nigeria
    and apply from there because it is Mr Hurley, who appeared on behalf of
    the  Respondent,  who  maintained  that,  though  the   Appellant   was
    financially dependent on her children, the appropriate course of action
    for her was to make an application from abroad.  What the  judge  bases
    the decision on are the following  factors.   First,  that  it  is  not
    reasonable to remove the Appellant.

22. Second, that there is no-one to support her in Nigeria.  Third, she has
    no place to live in Nigeria.  Fourth, she would be largely  left  alone
    to fend for herself.  And  fifth,  that  there  is  no  certainty  that
    anybody  there  could  render  her  with  meaningful  assistance   (see
    paragraph 63).  The judge then contrasts this with the  situation  that
    the Appellant enjoys in the UK and observes that this is "where all  of
    her needs are catered for with the financial assistance offered by  her
    family and the home she has with her son  and  his  family"  (paragraph
    64).  It is only in this context that the  judge  asks  the  rhetorical
    question,  "what  would  be  the  purpose  of  sending  this   somewhat
    vulnerable 65 year old woman back to Nigeria simply to apply for  entry
    clearance as a dependent relative" (paragraph 65).

23. The fact is that the Appellant can succeed on Article 8 grounds in  any
    event, and this is a second reason that the judge  gives  for  allowing
    the appeal,  which  exists  entirely  independently  of  any  Chikwamba
    principle.

24. Secondly, the reason why the judge  ultimately  allows  the  appeal  is
    because of Article 8.  The judge refers to ZB (Pakistan)  [2009]  EWCA,
    and notes that, as in that case, this is an Appellant who  is  "wholly,
    or largely dependent upon her sons in the UK for financial assistance",
    and that in such a case, "the focus is on the Appellant, the issue must
    be: how dependent is the older relative on the younger ones in  the  UK
    and does that dependency create something more  than  emotional  ties?"
    (See paragraph 53).

25.  This,  of  course,  is  an  application  directly  of  the   "Kugathas
    principle", which the judge refers to at paragraph 52.  In this regard,
    the judge's findings are quite clear again.  He  observes  that,  "this
    Appellant is wholly financially dependent upon her children in the  UK.
    She has lived with one or another of them since arrival in  2005.   She
    has been totally dependent upon them ..." (paragraph 54).

26. The judge goes on to say that "she is involved in the children's family
    lives,  looking  after  grandchildren  ..."  (paragraph  58).   It   is
    therefore, in this context that the judge  allows  the  appeal  on  the
    basis of freestanding  Article  8  rights,  after  observing  that  the
    Appellant could not succeed under  the  Immigration  Rules,  and  after
    applying the Section 117B consideration in terms of the public interest
    considerations (see paragraphs 43 to 45).  In short, the  determination
    is clear, comprehensive, and one that was entirely open to the judge to
    make.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        15th April 2015

