

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers:
                                                               IA/32514/2013
                                                               IA/38000/2013
                                                               IA/38032/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 23rd April 2014                           |On: 6th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     HR
                                     RK
                                     ZR
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellants:    Mr Muhammad, International Immigration Advisory
Servi
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are all nationals of Pakistan. They are  respectively  a
    mother, father and their son, who is now aged two years old.  They have
    permission to appeal against the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Lever) to dismiss their linked appeals against the  Respondent's
    decisions to refuse to vary their leave to remain and  to  remove  them
    from the United Kingdom pursuant to s47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The background to these appeals is that the  parents  of  the  youngest
    Appellant both came to the United Kingdom in September 2011 with  leave
    to enter under the Points Based System (respectively a Tier 4 (General)
    Student Migrant and her dependent).   The Third Appellant was  born  in
    the UK in 2012.  Both parents were fully complying with  the  terms  of
    that leave when on the 21st January 2013 they made an  application  for
    leave to remain on compassionate grounds on the basis  of  their  son's
    medical condition.

 3. The Third Appellant  has  been  unwell  all  of  his  life.  He  needed
    significant resuscitation at birth and  thereafter  received  intensive
    care support.   By early  2013  he  had  been  diagnosed  with  a  rare
    congenital deficiency of  a  specific  enzyme  called  ADAMTS/13  which
    results in developmental problems and difficulty in coagulating  blood.
    The basis of the applications in January  2013  was  that  he  required
    specialist  medical  intervention  that  would  not  be  available   in
    Pakistan.  The application form expressly states that this is "the only
    factor" under the heading of 'private life' [at 6.18].

 4. The evidence submitted to the  Respondent  consisted  of  a  series  of
    letters from Central Manchester University Hospitals[1].  These  stated
    that the Third Appellant:

    . Was born prematurely at 34 weeks;
    . Was placed in intensive care  on  mechanical  ventilation  immediately
      after birth;
    . Was found to have a very large brain infarction (neonatal stroke)  and
      required large blood transfusions;
    . Has a diagnosis of ADAMTS-13 deficiency and related  micro-angiopathic
      haemolytic anaemia
    . Is likely to have long-term growth and development problems;
    . Will require physiotherapy, speech therapy, occupational  therapy  and
      intervention by other services;
    . Will require close monitoring and blood transfusion every two weeks to
      maintain survival;
    . Was in March 2013 in remission due to the treatment he  was  receiving
      here;
    . Would be unlikely to receive the medical support he needs in Pakistan.

 5. The applications were refused on the basis that there would be suitable
    medical treatment for the Third Appellant in Pakistan.










 6. On appeal the First-tier Tribunal had one additional  letter  from  the
    hospital treating the Third Appellant.  In a letter dated  22nd  August
    2013 Dr Andrew M Will stressed that it would be extremely unlikely that
    there would be any understanding of, or treatment for,  this  condition
    outside of Europe or the United  States:  in  particular  it  would  be
    "extremely  unlikely  that  recombinant  ADAMSTS  -13  would  ever   be
    available in the third world".  This was a reference to a  new  therapy
    currently under development in the UK.


 7. On the basis of the evidence that was before  him,  Judge  Lever  found
    that the Appellants had not shown that the physiotherapy  etc  required
    by the Third Appellant would not be available in Pakistan. He noted the
    unchallenged medical evidence that the child required fortnightly blood
    transfusions to survive but accepted  the  Respondent's  evidence  that
    such transfusions would also be available  in  Pakistan.   He  accepted
    that the treatment that the child now receives in the UK may be  better
    than that he would receive in Pakistan; in  particular  therapies  were
    being developed here which could lead to greater  success  in  treating
    the condition  in  the  future.  However  at  present  those  therapies
    appeared to be "some years off".  These findings  led  Judge  Lever  to
    reject the appeal on  Article  3  grounds.  He  found  that  the  Third
    Appellant was not in the exceptional category referred to  in  D[2]  or
    N[3].  He would benefit from the support of his parents and the medical
    treatment available in Pakistan.

 8. In respect of Article 8 the determination notes that a healthcare  case
    that has failed under Article 3 will not necessarily fail under Article
    8, however those  cases  that  could  succeed  would  likely  be  on  a
    particular set of facts. Unlike the applicants in JA (Ivory Coast)  [4]
    the Respondent had never taken responsibility for the Third Appellant's
    medical treatment. Unlike the case of MM[5], the health  of  the  child
    was  not  one  factor  amongst  many  relevant  considerations  in  the
    proportionality balancing exercise; it was the only consideration.   In
    respect of section 55 of the Borders Act 2007  Judge  Lever  considered
    that it may be in the Third Appellant's best interest to  grow  up  and
    know his own country, culture and society. Weighing all these factor in
    the balance he found that the decision was proportionate.

 9.  Permission  to  appeal  was  sought  by   the   Appellants'   previous
    representatives, Malik Legal Solicitors Ltd.   The  grounds  of  appeal
    were that  there  was  inadequate  consideration  given  to  the  Third
    Appellant's best  interests  and  that  the  determination  "failed  to
    properly assess Article 8". Ground  3  refers  to  "additional  medical
    evidence which is dated the  same  day  as  the  hearing  and  was  not
    considered by the Judge or the Respondent".

10. It was that  latter  point  which  attracted  the  attention  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Roberts in granting permission to appeal:


         "The Judge clearly did consider section 55  and  did  undertake  an
         evaluation of the child Appellant's  best  interests.  It  appears,
         though, the Judge did not take into account two letters written  by
         a Consultant involved in the child's treatment seemingly suggesting
         a cessation in treatment would be fatal "within a matter of  weeks"
         and that suitable treatment might not be available outside  Europe,
         the USA and Canada. It was also suggested there  would  be  a  risk
         from contaminated blood in Pakistan"

11. Judge Roberts was here paraphrasing a letter dated  24th  January  2014
    from Dr Will in which he reiterates his conviction that treatment would
    not be available outside of Europe, the US and Canada, and  states:  "I
    note that in my last letter I had not mentioned that without  treatment
    this condition is fatal within a matter of  weeks".   A  further  brief
    letter dated the  29th  January  2014  from  Dr  Will  states  that  an
    additional problem is that blood supplies in Pakistan are likely to  be
    contaminated with, for instance, dengue fever or malaria, which are not
    problems in the UK.


12. Since permission to appeal was  granted  the  Appellants  have  changed
    their  legal  representatives.  Before  me  Mr  Muhammad  realistically
    conceded that the grant of permission appeared to turn on evidence that
    was simply not before Judge Lever. He accepted that Judge  Lever  could
    not therefore be criticised for not taking this evidence into account.

13. It is unfortunate in the extreme that Dr Will did not make his evidence
    about the extent  of  this  child's  illness  clearer  in  his  earlier
    letters.  It  is  often  the  case  that  doctors,  particularly   when
    communicating with one another, will  think  such  conclusions  obvious
    from the context of the information being communicated, but this is not
    so. Although  the  earlier  letters  certainly  hint  at  a  very  poor
    prognosis for the Third Appellant should his treatment  cease,  it  was
    not spelled out in terms. Had it been Judge Lever would no  doubt  have
    directed his mind to the likelihood of any treatment in Pakistan  being
    found and commenced in time to save this child's  life.  The  issue  of
    contaminated blood was not evidenced at all before  Judge  Lever.  This
    Tribunal is aware that this is a serious problem and that there is good
    evidence available showing the extent of contamination by hepatitis and
    HIV in the blood transfusion supply in  Pakistan,  where  there  is  no
    screening. This evidence must however be  produced  if  the  Appellants
    wish to rely upon it.

14. I find there to be no error of law in the determination of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  It is not a decision that  every  Tribunal  would  have
    reached, but the decision taken reflects the law and the evidence  that
    was before it.  Judge Lever  considered  section  55  and  conducted  a
    proportionality balancing exercise, giving  reasons  for  his  findings
    throughout.  This appeal is grounded wholly upon new evidence that  was
    not before him.  At the conclusion of the hearing before me Mr  McVeety
    undertook to ensure that this up to date evidence is placed before  the
    relevant case-owner. Mr Muhammad indicated that he would  seek  further
    information about the availability, if any, of  suitable  treatment  in
    Pakistan, and provide this, along with evidence  about  blood  supplies
    there,  to  the  Respondent,  who  will  no  doubt   re-examine   these
    applications with the care and sympathy that they demand.


      Decisions

15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and the decision is upheld.


16. The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  pursuant  to  rule
    45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
    I continue that order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               1st June 2014


-----------------------
[1] 25th October 2012 and 13th June 2013 from Dr Victor, Senior Lecturer
and Honorary Consultant Neonatologist, 6th and 15th March 2013 from Dr RF
Wynn, Consultant Paediatric Haematologist and BMT.
[2] [2007] Application no. 30240/96
[3] N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31
[4] JA and ES [2009] EWCA Civ 1353
[5] MM (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ 279

