
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/32685/2014
                                                               IA/32691/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th September 2015               |On 7th October 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           AUDEEN ALETHIA BONNICK
                           THERON jAVIER PLOWRIGHT
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant Secretary of State:   Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms E Norman, instructed by Bassi Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal C M Mather to  allow  the  appeals  of
    Audeen Alethia Bonnick and of her son Theron Javier Plowright  (whom  I
    shall refer to as the Claimants) against decisions to refuse them leave
    to remain under Article 8 ECHR and to  remove  them  to  Jamaica.   The
    applications leading to the decisions had  been  lodged  on  2nd  April
    2012.  They were ultimately refused and the removal decisions  made  on
    30th July 2014.

 2. At the hearing the judge was persuaded that  as  the  applications  had
    been made before the  significant  changes  in  the  Immigration  Rules
    introduced with effect from 9th July 2012 the appeals before  her  fell
    to be decided under Article 8 ECHR without  reference  to  the  amended
    Immigration Rules.  In reaching that view she referred to the  judgment
    of the Court of Appeal in Edgehill v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  402.   She  did
    refer  (at  paragraph  18  of  her  decision)  to  Section  19  of  the
    Immigration  Act  2014  (which   introduced   into   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 Section 117) but she made no  reference
    to the specific elements set out at Section 117B of the 2002  Act.   In
    the application to the Upper Tribunal (which now stands as the  Grounds
    of Appeal) it was in essence asserted that the judge  should  have  had
    regard to the Immigration Rules and should have addressed the  specific
    matters set out at paragraph 117B of the 2002 Act.

 3. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Smart for the Secretary of  State
    said that he sought to amend the grounds to refer specifically  to  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in Singh v SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74,
    which had been handed down after the  application  had  been  made.   I
    considered that this was not in truth a  matter  of  amendment  to  the
    Grounds of Appeal but merely reliance on a more recent judgment of  the
    Court of Appeal which was germane to the issue.  Ms Norman for her part
    quite properly had  no  objection  to  reference  being  made  to  that
    judgment.  Mr Smart said  that  paragraph  15  of  the  decision  under
    appeal, in which the judge had made  it  clear  that  she  relied  upon
    Edgehill as authority for not having regard to the amended  Immigration
    Rules, was  simply  wrong.   It  was  now  clear  from  Singh,  notably
    paragraph 56 of that judgment,  that  the  guidance  in  Edgehill  only
    obtained as regards decisions taken in the two-month period between 9th
    July and 6th September 2012.  The decisions by the Secretary  of  State
    under appeal had been made in July 2014 and therefore the  applications
    fell properly to be considered with reference to the Immigration Rules.



 4. If the matter was considered beyond the Rules, he said,  it  was  clear
    that Section 117B of the 2002 Act had to be taken into account  in  its
    entirety.  This was clear from various decisions of the Upper  Tribunal
    including AM  (S117(B))  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260  (IAC)  and  Forman
    (Sections 117 A - C considerations) [2015] UKUT 412 (IAC).

 5. Ms Norman for her part sought to argue that the judge had not erred  in
    considering Article 8 outside the Rules and that she had made reference
    to some of the items mentioned in Section 117B of the 2002 Act but  had
    to acknowledge that the judge had not said that she gave little  weight
    to private life established whilst the Claimants were in  this  country
    unlawfully.

 6. Having considered the decision and reasons of Judge Mather, the Grounds
    of Appeal and the submissions made I  decided  that  there  were  clear
    errors of law in the decision such that  it  was  required  to  be  set
    aside.  I can quite understand why the judge considered  herself  bound
    by Edgehill, but the position has now been clarified by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Singh. It is clear that Article 8  cases  decided  after  6th
    September 2012, whenever the applications were made, fall to be decided
    firstly with reference to the Immigration  Rules.   There  had  clearly
    been an error in this  regard.   Although  the  judge  made  a  passing
    reference to the Section of the 2014 Immigration Act, which  introduced
    Section 117 of the 2002  Act,  she  did  not  in  substance  apply  the
    elements of Section 117B as she was required to do. That  duty  is  now
    clear from the cases referred to by Mr Smart as  well  as  other  cases
    such as Dube (Sections 117(A) to  Section  117(D))  [2015]  UKUT  00090
    (IAC).

 7. Ms Norman suggested that it might be possible for me to go  on  to  re-
    decide the appeal on the basis of the findings made but on  examination
    it was clear that the judge had not addressed all of the matters  which
    needed to be decided and  a  further  hearing  was  required  when  new
    findings on all issues would need to be made.  In the  circumstances  I
    decided that the appropriate course was to remit  the  appeals  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a further hearing.  Both representatives agreed
    that this would in fact be the appropriate way forward, also bearing in
    mind further levels of appeal.  Having regard to  paragraph  7.2(b)  of
    the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum Chamber  of  the
    Upper Tribunal the appeal will accordingly be remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal under  the  provisions  of  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  in  accordance  with  the
    directions set out below.

Notice of Decision

The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal on both appeals contained  material
errors of law and those decisions are set aside.

I remit the appeals to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions  for  their
reconsideration.

There was no application for an anonymity order and no such order  is  made.



Signed   Date 07 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

   DIRECTIONS (SECTIONS 12(3)(a) AND 12(3)(b) OF THE TRIBUNALS COURTS AND
                            ENFORCEMENT ACT 2007)

1.   The members of the First-tier Tribunal who are chosen to re-decide  the
    appeals should not include Judge of the First-tier Tribunal C M Mather.

2.   None of the findings of Judge Mather are preserved and the appeals  are
    to be heard afresh. The appropriate hearing centre is at Birmingham and
    the time estimate two hours.  No interpreter will be required.

3.   Each party shall serve upon the other and upon the First-tier  Tribunal
    copies of all witness statements and  other  documentation  upon  which
    reliance is sought to be placed at least seven days before the hearing.




Signed   Date 07 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

