

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number IA/32090/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Sheldon Court
                        Determination Promulgated
On 18th June 2014
                            On 1st July 2014
Prepared 24th June 2014

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                  MRS ROZY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Mr A Pipe (Counsel, instructed by HSBS Law Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Mr D Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of India. She arrived in the UK with leave
   to remain as a visitor until the 7th of June 2013. On the 5th of June
   2013 she applied to vary her leave to remain on the basis of her
   relationship with her partner and his children. The application was
   refused for the reasons given in the Refusal Letter of the 10th of July
   2013.

2. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-
   Beale at Sheldon Court on the 14th of January 2014. In a determination
   promulgated on the 29th of January 2014 the appeal was dismissed, the
   reasons given are considered below. The Appellant sought permission to
   appeal in grounds of the 4th of February 2014, permission being refused
   on the 19th of February 2014 but granted by the Upper Tribunal on the
   25th of March 2014.

3. The Appellant's application was made outside the Immigration Rules, it
   is common ground that as the Appellant only entered with leave as visitor
   she could not apply to change the basis of her leave and paragraph EX.1
   of Appendix FM would not apply and the Sponsor does not leave on a basis
   that would permit him to sponsor an application.

4. The Appellant came to the UK on the 22nd of December 2012 and met her
   partner for the first time by the end of the month.  In the determination
   at paragraph 20 it was found that the Appellant came to the UK to marry
   and the suggestion that the Appellant and Sponsor married for the benefit
   of the children was explicitly rejected. The Judge also found that the
   Appellant became pregnant after her application was refused knowing that
   her status in the UK was precarious and that the Sponsor could not
   support an application made by her from abroad and that the situation was
   of their own making. These findings have not been appealed.

5. In paragraph 19 having set out the Sponsor's legal position it was
   suggested that he will not be in a position to obtain indefinite leave to
   remain until 2019. At the hearing it was accepted that he will be in a
   position to make an application sometime in 2016.

6. For the Appellant it was argued that the Judge had set out the domestic
   circumstances as they stood at the hearing and the role played by the
   Appellant in the family life with the Sponsor and his 2 children. These
   are found in paragraphs 14 and 15, however, there was no finding made on
   the role that the Appellant played. It was submitted that there were no
   findings on the children and the effect on them of the removal of the
   Appellant. Visits would not deal with her role as a mother. The
   children's father has to be in the UK to look after them.

7. For the Home Office it was observed that there was little evidence of
   the best interests of the children, there was only the oral evidence of
   the Appellant and Sponsor and a brief letter from the school saying that
   the children would miss the Appellant. In terms of facts she was only
   recently involved and they liked her. In the light of that evidence it
   was submitted that there was no basis for the Judge to find that the
   children's best interests outweighed immigration control, especially in
   the light of the findings in paragraph 20. Paragraph 19 was adequate and
   fuller reasons would not have led to a different result.

8. The Judge could only approach the case on the evidence that was
   provided. The Appellant's representative would have been familiar with
   section 55 of the 2009 Act and that the best interests of the children
   were a primary but not determinative consideration and that those
   interests would have to be weighed in the balance against the Appellant's
   immigration history and the public interest in the maintenance of
   effective immigration control.

9. With those observations in mind and bearing in mind the time that the
   Appellant had had to prepare the case the only independent evidence
   provided to the Tribunal was the letter from the school with the
   observation that the children liked the Appellant and would miss her. The
   Appellant had entered the UK on the 22nd of December 2012 as a visitor
   with the intention of marrying the Sponsor, this finding was clearly open
   to the Judge and has not been challenged.

10. The application was made on the 30th of May 2013 and the Refusal Letter
   is dated the 10th of July 2013. There is no question of there having been
   any delay in the decision making process that could be prayed in support
   of the Appellant. The hearing of the appeal took place ion the 14th of
   January 2014, some 6 months later but the evidence before the Tribunal
   was limited as set out above.

11. It is not necessary that a Judge refers to section 55 of the 2009 Act
   explicitly so long as the best interests of children affected by a
   decision are treated appropriately. Paragraph 20 contains findings about
   the Appellant's approach to the children's position where the claim that
   they married quickly for the children's benefit was explicitly rejected,
   again a finding clearly open to the Judge and not challenged. The Judge
   also found that having entered to get married and circumvent the
   Immigration Rules when faced with the refusal of her application the
   Appellant fell pregnant and this situation is of their own making.

12. In the course of the hearing I raised with Mr Pipe the analogy of a
   person getting their partner pregnant when facing criminal charges in a
   criminal court. It is clear in such a situation that their position is
   precarious and despite the effect that imprisonment may have on family
   life, clearly interrupting it and possibly preventing it from taking
   place at all, that is not a reason for a Judge to avoid imposing a prison
   sentence.

13. It seems to me that the analogy is apt to this situation. It is not a
   question of punishing the children for a situation not of their making.
   The fact is that the Appellant has acted deliberately to evade controls
   that apply. Even if her husband had enjoyed ILR in the UK she could not
   have met the requirements of the Immigration Rules as they had not met
   and he did not meet the earnings threshold in Appendix FM and she had not
   passed the English language test, whatever the genuineness of their long-
   term intentions. The substantive requirements remain outstanding.

14. In summary it is not an error for the Judge to have not mentioned
   section 55 of the 2009 Act by name. It is clear that the Judge had the
   evidence relating to the children in mind but that evidence was from the
   Appellant and Sponsor whose behaviour was clearly questioned and the only
   other evidence was from the school which was very limited. Given their
   behaviour and the clear effort to breach the controls that applied in
   circumstances where the requirements could not be met against the limited
   evidence relating to the children the only conclusion available to the
   Judge was that the requirements of immigration control were not
   outweighed by the best interests of the step-children and the reasons
   given in paragraphs 19 and 20 were more than adequate.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 30th June 2014


