
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/32271/2015
                                                               IA/32274/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th November, 2017                        |                              |
|Corrected, signed an sent                     |21st December 2017            |
|For Promulgation on 20th December, 2017       |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                 mr MD Ashraful alam (First-named appellant)
                    mrs Mst Ismot ara (Second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss C Lichfield of Counsel instructed by J Stifford
Law, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are nationals of Bangladesh.  Mr Alam was born  on  25th
    November 1980 and his wife on 7th October 1981.  They appealed  against
    the decision of the respondent, taken on 18th September 2015,  refusing
    each of them variation of leave to remain to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and their appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge I  A  Lewis  on
    26th October, 2016.

2.   The first-named appellant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in  January
    2010; he obtained successive grants of leave and was last granted leave
    to remain valid from 1st September  2012  to  24th  August  2014.   The
    second applicant arrived in the United Kingdom on 2nd October,2013 with
    a visa conferring leave until 24th August 2014  (the  second  applicant
    has for immigration purposes been treated as the dependant of the first
    applicant and indeed her position in these linked appeals is contingent
    upon that of her husband).

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  P  J  M
    Hollingworth.  At the hearing  before  me  today  Counsel  appeared  on
    behalf of the appellants and Mr Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer appeared on behalf of the respondent.  Miss Lichfield addressed
    me at some length and told me that the judge  had  made  the  following
    errors of law:-

    (i)  He failed to provide adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the  first
         named appellants' evidence and failed to explain  why  it  did  not
         amount to an innocent explanation.


    (ii) The First-tier Tribunal Judge placed too  high  a  burden  on  the
         first-named appellant as to whether he had an innocent  explanation
         and failed to give any reasons at all why the first-named appellant
         should cheat in his examination.  It was, she asserted incumbent on
         him to do so.


    (iii)    Lastly, there were no proper reasons given as to why the first-
         named appellant has not given an innocent explanation.   The  judge
         has simply failed to consider the first-named appellant's  existing
         academic achievements, all taught in English, and make an  analysis
         of them when finding that he did not have an innocent  explanation.



4.   Mr Walker pointed out that at paragraph 18 of the judge's  decision  he
    had recognised and acknowledged the force of submissions made on behalf
    of the appellants, and at  paragraph  20  of  the  decision  concluded,
    looking at all the evidence, that the first named appellant had  failed
    to provide any adequate explanation or bases  to  reject  the  evidence
    relied on by the respondent.

5.   I reserved my decision.

6.   At paragraph 14 of the judge's decision he  said  "The  real  issue  in
    this case is whether or not the Appellant obtained his ETS  certificate
    through the use of a proxy sitter".  At paragraph 17  of  the  decision
    the judge records a submission made on behalf of Counsel to the  effect
    that the first-named appellant  had  provided  the  requisite  innocent
    explanation (per Shehzad [2016] EWCA Civ 615 at paragraph 22  and  also
    paragraph 23).  In this context the judge highlighted  the  first-named
    appellant's academic achievements, both before and after  the  disputed
    test.

7.   The first-named  appellant  had  been  awarded  a  Master  in  Business
    Administration in April 2012 (referred to at page 28 of the appellants'
    bundle), which, it was asserted by Counsel,  suggested a  good  command
    of English; he scored well in the IELTS test in November 2007 (page  32
    of the appellants' bundle), some three years prior to  his  arrival  in
    the United Kingdom, and it was reasonable to assume that at the date of
    the disputed test, some two years  after  his  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom, during which time he had  been  studying,  that  his  language
    would have improved significantly; in this latter regard it was  to  be
    noted that he had obtained a BTEC level 7 Diploma in July  2011  (pages
    30 to 31).  It was submitted that the  first-named  appellant  did  not
    present as a person who needed to cheat in an English  examination  and
    accordingly the evidence was indicative that he would not seek to  fake
    a test.

8.   The judge said at paragraphs 18, 19 and 20:-

         "18. I recognise and acknowledge the force and logic of Mr  Karim's
             submission.  However, I am not  satisfied  on  the  particular
             facts here that what is essentially circumstantial evidence is
             sufficient  in  circumstances   where   the   Respondent   has
             discharged the evidential burden such that it  shifts  to  the
             Appellant.


         19.  I do not  consider  the  First-named  appellant's  ability  to
             advance a narrative account of the  date,  times,  venue,  and
             format of the examinations to advance  his  case.   These  are
             essentially matters of record, and it is  not  suggested  that
             the First-named appellant did not book examinations.  Moreover
             his due attendance at the exams would not preclude the use  of
             a proxy sitter.  Nor do I consider the potential to be able to
             pass an examination without cheating to be  an  inevitable  or
             even significant indicator of not cheating.


         20.  Looking at all of the evidence I find that the Respondent  has
             discharged the evidential burden and that  the  Appellant  has
             failed to provide any adequate explanation or basis to  reject
             the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the  Respondent.    In   such
             circumstances I find  the  Respondent's  decisions  to  be  in
             accordance with the  Immigration  Rules  in  respect  of  both
             Appellants. "

9    Having carefully read the determination I have concluded that what  the
    judge said at paragraphs 18, 19 and 20  was  perfectly  adequate.   The
    respondent discharged the evidential burden and it was for  the  first-
    named appellant to provide an innocent  explanation.   I  believe  that
    looking at the evidence in the round the judge  was  entitled  to  find
    that the first-named appellant's ability to advance a narrative account
    of the date, times, venue and format of the examinations to advance his
    case.  As the judge pointed out they were a matter of  record,  in  any
    event, and there is no suggestion that the  first-named  appellant  did
    not actually book the examinations himself.  Additionally, as the judge
    pointed out, the first-named appellant's attendance at the  examination
    could not possibly preclude his use of  a  proxy  sitter  to  take  the
    examination for him.  The judge considered the first-named  appellant's
    potential to be able to pass  examinations  without  cheating  and  was
    entitled to conclude that that was not a significant indicator  of  him
    not having cheated. The fact that the first-named appellant was awarded
    an MBA Degree in April 2012, passed the IELTS in November 2007 and  was
    awarded a BTEC level 7 Diploma in July 2011, does not mean that he  did
    not use a proxy sitter.  The failure by the  first-named  appellant  to
    provide an innocent explanation means that the  respondent's  decisions
    are in accordance  with  the  Immigration  Rules  in  respect  of  both
    appellants.

10.  I conclude  that  there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of
    Immigration Judge I A Lewis and I uphold it.  The  appellants'  appeals
    are dismissed.

Summary

The appellants' appeals are dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

