
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: Ia/32237/2014
                                                               IA/32241/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On  7 December 2015                  |On 22 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                          tracey nyonma chidi-ubani
                                     e n
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SecretARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Richard Singer, Counsel, instructed by Adam
Bernard Sols.
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willcocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellants appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Oliver) dismissing the appellants'  appeal  against  a  decision
    taken on 26 July 2014 to refuse to grant leave to remain in the UK  and
    to remove the appellants from the UK.

Introduction

 3. The first appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born in  1985.  The  second
    appellant is her infant son, born in 2014. The first appellant  entered
    the UK in 1999 on a visit visa with her father at the  age  of  14.  An
    application for an extension was refused on 3 March  2000  and  further
    applications were refused on 9 February 2001, 15 February 2012  and  20
    May 2013. On 30 June 2014 the  respondent  replied  to  a  request  for
    reconsideration by issuing a section 120 notice and serving a notice of
    liability to removal. Her solicitors made  further  submissions  on  11
    July 2014 arguing that  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  her
    continuing  her  life   in   Nigeria   and   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances.

 4. The Secretary of State accepted the appellant's identity and length  of
    stay in the UK but concluded that requirements of the Immigration Rules
    were not met and there were  no  exceptional  circumstances  so  as  to
    justify a grant of leave outside the Rules.

The Appeal

 5. The appellants appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  first
    appellant attended an oral hearing at Richmond on 18 May 2015. She  was
    represented by Mr Singer. The First-tier Tribunal found that the  first
    appellant did not meet the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Rules which at the time of decision required that she had no ties  with
    the country to which she would have to go if  required  to  leave.  She
    spent her first 14 years in Nigeria and had  lived  close  to  many  of
    Nigerian origin  through  her  aunt  and  the  church  which  plays  an
    important part in her life. She had not lost all her ties.

 6.  The  judge  went  on  to  consider  whether  there  were   exceptional
    circumstances which required  the  judge  to  permit  or  consider  the
    appeals more widely under the Razgar tests. The judge accepted that the
    first  appellant  could  not  be  blamed  for  the  initial  period  of
    overstaying because she was only a child at the time and  accepted  her
    evidence that she was unaware of the early attempts to  regularise  her
    stay. However, by 2003 she was an adult and must have become  aware  of
    her status well before 2010-2011 when it was the particular reason that
    she was refused enrolment at college. The judge  found  that  the  2013
    Immigration Act was relevant to the first appellant's case in terms  of
    her immigration history and the weight that should be attached  to  her
    private life in the UK. The 14 year long residence rule never  assisted
    the first appellant because her  period  of  residence  was  broken  at
    various stages and it was clear that  the  first  appellant  could  not
    prove continuous residence.

 7. The judge briefly considered the best interests of the second appellant
    and found that he was just over one year old, his mother was his  whole
    world and his paramount interest was to be with her, he  had  a  family
    cultural heritage to which he would be returning and he would have  the
    benefit that his  mother  had  the  educational  advantage  of  further
    studies which would hold her in good stead in the employment market  on
    return.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  law.  The  judge  had
    applied the wrong test under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules (the correct
    test was whether there were very significant obstacles to reintegration
    into Nigeria as a single mother with a child born out of  wedlock,  the
    judge incorrectly applied an exceptional circumstances test, the  judge
    failed to consider the best interests of  the  second  appellant  as  a
    primary consideration and the judge failed to  consider  delay  on  the
    part of the respondent as part of any balancing exercise under  Article
    8.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Frankish
    on 28 September 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that  the  judge
    had applied the pre-28 July 2014 276ADE test.

10. In a rule 24 response dated 2 October  2015  the  respondent  submitted
    that the first appellant could not meet either version of the Rules and
    the grounds amounted to no more than a  litany  of  forensic  criticism
    whilst ignoring the basic legal test required.

11. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

12. Mr Singer submitted that the latest application was refused on 26  July
    2014 and HC532 was laid before Parliament on 12 July 2014, coming  into
    force on 28 July 2014. The judge heard the appeal on 18 May 2015  which
    means that the new version of paragraph 276ADE was in force. The stigma
    of having a child out of wedlock is capable  of  amounting  to  a  very
    serious obstacle. There is  no  prior  test  of  exceptionality  before
    considering Article 8; it is normal to look at Article  8  outside  the
    Rules in cases involving a child  and  there  was  sufficient  here  to
    justify consideration outside  the  Rules.  There  was  no  element  of
    primacy given to the best interests of the child; as shown by  the  use
    of the word "finally" in paragraph 16 of  the  decision.  There  was  a
    wealth of evidence that should have been considered by the judge. There
    has been a significant delay. The first appellant turned 18  in  August
    2003 and could have been removed. There was no reasoned  decision  from
    the respondent which granted a right of appeal until  July  2014.  That
    was a 10 year delay and should have been  a  factor  in  the  balancing
    exercise.

13. Ms Willcocks-Briscoe submitted that "no ties" was a stricter  test  for
    the respondent than the current 276ADE test.  There  is  no  background
    evidence to show that there would be very significant obstacles and the
    first appellant's educational achievements could be used to obtain work
    in Nigeria. Religious activity could continue in Nigeria and  there  is
    nothing to show detriment to the appellants. The judge did consider the
    circumstances. The judge did go on  to  assess  the  appellants'  claim
    outside the Rules;  if  the  judge  had  thought  that  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances  that  would  not  have  happened.  The  best
    interests starting point is the parents and then the children should be
    considered. The judge did consider the mother and the best interests of
    the  child.  There  was  no  background  evidence  regarding  lack   of
    facilities in Nigeria. The judge could not make findings about evidence
    that was not there. The appellants' position should have been supported
    by evidence that was easily available. There was nothing to  show  that
    the first appellant was adversely affected  by  delay.  Applicants  are
    expected to return when they have no further right to remain in the UK.
    The decision should stand - any errors are not material.

14. I find that the judge intended to refer to the Immigration Act 2014  in
    paragraph 15 of the decision rather than "2013"  (presumably  referring
    to section 117B of the  2002  Act).  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge
    incorrectly applied a test of exceptionality  in  paragraph  15  before
    application of the Razgar tests. The  judge  made  no  mention  of  the
    correct test, i.e. whether there were compelling circumstances such  as
    to justify a grant of leave to  remain  outside  the  Rules  (SS  Congo
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387). That error clearly influenced the somewhat  brief
    assessment of Article 8 factors including the  best  interests  of  the
    child. I find that the judge materially erred  in  law  when  assessing
    Article 8.

15. In addition, I am satisfied that the judge applied the wrong version of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules because the  new  version  was  fully  in
    force by the date of the oral hearing. The judge did not  consider  the
    "very significant obstacles" test from paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Rules. The first appellant would return to Nigeria as a  single  mother
    with a child born out of wedlock, having lived in the UK since she  was
    14 years old. I reject the submission that the  first  appellant  could
    not possibly meet either version of the Rules. Again, the correct  test
    has simply not been considered and that is a further material error  of
    law.

16. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellants'
    appeals involved the making of an error of law and its decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

17. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

18. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.



Signed   [pic]    Date 20 January 2016

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

