
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/32938/2014
                                                               IA/32945/2014
                                                               IA/32949/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 August 2015                              |On 31 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                               farhama sultana
                           md mahmudul hoque miah
                             maneeah hoque miah
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr D Coleman of Counsel instructed by
       Shamaz & Partners, solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellants

 1. The Appellants are wife, born 1 September  1976  and  husband,  born  3
    January 1974 and their daughter born in  2006.   The  adult  Appellants
    have another child born at the end of 2014.   All  family  members  are
    citizens of Bangladesh.  Both children were born in the United Kingdom.



 2. On 10 September 2006 the wife arrived with leave to enter as a  student
    which leave was extended on a number of occasions, expiring on  31  May
    2014.  On 16 December 2006  her  husband  arrived  with  leave  as  her
    dependant.  His leave has been  extended  in  line  with  hers.   Their
    eldest child was granted leave as a dependant of the wife expiring also
    on 31 May 2014.

 3. In time, on 18 May 2014 the  three  Appellants  applied  through  their
    solicitors for leave to remain on the basis of their private and family
    life in the United Kingdom. There is  no  evidence  that  a  subsequent
    application has been made in respect of the younger child.

The Respondent's Decision

 4. On 31 July 2014 the Respondent refused the applications.  He considered
    the wife's application under paragraph 246ADE of the Immigration  Rules
    and Appendix FM.  She noted that paragraph EX.1. of Appendix FM was not
    applicable because the relevant criteria were not met.  Her application
    was refused insofar as it related to her private life  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules because the wife did  not  meet  the
    length of residence requirements.  Further, the  Respondent  considered
    there was no evidence to show the wife  with  her  husband  and  family
    could not re-integrate into life in Bangladesh and it was not the  case
    the family had no  ties  to  Bangladesh.  So  they  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

 5. The Respondent went on to consider whether  the  wife's  claim  merited
    consideration by  way  of  reference  to  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention outside the Immigration Rules.  She referred to her duty  in
    respect of the Appellants'  children  imposed  by  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  and  noted  the  eldest
    child aged 7 had been born and lived in the United Kingdom since birth.



 6. She referred to the functioning  education  system  in  Bangladesh  and
    asserted there was no evidence the eldest child would not be maintained
    or be safe in Bangladesh.  The disruption to  the  wife's  private  and
    family life was proportionate to  the  legitimate  aim  of  maintaining
    immigration control and removal of the  Appellants  as  a  family  unit
    would not place the Respondent in breach of her duties under Section 55
    of the 2009 Act.

 7. Similar considerations were made and  similar  conclusions  reached  in
    respect of the husband.  The Respondent then went on  to  consider  the
    eldest child and for similar reasons concluded that she and  the  child
    could  return  with  the  parents  to  Bangladesh.   Additionally,  the
    Respondent made directions for removal of the Appellants to  Bangladesh
    by way of directions under Section 47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 8. On 18 August 2014 the Appellants lodged notices of appeal under Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds assert that  para  EX.1.  of  Appendix  FM  was
    applicable because their eldest child had spent at least seven years in
    the United Kingdom.  The Respondent had failed adequately  to  consider
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) in relation to their eldest child and  to  take
    into account relevant factors in her assessment  of  her  duties  under
    Section 55 of the 2009 Act.  The  best  interests  of  the  Appellants'
    child required that she remain in the United Kingdom and  removal  with
    the parents would breach their rights to respect for their private  and
    family life protected by Article 8 of European Convention.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 9. By a decision promulgated  on  1  May  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal K W Brown  dismissed  each  of  the  appeals  under  both  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.  A concession  was  made
    at the hearing that the  Appellants  could  not  meet  the  eligibility
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

10. The wife and the husband gave oral testimony.  The Judge  made  certain
    adverse findings against each of them.

11. Each of the Appellants sought permission to appeal on grounds that  the
    Judge had erred in law in his consideration of the  best  interests  of
    the child Appellant and the  public  interest  factor  referred  to  in
    Sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act.

12. The Judge had further erred in law by narrowing  the  consideration  of
    the child's best interests to a finding that  the  child  would  return
    with the parents as a family  unit.   The  Judge  had  failed  to  give
    adequate and sufficient consideration to the circumstances outlined  in
    the documentary evidence  about  the  mental  health  of  the  paternal
    grandmother and the drug addiction of the paternal uncle.  Additionally
    reference was made to "the current and  ongoing  social  and  political
    instability in Bangladesh" but without any detail.

13. The grounds also referred to the fact that the child had lived  in  the
    United Kingdom since birth and the quality of schooling in  the  United
    Kingdom. The Judge had not taken into account the  different  standards
    of education in the United Kingdom and Bangladesh.  The grounds  assert
    that any adverse findings against the child's  parents  should  not  be
    held to the child's detriment and challenged the Judge's  treatment  of
    the factors referred to in Sections 117A-117B of the 2002 Act.

14. On 23 June  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Landes  granted
    permission to appeal because it was arguable the Judge had erred in his
    assessment of the child's best interests and had not made any  findings
    in relation to the grandmother and uncle.  It was further  arguable  he
    had erred in disregarding certain of the factors referred to in Section
    117B, and in particular Section 117B(vi) that in the case of  a  person
    not liable to deportation, the public interest  does  not  require  the
    person's removal where a person has a genuine and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child and it would not be reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the United  Kingdom.   The  Judge  had  erred
    because earlier in his decision he had already concluded in  effect  at
    para.44 that it was reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United
    Kingdom.  It was only subsequently in his decision that he had gone  on
    to consider Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Submissions for the Appellants

15. Mr Coleman submitted that the cumulative effect of the various  aspects
    of the Judge's determination under challenge and to  which  he  was  to
    refer was such as to amount to a material error of law.

16. At para.44 the Judge had concluded there was no reason  why  the  child
    Appellant would not thrive in Bangladesh.  He submitted  there  was  in
    fact a wealth of evidence that the  child  would  not  thrive  for  the
    reasons identified in the statements made by the wife and husband.   On
    return to Bangladesh the husband would  have  no  employment  or  other
    work.  He had no assets in Bangladesh and no accommodation.  He and his
    family were well integrated into life in the  United  Kingdom  and  the
    child  had  made  considerable  academic  success.   There   would   be
    considerable detriment to  the child, if removed.

17. The Judge had also failed to take into account the findings  in  Azimi-
    Moayed and Others (Decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013]
    UKUT 00197 (IAC) that:

         It is generally in the interests of children to have both stability
         and continuity of social and educational provision and the  benefit
         of growing up in the cultural norms of the society  to  which  they
         belong.

         Lengthy residence in a country other than the state of  origin  can
         lead to development of social, cultural and educational  ties  that
         it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in the absence of  compelling
         reason to the contrary.  What amounts to lengthy residence  is  not
         clear cut but past and present policies have identified seven years
         as a relevant period.

    These aspects were in favour of the child and the Judge had  failed  to
    consider them although he had noted that at the time of the hearing the
    child was 8 years of age.

18. At para.45 of his decision the Judge had not  dealt  with  the  factors
    referred to in Sections 117B(2) and (3) of the 2002 Act identifying the
    desirability  that  individuals  speak  English  and   be   financially
    independent because persons who meet these criteria are less of or  not
    a burden on tax payers and are best able  to  integrate  into  society.
    These were elements in favour of the Appellants.  I noted the Judge had
    considered aspects of these matters at paras.17, 19, 21 and 35  of  his
    decision.

19. Mr Coleman turned to the adverse findings against the husband and noted
    the Judge's comments at para.37 amounted to a very  serious  conclusion
    but nevertheless it should have had no impact on his treatment  of  the
    child Appellant's appeal in relation to Section 55 of the 2009 Act  and
    para 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules.

20. It was evident from  the  opening  words  of  para.38  of  the  Judge's
    decision that in focussing his treatment  of  the  human  rights  claim
    outside the Immigration Rules that he had in mind his  earlier  adverse
    findings against the husband and this had infected his treatment of the
    Article 8 claim.

21. Additionally, the Judge had not referred to the situation of the  child
    Appellant's grandmother and uncle when dealing with  his  consideration
    of the Respondent's duties under Section 55 of the 2009 Act and had not
    referred to para 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules.   In  the  key
    para.44, the Judge had focused on removal of the Appellants as a family
    unit but had not taken into account the  surrounding  circumstances  of
    the wife and husband and in particular their child.

22. Mr Coleman referred at length to the determination  in  JO  and  Others
    (Section 55  duty)  Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT  00517  (IAC).   The  Judge's
    treatment of the child Appellant's claim had  not  been  in  accordance
    with the specific duty imposed by Section 55(3) of the 2009 Act or  the
    over-arching duty to have regard to the need to safeguard  and  promote
    the welfare of any children involved in or  affected  by  the  relevant
    matrix: see JO and Others para.12.  He then turned to paras.8-10 of  JO
    and Others.  The Judge had not made a careful examination  of  all  the
    circumstances of the child Appellant or considered the various  factors
    identified in Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74.  The failure  specifically
    to address the circumstances of the child's grandmother and  uncle  was
    evidence that the Judge did not have a clear idea of what would be  the
    child's circumstances on removal to Bangladesh.  This issue was  before
    the Judge.  It had been referred to in the statements of the  wife  and
    husband and the husband's brother.

23. Mr Coleman further invited me to accept that the circumstances  of  the
    child Appellant were the  same  as  those  of  one  of  the  Appellants
    identified at page 18 of JO and Others because the child Appellant  was
    entitled to succeed under para.246ADE(1)(iv)  and  the  Judge  had  not
    sufficiently considered whether it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
    the child to leave the United Kingdom.

Submissions for the Respondent

24. Mr Wilding opened by noting that the grounds for permission  to  appeal
    did not assert any  error  of  law  dependent  upon  the  Judge's  pre-
    consideration or lack of consideration of paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  I noted the concession which had been made  at  the
    hearing on behalf of the Appellants recorded at page 3 of  the  Judge's
    decision.

25. He then turned to the Judge's treatment of Section 55 of the 2009  Act.
    The key paragraph in the decision was para.44.  The Judge had  made  no
    reference to his earlier adverse findings about the wife  and  husband.
    He had been careful to limit his consideration to the interests of  the
    children and other relevant elements.  He had to consider these in  the
    context of  his  adverse  findings,  in  particular  on  the  husband's
    credibility about whom at para.36 of his decision he had noted  a  lack
    of candour about the available accommodation in Bangladesh.

26. The Respondent's notes of the hearing indicated that no submissions had
    been made against taking as a starting point that it was  in  the  best
    interests of children to be with both  their  parents  referred  to  in
    Azimi-Moayed and Others.  There were no reasons  to  the  contrary  and
    that fact limited the relevance of the other  aspects  of  Azimi-Moayed
    and Others referred to in para.44 of the decision.

27. Mr Wilding referred to the Judge's treatment of  Sections  117B(2)  and
    (3) of the 2002 Act and cited the decision in AM (s.117B) Malawi [2015]
    UKUT 0260 (IAC).  The Upper Tribunal had  noted  that  the  factors  of
    facility in English and financial  independence  referred  in  Sections
    117B(2) and 117(3) of the 2002 Act  are  matters  which  are  important
    because they reinforce  the  statement  in  Section  117B(1)  that  the
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the   public
    interest.  At para.18 the Upper Tribunal had noted  that  an  applicant
    "could obtain no positive right to a grant  of  leave  to  remain  from
    either s.117B(2) or (3), whatever the degree of his fluency in English,
    or the strength of his financial resources".

28. The Judge had made findings of fact and a proper  assessment  that  the
    Appellants could return as a family unit  to  Bangladesh.   He  had  at
    para.36  of  his  decision  rejected  the   account   of   the   family
    accommodation available in Bangladesh.   The  Appellants  had  made  no
    material challenge to the facts as found by the Judge and  the  grounds
    for appeal amounted to a haphazard complaint which was no more  than  a
    disagreement with the Judge.

29. The Appellants' leave  throughout  had  been"precarious".   The  wife's
    leave was as a student with her husband and child as dependants so that
    little weight should be given to any private life  established  in  the
    United Kingdom as provided in Section 117B(5) which principle had  been
    fore-shadowed by para.5 of the extract from Azimi-Moayed and Others set
    out at para.44 of the Judge's decision.  At paras.43-46 the  Judge  had
    made an adequate assessment of  the  proportionality  of  the  decision
    which involved a consideration of the duties imposed by Section  55  of
    the 2009 Act and importantly other matters.  If the adverse credibility
    findings are accepted then the submissions for the Appellants based  on
    JO and Others were not relevant because the Appellants would be removed
    as a family unit.  The decision should be upheld.

Response for the Appellants

30. Mr Coleman replied that any credibility findings at paras.35 and 36  of
    the Judge's decision were not made with reference to the issue  of  the
    child Appellant's grandmother and uncle and that evidence was  integral
    to the assessment of the best interests of the child and the assessment
    of the proportionality of the Respondent's decision to remove.

31. The Appellants had  never  been  a  burden  on  the  public  purse  and
    consequently were to be considered as financially independent, a factor
    which the Judge had been obliged to take into account.

32. The concession made for the Appellants in relation to para.276ADE(1) of
    the  Immigration  Rules  had  been   limited   to   eligibility.    The
    consideration of the duties under Section 55 of  the  2009  Act  should
    have been inextricably linked to a consideration whether the Appellants
    met the requirements of para.276ADE(1)(iv).  And indeed  the  scope  of
    the concession was evidently limited in  view  of  the  fact  that  the
    Respondent had made submissions in relation to Appendix FM as  recorded
    by the Judge at  para.27  of  his  decision.   His  assessment  of  the
    eligibility of each of the Appellants in relation to  Appendix  FM  was
    deficient, comprising a single sentence, being para.34 of the decision.
     The Judge although properly informed,  particularly  about  the  child
    Appellant's  grandmother  and  uncle,  had  not  conducted  a   careful
    examination of all the relevant information and  factors  in  assessing
    the child's interests and consequently had not conducted  a  scrupulous
    analysis of the situation as outlined at para.11 of JO and Others.  The
    decision should be set aside.

33. Both parties confirmed that in the event that I found a material  error
    of law they were not in a position to proceed to a re-hearing  and  the
    parties would require time to prepare.

Findings and Consideration

34. At paras.11 and 24 the Judge noted the  child  Appellant's  grandmother
    was said to have suffered from paranoid schizophrenia and diabetes  and
    was a victim of domestic violence perpetrated by the child  Appellant's
    uncle who was a drug addict and resistant to assistance  (para.25)  but
    when he came to consider the reasons  for  dismissing  the  appeals  he
    failed to make any reference to these matters.  Notwithstanding  it  is
    evident from paras.29 and 32 of the decision that the Judge had in mind
    that on return the Appellants would go to the family home occupied,  at
    least in part,  by  the  grandmother  and  the  uncle.   There  was  no
    consideration whether  the  Appellants  could  without  undue  hardship
    relocate elsewhere in Bangladesh, notwithstanding the  Judge's  finding
    at para.44 that both wife and husband had been educated to a relatively
    high level in Bangladesh.

35. If  the  Appellants  were  to  return  to  the  family  home  then  the
    circumstances of the grandmother and uncle  would  be  crucial  to  any
    assessment under Section 55 of the 2009 Act which in turn would  go  to
    the assessment of the proportionality of the decision under  Article  8
    of the European Convention: see Zoumbas.  At para.46 the  Judge  failed
    to conduct an adequate balancing exercise, including giving  sufficient
    reasons for his conclusion.  In line with the learning in  Azimi-Moayed
    and Others that the starting point is that it is in the best  interests
    of children to be with both their parents unless there are  reasons  to
    the contrary, the Appellants had  given  reasons  to  the  contrary  as
    mentioned by  Mr  Coleman  but  the  Judge  did  not  address  them  in
    sufficient detail.

36. The Judge had noted that the Appellants were financially  dependent  on
    the husband's brother.  There was no finding  as  to  the  facility  in
    English of the wife and husband.  The Judge dealt  with  the  issue  of
    facility in English of the child Appellant at  para.44.   In  assessing
    the financial independence or otherwise of the wife and the husband, it
    would be necessary to take into  account  comments  at  para.18  of  AM
    (s.117B) Malawi promulgated a few days  before  the  Judge  heard  this
    appeal.  Para.18 states:-


         The mere fact that the evidence in a  particular  case  establishes
         fluency or financial independence to some degree, does not  prevent
         the Respondent from relying upon these matters as  public  interest
         factors weighing against the claimant.  The Respondent  would  only
         be prevented from doing so if a claimant could demonstrate fluency,
         or financial independence, to the level of the requirements set out
         in the Immigration Rules.  ....


37. Subsequent to  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Upper
    Tribunal has promulgated the determination in  Bossade  (ss.  117A-D  -
    inter-relationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 00415 (IAC)  which  although
    subsequent to the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal explains  what  is
    and has been the jurisprudence in respect of the  relationship  between
    the Immigration Rules and Sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act.

38. For the reasons already given, I find the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal contains material errors of law such  that  it  cannot  stand.
    However, there is no reason why the findings of fact in paras.35 and 36
    of the decision should not stand with the proviso that the findings  in
    para.36 stand limited to the lay-out of  the  family  accommodation  in
    Bangladesh and its impact on the husband's credibility  as  a  witness.
    Save as aforesaid the appeal will  need  to  be  heard  afresh  in  its
    entirety.

39. The decision has been set aside. Section 12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007 allows for the case  to  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal with directions or for the Upper  Tribunal  to  re-
    make it. Having regard to Practice Statement 7.2(b) and the nature  and
    extent of the fact finding required, I conclude the decision should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to decide afresh.

40. I noted that no submissions for the Appellants had  been  made  to  the
    Judge in relation to any consideration of the Section 55  of  the  2009
    Act duties.  Further there was no reference  to  para.276ADE(1)(iv)  of
    the Immigration Rules, only to para. EX.1. of Appendix FM.  If  in  the
    light of this decision the Appellant may wish to  consider  withdrawing
    the concession but if so, adequate written notice must be given to  the
    Respondent.

Anonymity

41. There had been no request for an anonymity direction before the  First-
    tier Tribunal and no request  for  anonymity  was  made  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Having considered the appeal I find that  anonymity  is  not
    necessary.


NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained errors  of  law  such
    that it should be set aside in part and to that extent  the  appeal  of
    each of the Appellants is allowed.

    Anonymity order not made.


Signed/Official  Crest                                            Date   11.
viii. 2015




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
