
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/32634/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 1 December 2017                    |On 23 January 2018                    |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                           mr brian kimani kibata
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Corban, Solicitor of Corban Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya, born  on  11  March  1993  and  he
    entered the United Kingdom on 3 September 2005 at the age of  12  years
    as a student with limited leave to remain and  which  was  periodically
    extended.  On  30  September  2015  he  submitted  an  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain on the  grounds  of  long  residence.   That
    application was refused on 1 October 2015 (on  the  same  date  as  the
    application was received) under paragraph  276B  and  276ADE.   It  was
    concluded that although he claimed to have been absent for a period  of
    533 days in the ten years preceding his application, on  examining  his
    passport it was evident that he had been absent for  a  period  of  537
    days.  His passport evidenced further absences from the UK in the  form
    of entry stamps to the UK dated 8 January 2007, 25 September  2011  and
    10 December 2012 as well as the United  States  entry  stamp  dated  20
    March 2008 and a Kenyan exit stamp dated 8 August 2012.   These  stamps
    were said to be for dates that he had claimed to be in the UK.  It  was
    considered that he must therefore have been absent from the UK on these
    dates which brought his total days of absence from the UK to 542  days.
    He therefore failed to meet the requirements of paragraph  276B(i)  and
    176A(vi) of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The Secretary of State also noted from  his  immigration  history  that
    following his leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant valid  from
    3 September 2012 to 24 July 2013 he claimed to have left the UK  on  26
    August 2013 after his leave to remain had expired.   He  then  made  an
    application for entry clearance to the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant
    on 22 August 2013, more than 28 days after his leave had expired on  24
    July 2013.  Additionally, he claimed to have been present in the UK  on
    27 August 2013.  This was also the date that his application for  entry
    clearance was made and therefore as stated  above  he  must  have  been
    outside the UK to apply for the entry clearance visa.  His  application
    dated 22 August 2013 was therefore invalid.  It was considered that  on
    22 August 2013 his previous visa had expired more than 28 days prior to
    his application  for  entry  clearance  and  therefore  his  continuous
    residence was considered to have been broken as he  was  without  valid
    leave from 24 July 2013 until 3 September 2013.

 3. The matter came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Mulholland  on
    31 October 2016 and he dismissed the appeal on 21 November 2016.

 4. An application for permission to appeal was made on the basis that  the
    respondent's  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions   entitled   'Long
    Residence' made clear provision for the exercise of discretion where an
    applicant exceeded the total number of absences of 540 days in the  ten
    year period preceding an application for settlement particularly  where
    the excess is not significant.  In this appeal  the  respondent  stated
    that the appellant's total absence was 542 days which is only two  days
    above the 540 allowed under the  Rules.   The  grounds  for  permission
    referred to pages 10 and 11 of the Home Office  Policy  and  which  was
    said to be attached to the grounds and marked.  It was clear  therefore
    that the respondent  ought  to  have  considered  the  content  of  the
    Immigration Directorate Instructions and give  reasons  why  discretion
    could not be exercised in favour of the appellant.

 5. It was submitted that the Immigration Judge erred in law because he did
    not consider the discretion provided  in  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions on Long Residence and did not address the issue of whether
    the discretion was considered at  all  by  the  respondent  and  if  so
    whether the discretion ought to have been exercised differently.   This
    was part of the function of the Immigration Judge.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the reasoning for the Secretary of State not exercising her  discretion
    and the exercise of  discretion  under  the  Policy  Guidance  on  Long
    Residence in all the circumstances should have been addressed.

Rule 24 Response

 7. The respondent opposed  the  appellant's  appeal  and  in  summary  the
    respondent submitted that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal directed
    himself appropriately.  There was no basis on  which  the  judge  could
    have intruded into the respondent's exercise of discretion and as noted
    in Ukus (discretion: when reviewable) [2012] UKUT 00307 the only  basis
    upon which a judge may intervene on an issue over  discretion  is  when
    the decision-maker had failed to exercise discretion.

 8. It was clear from the refusal letter that the  exercise  of  discretion
    was considered but not applied in the appellant's favour because of the
    issues in the application.  The fact that issues were  later  found  in
    favour of the appellant did not  undermine  the  discretion  which  was
    properly exercised by the respondent.  Because the discretion  was  not
    applied in the appellant's favour did not establish that the respondent
    failed to exercise discretion.

 9. As noted by the judge  the  history  of  absence  as  provided  by  the
    appellant was  incorrect  and  the  appellant  failed  to  provide  any
    explanation as to why he had not included the missing  dates  from  the
    passport (determination 17-24).  As such it was open to  the  judge  to
    refuse the appellant's application and there was no basis to  challenge
    the decision.  The grounds failed to establish what statutory power the
    judge had for exercising discretion on behalf of the respondent.

The Hearing

10. At the hearing before me Mr Corban submitted that  the  respondent  had
    accepted that the appellant was only over the 540 days by two days.   I
    raised the issue of the rights of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge and Mr Corban confirmed that it was the same day application made
    on 1 October 2015 which would have been  after  the  amendment  to  the
    rights of appeal under the Immigration Act 2014.  Mr  Corban  submitted
    that the Secretary of State did not consider  discretion  properly  and
    omitted to consider whether the appellant was a minor when much of  the
    time had been spent in the UK and had not considered  the  reasons  for
    the absences.  For example five of the days  were  when  he  was  on  a
    school trip.  The Secretary of State needed to take  into  account  the
    Long Residence policy.  The judge did not consider  whether  discretion
    was exercised properly or at all.  The relevant factors  had  not  been
    taken into account.  The appellant had spent all his relevant life here
    and when he had left on holiday these had been for trips to  Sweden  to
    visit his parents.  He suggested the matter should be remitted  to  the
    respondent for reconsideration of her decision.  This matter  was  also
    relevant to the assessment under Article 8.

11. Mr Nath agreed that the application was made after the wholesale change
    to the rights of appeal under the Immigration Act.  He acknowledged the
    decision of Zheng IA/00094/2015 IAC but said that this was not  on  all
    fours with this case.  There was no basis to intrude into the  exercise
    of discretion.  The Secretary of State had considered discretion and he
    relied on the Rule 24 notice.  The  judge  had  considered  the  matter
    adequately and I was referred to  paragraphs  37,  38  and  44  of  the
    decision.  It was clear the judge had not just glanced at the facts  in
    this case but had taken careful note of all the  relevant  issues.   If
    one considered the judge's findings under Section 117B,  looking at the
    appeal in the round there was no challenge to the Article 8 claim.

12. Mr Corban  responded  that  the  appellant  had  been  deprived  of  an
    administrative review decision and this was a breach of his  Section  6
    rights.  The court  did  have  jurisdiction  to  consider  whether  the
    discretion had been exercised appropriately.  The Rules in relation  to
    paragraph 276B were a starting point and the Secretary of State had not
    considered her policy correctly.  It should be  evident  that  she  had
    considered her discretion properly and  that  was  the  point  made  in
    Zheng.  The Secretary of State  had  not  addressed  it  properly.   He
    disagreed and found that Zheng did assist.

Conclusion

13. I have carefully considered the evidence submitted.  There were various
    points in the appeal that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  found  in  the
    appellant's favour, not least that when his leave  was  granted  on  23
    August 2013 that the leave granted was valid because the appellant  was
    indeed outside the United Kingdom when  he  made  his  application  for
    leave.  As the judge stated, at paragraph 12:

         "As before, in order for this appellant to be successful he had  to
         demonstrate  that  he  was  outwith  the  UK  when  he   made   the
         application.  The respondent has alleged that the appellant was not
         outside the United Kingdom when his leave was granted on 23  August
         2013.  This is because the appellant declared  in  his  application
         that he left the UK on 26 August 2014.  The appellant  now  asserts
         that he left the United Kingdom on 14 July 2013 and not  26  August
         2013.  He left on 14 July 2013 to make  an  application  for  entry
         clearance in Geneva.  He asserts that he was fingerprinted  at  the
         British Embassy at Geneva on 23 August  2013.   The  appellant  has
         produced an e-ticket receipt which could  be  found  in  the  first
         bundle which I hereinafter call 'AB1' at pages 57-60.   This  shows
         that the appellant and his parents booked a flight  leaving  London
         Heathrow on 14 July 2013.  This information was not  provided  with
         the application and was not before the decision maker."

14. The judge went on in the remainder part of that paragraph to find  that
    the appellant had indeed left the UK on 14 July 2013  and  had  made  a
    valid application.

15. This however in turn raises two points which are quite evident from the
    decision.  The first is that the dates given by the  appellant  to  the
    Secretary of State in the application were not reliable and,  secondly,
    the appellant clearly asserted that he  had  left  the  United  Kingdom
    earlier than declared in his application to  the  Secretary  of  State.
    His leave expired on 24 July but he claimed in his appeal that  he  had
    left ten days earlier on 14 July 2013.  Thus there were a  further  ten
    days when the appellant was not in the UK bearing  in  mind  the  judge
    accepted that he had indeed left on 14 July.

16. The judge did not  accept  that  leave  had  been  broken  because  the
    appellant did not have leave for the  period  of  24  July  2013  to  3
    September 2013 but it remains the case that the appellant had been  out
    of the UK for a further ten days than claimed in his  record.   As  the
    judge stated at paragraph 17:

         "The appellant provided information about absences from the  UK  in
         form SET (LR), a copy of which can be  found  in  the  Home  Office
         bundle.  He accepts that some of the information recorded there  is
         wrong or incomplete: for example he now asserts that he left the UK
         on 14 July 2013 which is not recorded there.  Instead he records he
         left on 26 August 2013.  The record provided by  him  therefore  is
         unreliable."

17. The respondent also noted that the appellant's passport  stamps  showed
    further absences from the UK in the form of  entry  stamps  to  the  UK
    dated 8 January 2007, 25 September 2011 and 10 December 2012 as well as
    the United States entry stamp dated 20 March 2008  and  a  Kenyan  exit
    stamp dated 8 August 2012.  According to the  respondent  these  stamps
    are the dates he claims to have been in the UK.

18. The judge proceeded to note at paragraph 18:

         "The schedule of absences found in AB1/54-56  and  AB2/4-5  records
         that he was in the UK from 29 October 2006 until 26  January  2007.
         The appellant has failed to address this issue in any way.   Having
         examined the photocopy of the passports I could only  find  a  date
         stamp on 8 January 2008 for entry at Heathrow.  It is possible that
         the respondent had made a typographical error here.  Even  if  that
         were so, the appellant declared in the application form and in  the
         schedule of absences that he left the UK on  9  December  2007  and
         returned on 4 January 2008 [my emphasis] [AB1/14] AB2/4].   He  has
         not provided an explanation why there  is  an  entry  stamp  for  4
         January 2008."

19. Therefore the judge clearly identifies a further  four  days  when  the
    appellant is not in the UK.

20. The judge, in addition, identifies the following:

         "19.     The respondent asserts that there is an  entry  stamp  for
             the US on 20 March 2008 yet his application  records  that  he
             was present in the UK from 24 Feb 2008 until  26  March  2008.
             Again, no explanation has been forthcoming.

         20.      According to the respondent there is an entry stamp to the
             UK dated 25 September  2011.   According  to  the  information
             supplied by the appellant in his application he was in the  UK
             from 3 September 2011 until 28 October 2011.   Again,  he  has
             failed to provide an explanation to account for this.

         21.      There is an entry stamp to the UK on 10 December 2012  yet
             his application records that he was in the UK from 2  December
             until 26  December  2012.   Again,  no  explanation  has  been
             forthcoming.

         22.       A  Kenyan  exit  stamp  is  dated  8  Aug  2012  yet  his
             application records that he was in the UK from  10  July  2013
             until  26  Aug  2013.   Again,   no   explanation   has   been
             forthcoming.

         23.      I am satisfied that the appellant has  failed  to  explain
             why his passport has entry and exit stamps for dates he claims
             to have been in the UK.   He  did  not  add  anything  to  his
             statement which is in broad terms and makes  no  reference  to
             the respondent's points made in the refusal letter.  I am  not
             satisfied that the appellant  has  provided  an  accurate  and
             reliable account of the dates he has been outwith the UK.  His
             mother has provided  a  statement  at  AB1/23-25.   Again,  no
             details have been provided as to the dates the  appellant  was
             absent from the  UK  and  all  that  is  stated  is  that  the
             appellant has not spent a total of 18 months outwith  the  UK.
             I am of the view that more is required to address  the  points
             made by the respondent in the refusal letter.   Accordingly  I
             am not satisfied that the appellant has discharged the  burden
             of proof to establish that he has not been absent from the  UK
             for a period less than 540 days.  Accordingly this part of his
             claim must fail."

21. Clearly the judge was not satisfied that the appellant had provided  an
    accurate and reliable account of the dates he has been outside  the  UK
    and although his mother provided a statement no details  were  provided
    as to the dates the appellant was absent from the UK.  The judge was of
    the view that more was required to  address  the  points  made  by  the
    respondent in the refusal letter and in sum

             "accordingly he was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had
             discharged the burden of proof to establish that  he  had  not
             been absent from the UK for a period less than  540  days  and
             that his claim should fail".

22. It was open to the judge to conclude that  there  were  numerous  dates
    that had not been accounted for by the appellant and that  no  reliable
    record had been  presented.   On  a  careful  analysis  of  the  record
    supplied by the appellant t is clearly littered with  inaccuracies  and
    this was as set out by  the  judge.   Indeed  the  record  was  altered
    subsequent to the application and in the appeal evidence  presented  to
    the judge.  It is clear that the altered record would, however,  add at
    least a further ten days' absence from the  UK  and  this  is  just  an
    example.

23. In the light of the above despite the judge findings in the appellant's
    favour, the judge simply did not accept the  days  claimed  in  the  UK
    because the record provided did not accord with the datestamps.

24. Of critical importance is that contrary to the appeal grounds that  are
    recorded in the decision the  application  was  only  challengeable  on
    human rights grounds.  It was not challengeable on the grounds  of  the
    Secretary of State exercising her discretion or on the  basis  that  it
    was not in accordance with the law.

25. The judge makes no reference to  the  exercise  of  discretion  by  the
    Secretary of State but the decision letter clearly  states,  "as  noted
    above and as you were without lawful leave from 24 July  2013  until  3
    September 2013 it is considered that it is not appropriate to  exercise
    discretion in your circumstances".  The  Rule  24  notice  or  response
    makes the point that albeit that the Secretary of  State's  finding  on
    that matter was overturned  it  did  not  mean  that  the  exercise  of
    discretion was not considered.  I have noted the case of Zheng which is
    not reported and not binding on me, but nonetheless in the view of  the
    particular circumstances of this case and the essential findings of the
    judge, albeit there may have been some scope for the judge  to  address
    the exercise of discretion by the Secretary of State which may in  turn
    affect the proportionality exercise under Article 8, there was no error
    of law in  the  judge's  decision  to  refuse  to  interfere  with  the
    Secretary of State's decision in this particular case.  In the light of
    the findings by the judge, particularly with regard to the state of the
    record put before the Secretary of State and before the judge  himself,
    I am not satisfied that there are any grounds on which to challenge the
    exercise of the discretion by the  Secretary  of  State.   She  clearly
    addressed her mind to this issue and there was no indication  that  the
    Secretary of State did not consider the policy.

26. The appellant did challenge the decision on Article 8 grounds but  this
    was not strictly  subject  to  the  grant  of  permission  for  appeal.
    However in the light of the very full findings by the judge in relation
    to paragraph  276B  and  the  detailed  assessment  made  by  him  from
    paragraphs 29 to 49, specifically at paragraph 37, the judge  addressed
    the question of the length of time of the appellant in the UK and  that
    he had spent the majority of his life  in  Kenya.   The  judge  rightly
    applied Section 117B and AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC)  and
    it  was  open  to  him  to  find  that  the  refusal  decision  was   a
    proportionate interference into the appellant's private life.

Notice of Decision

27. As such I find that there is no error of law in the  decision  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed           Helen Rimington                         Date  10th  January
    2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


