
[pic]
IAC-AH-co-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/32947/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd October 2014                       |On 7th November 2014            |
|Prepared                                   |                                |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                            Mr Shahmeelsamad Khan
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Ms Logan, Counsel
For the Respondent:        Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  17th  July  1987.   The
    Appellant had applied for a residence card as confirmation of  a  right
    of residence in the United Kingdom on  the  grounds  that  he  was  the
    unmarried partner of a qualified EEA national.   That  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State by letter dated 20th July 2013.   The
    Secretary of State considered that without further convincing  evidence
    about the Appellant's relationship it was not accepted that he was in a
    durable relationship  for  the  purpose  of  the  EEA  Regulations  and
    consequently refused his application under Regulation 8(5).  They noted
    that even if a person is held to be in a  "durable"  relationship  they
    are only entitled to a residence card as an extended family  member  if
    it is considered appropriate to issue the card.  The Secretary of State
    indicated that she did not believe  that  the  Appellant  had  provided
    enough evidence to allow discretion to be exercised in the  Appellant's
    favour and therefore would not issue a residence card and as  a  result
    the  application  was  refused  under  Regulation   17(4)(b)   of   the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. The appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  came  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Malik on 12th December 2013 and  in  a
    determination promulgated on 23rd December 2013 the Appellant's  appeal
    was allowed under the 2006 Regulations.

 3. The Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal.   Those  Grounds  of
    Appeal contended that the correct approach for  the  Immigration  Judge
    was firstly to consider the terms of Regulation 8  and  thereafter  the
    Secretary of State's refusal to exercise  the  discretion  inherent  in
    Regulation 17(4).  It was contended that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    had not followed the appropriate two-stage test.

 4. On 14th January  2014  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Appleyard granted permission  to  appeal  noting  that  the  Respondent
    contends that in allowing the appeal the judge had only considered  the
    terms of Regulation 8 and had failed to  deal  with  the  Secretary  of
    State's refusal to  exercise  the  discretion  inherent  in  Regulation
    17(4).

 5. The  Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed  Counsel  Ms  Logan.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    Harrison.  I note that this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  but
    for  the  benefit  of  convenience  to  all  parties   throughout   the
    proceedings and to ensure continuity of reference Mr Khan  is  referred
    to herein as the Appellant and the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department as the Respondent.

The Factual Issues

 6. The Appellant claims that he is in a durable relationship with Raimonda
    Zlabiene.  The history of their relationship is set out at paragraph  8
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination in some  detail.   The
    Appellant contends that he has entered into an Islamic marriage with Ms
    Zlabiene who was not yet divorced  from  her  husband  and  that  three
    months after the divorce they married on 25th September 2012  and  made
    application for a residence card two days later.  It  appears  that  Ms
    Zlabiene has eight children by her former marriage five of whom are  of
    age and of those that are under age two daughters of Ms  Zlabiene  live
    with him and her and one son with their father.  Ms Zlabiene was  found
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge to be a credible witness.

The Regulations

 7. Regulation 8 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 states:-

         "8.  (1) In these Regulations  "extended  family  member"  means  a
                  person who is not a family member of an EEA national under
                  regulation 7(1)(a), (b)  or  (c)  and  who  satisfies  the
                  conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

             (2)  A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
                  person is a relative of an EEA national, his spouse or his
                  civil partner and-

                  (a)  the person is residing in an EEA State in  which  the
                      EEA national also resides and is dependent  upon  the
                      EEA national or is a member of his household;

                  (b)  the person satisfied the condition in  paragraph  (a)
                      and is accompanying the EEA national  to  the  United
                      Kingdom or wishes to join him there; or

                  (c)  the person satisfied the condition in paragraph  (a),
                      has joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and
                      continues to be dependent upon him or to be a  member
                      of his household.

             (3)  A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
                  person is a relative of an EEA national or his  spouse  or
                  his civil partner and, on serious health grounds, strictly
                  requires the personal care of the EEA national his  spouse
                  or his civil partner.

             (4)  A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
                  person is a relative of an EEA national and would meet the
                  requirements in the immigration rules  (other  than  those
                  relating to entry clearance) for indefinite leave to enter
                  or remain in the United Kingdom as a dependent relative of
                  the EEA national were the EEA national  a  person  present
                  and settled in the United Kingdom.

             (5)  A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
                  person is the partner of an EEA  national  (other  than  a
                  civil partner) and can prove to the decision maker that he
                  is in a durable relationship with the EEA national.

             (6)  In these Regulations "relevant EEA  national"  means,  in
                  relation to an extended family member,  the  EEA  national
                  who is or whose spouse or civil partner is the relative of
                  the extended family member for the  purpose  of  paragraph
                  (2), (3) or (4) or the EEA national who is the partner  of
                  the extended family member for the  purpose  of  paragraph
                  (5)."

    Regulation 17(4) states:-

         "The Secretary of State may issue a residence card to  an  extended
         family member not falling within regulation 7(3) who is not an  EEA
         national on application if-

         (a)  the relevant EEA national in relation to the  extended  family
             member is a  qualified  person  or  an  EEA  national  with  a
             permanent right of residence under regulation 15; and

         (b)  in all the circumstances it appears to the Secretary of  State
             appropriate to issue the residence card."

The Issue

 8. When this matter last came before me I found that there was a  material
    of error law and maintained a finding of the First-tier  Tribunal  that
    the Appellant was in a durable relationship.  That position is accepted
    by the Secretary of State.   I  gave  directions  that  the  matter  be
    reheard by way of submissions only limited to argument  as  to  whether
    the Appellant should or should not be granted  an  EEA  residence  card
    pursuant to Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations.  It  is  on  that
    basis that this matter reappears before me.  The legal  representatives
    are the same as appeared previously before me when I found  a  material
    error of law namely Ms Logan appears for the Appellant and Mr  Harrison
    on behalf of the Secretary of State.

 9. There are no further documents lodged.

Submissions

10. Mr Harrison advises me that the starting point is my  findings  on  the
    error of law hearing and that I preserved  Judge  Malik's  findings  of
    fact.  He accepts that the Appellant's Sponsor is still  working  as  a
    security officer for the same firm that she was working previously  and
    consequently that the appellant's spouse is an EEA national  exercising
    treaty rights as at the date of the rehearing.

11. He consequently accepts that the appellant meets  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 17(4)(a) and that the only matter  remaining  outstanding  is
    whether or not in all the circumstances it appears to the Secretary  of
    State appropriate to issue the residence card i.e. he acknowledges that
    this is a matter of discretion.   In  such  circumstances  Mr  Harrison
    relies solely on the Notice of Refusal.  He notes that the Appellant is
    an overstayer and that this now alone presents the basis upon which the
    Secretary of State opposes the appeal.  He submits that this is someone
    who should abide by the Immigration Rules, that has  not  done  so  and
    queries the point as to  whether  or  not  in  such  circumstances  the
    Appellant is someone to whom discretion should be  exercised  in  their
    favour.

12. Miss Logan points out that the Regulation 17(4)(b) makes  no  reference
    as to whether the Appellant is or is not an overstayer but  points  out
    that  at  the  time  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  gave   due
    consideration to this appeal there was an exhaustive examination of the
    circumstances and all three witnesses were cross-examined and found  to
    be credible.  It was accepted  that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  have
    maintained a household of two adults and two  children  for  some  four
    years.  Further  she  submits  that  Judge  Malik  found  that  it  was
    important to take into account the fact that the Appellant  had  looked
    after the Sponsor when she was ill, that the  Sponsor  is  working  and
    paying all of the Appellant's living expenses  and  that  there  is  no
    suggestion that the Appellant has sought  public  funds.   She  further
    points out that he has been in the UK now for  some  nine  years.   She
    acknowledges that it would be possible for the Appellant to  return  to
    his home country and reapply but that the Tribunal has to remember that
    he is the Sponsor's husband and father to her two children and that  it
    would be inappropriate to expect him to do so.  She asked me to  remake
    the appeal allowing it in favour of the Appellant.

Findings

13. The position in this appeal is clear.   When  the  Secretary  of  State
    first refused the appeal she was not satisfied that the  Appellant  was
    in a durable relationship and went on to find that

         "We do not believe that you have provided enough evidence to  allow
         us to exercise discretion in your favour."

14. There has now been a  finding  that  the  Appellant  is  in  a  durable
    relationship  and  there  has  been  exhaustive  examination   of   the
    circumstances and cross-examination of three witnesses all of whom were
    found to be credible.  In such a scenario Mr Harrison acknowledges that
    the only basis upon which the Secretary of State can now  rely  is  the
    fact that the Appellant was served with an IS151A in  January  2008  as
    his leave to remain as a student had expired and whilst he  applied  on
    that date for leave to remain again as a student that was  refused  and
    consequently the Appellant is an overstayer.

15. However that fact is addressed in YB (EEA reg 17(4) - proper  approach)
    Ivory Coast [2008] UKAIT 00062.

         "1.  Neither the Citizens  Directive  (2004/38/EC)  nor  regulation
             17(4) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
             2006 confers on an "other family member" or  "extended  family
             member" of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights a right to
             a residence card; consistent with  the  Directive,  reg  17(4)
             makes it discretionary.

         2.   In deciding whether to issue a residence card to  an  extended
             family member of an EEA national under reg 17(4) the decision-
             maker should adopt a three-stage approach so as to:

             (a)  first determine whether the person concerned qualifies as
                  an extended family member under reg 8 (in  this  case,  to
                  determine  whether  the  appellant  was  "in   a   durable
                  relationship").

             (b)  next have regard, as rules of thumb only, to the criteria
                  set out in comparable provisions of the Immigration Rules.
                  To do so ensures the like  treatment  of  extended  family
                  members of  EEA  and  British  nationals  and  so  ensures
                  compliance with the general  principle  of  Community  law
                  prohibiting discrimination on the grounds of  nationality.
                  The foregoing  means  that  for  reg  17(4)  purposes  the
                  comparable immigration rules cannot be used to define  who
                  are extended family members, but only to furnish rules  of
                  thumb as to what  requirements  they  should  normally  be
                  expected to meet. The fact that a person meets or does not
                  meet the requirements of the  relevant  immigration  rules
                  cannot be treated as  determinative  of  the  question  of
                  whether a residence card should or should not be issued.

             (c)  ensure there has been an  extensive  examination  of  the
                  personal circumstances of the applicant/appellant. It  may
                  be that in many cases such an examination will  have  been
                  made in the course of assessing the  applicant's  position
                  vis a vis the immigration  rules.  But  in  principle  the
                  third stage is distinct, since the  duty  imposed  by  the
                  Directive to undertake "an extensive  examination  of  the
                  personal circumstances..." necessitates a balancing of the
                  relevant factors counting for and against the  issuing  of
                  such a  card.  It  would  be  contrary  to  Community  law
                  principles to base refusal  solely  on  the  fact  that  a
                  person is an overstayer who falls  foul,  for  example  of
                  para 295D(i): see by analogy Case C-459/99 MRAX v  Belgian
                  State [2002] ECR I-6591).

         3.   Assessment of a  person's  individual  circumstances  done  by
             reference to Article 8 of the ECHR,  can  form  part  (even  a
             large part) of the requisite "extensive  examination",  since:
             what matters is that there is a balanced consideration in  the
             round. But it must be related to the  exercise  of  reg  17(4)
             discretion: see MO (reg 17(4)  EEA  Regs)  Iraq  [2008]  UKAIT
             00061.

         4.   Regulation 17 is subject to the "public policy" proviso in reg
             20(1): see reg 17(8). If (but only if) the respondent  invokes
             reg 20(1) can that constitute a proper basis for  refusing  to
             issue a residence card, irrespective of the position under reg
             17(4)."

16. It is important to note from the guidance given generally above that so
    far as this matter is concerned YB is  authority  for  saying  that  it
    would be contrary to community law principles to base a refusal  solely
    on the fact that a person is an overstayer.  The example referred to at
    paragraph 295D(i) relates to the old Immigration Rules and applications
    by unmarried partners outside the Rules but the fact remains that  that
    is only an example.  On the basis the only resistance put up now by the
    Secretary of State is that the Appellant is an overstayer  and  bearing
    in mind that there have been credible findings  of  fact  made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, who had the benefit of hearing  evidence-in-
    chief in cross-examination and whose finding has not been challenged  I
    conclude that this is a case where following the guidance of  paragraph
    2 of YB, firstly the Appellant qualifies as an extended  family  member
    under Regulation 8 being in a durable  relationship.   Secondly  it  is
    accepted by the Secretary of State that the relationship is durable and
    there has in fact been a finding by an Immigration Judge which  is  not
    challenged.  That merely leaves stage 3 namely the duty to undertake an
    extensive examination of the  personal  circumstances  necessitating  a
    balancing of the relevant factors counting for and against the issue of
    such a card.  Such an exercise has been carried out and in addition  to
    that the only opposition put forward now by the Secretary of  State  is
    that the Appellant is an overstayer.  Case law is against the Secretary
    of State's submission on this point.

17.  For all the above reasons I am satisfied that the Appellant meets  the
    requirements of Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations and that it is
    appropriate in all the circumstances for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    issue the residence card.  The position originally was in  this  matter
    that the Appellant's appeal was allowed.  I consequently reinstate  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  dismiss  the  appeal  of  the
    Secretary of State.

Notice of Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is reinstated and the appeal of
    the Secretary of State is dismissed.

19. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           6th November 2014
