
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32413/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th May 2016                              |On 7th June 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN



                                   Between

                         Mr IJIAS A M A SEYNULABDEEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Miss K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an application to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant  in
    relation to a Decision and Reasons of the First-tier Tribunal, Judge  E
    M Simpson, promulgated on 9th October  2015,  following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 20th July  2015.   The  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was in relation to a removal decision under Section 10 of  the
    1999 Immigration and Asylum Act.

 2. The matter was listed before Judge  Simpson  to  be  dealt  with  as  a
    preliminary issue on jurisdiction, it being argued by the Secretary  of
    State that there  was  no  in  country  right  of  appeal.   The  judge
    initially did not have a Presenting Officer but then one was  found  to
    assist her.

 3. In her Findings, Conclusions and Reasons starting at  paragraph  18  of
    the decision and going on to paragraph 28 Judge Simpson found that  the
    Appellant had no in- country right of appeal on the basis that he would
    only have had an in country right of appeal had he made a  prior  human
    rights claim which he had not done and that  it  was  not  possible  to
    acquire an in-country right of appeal by pleading human rights  in  the
    grounds of appeal which  he  had  not  done.   She  therefore  declined
    jurisdiction and dismissed the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  a  lack  of
    jurisdiction.

 4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that  he  did
    have a full in-country right of appeal,  that  the  Tribunal  erred  in
    adjourning an earlier hearing to allow  evidence  of  deception  to  be
    obtained by the Secretary of State and essentially it was wrong for the
    First-tier Tribunal to find that the  appeal  was  invalid  because  it
    should be brought out of country.  There is no merit in  any  of  those
    grounds.  It was quite clearly the case that he  only  had  an  out  of
    country right of appeal and therefore the judge had no jurisdiction.

 5. Before me there is  no attendance by or on behalf of the Appellant  and
    I am informed by Miss Pal that according to CID the Appellant left on a
    voluntary basis to Sri Lanka on 29th March 2016 which may well  explain
    why he is not in front of me.   If in truth he  has  left  the  country
    then his appeal to the Tribunal is abandoned by operation of  law.   If
    he has not left the country he nevertheless has not appeared  in  front
    of me to prosecute his application and as  it  is  his  application  it
    fails for that reason.

Notice of Decision

 6. Therefore if it is not abandoned the appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 7th June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
