
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32293/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard On the Papers at Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Sheldon Court                        |                                     |
|On 29th January 2016                 |On 18th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    JUDGE of the first-tier tribunal JUSS


                                   Between

                              MR Akhtar Rasool
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 21st July  1986.
    He appeals under the provisions  of  Section  82  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against the decision of the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 21st September 2015 refusing  his  application
    for leave to remain in the UK as a Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant
    under the points-based system.

 2. I had the bundle submitted for  the  Appellant.   His  solicitors,  Sky
    Solicitors, had on 1st October 2015 submitted a bundle  of  documents.
    There was no attendance before me on 29th January 2016  of  either  his
    solicitors or of the Appellant.  This was a "paper hearing".

 3. The Grounds of Appeal dated 1st October 2015 are in generic form  only,
    setting out that the decision is unlawful under Section 6 of the  Human
    Rights Act  1998  and  that  there  was  a  discretion  vested  in  the
    Respondent under the  Immigration  Act  1971  which  should  have  been
    exercised differently.

 4. The grounds state that the Appellant is a genuine  student  who  sought
    admission to complete his studies and provided all the information  for
    the grant of his further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)  Student
    (see paragraph 8 of the grounds).

 5. The decision letter makes it clear that an interview  was  required  to
    establish  the  genuineness  of  the  Appellant's   application.    The
    Appellant failed to attend the interview.  The Secretary of State could
    not establish that the Appellant was a genuine student as  required  in
    paragraph 245ZX(o) of the Immigration Rules.

 6. Consequently, the Appellant was awarded zero points  under  Appendix  A
    (attributes)  and  he  was  appointed  zero  points  under  Appendix  C
    (maintenance).  The Respondent Secretary of State proceeded to  make  a
    decision also under Section 47 of the  2006  Act  for  the  Appellant's
    removal.

 7. At the hearing before me on 29th June  2016,  there  is  no  additional
    evidence which in any way sets out to make good the  Appellant's  claim
    to be a genuine student.  In any event,  the  Supreme  Court  in  Patel
    [2013] UKSC 72 made it clear that there is no human right  to  complete
    one's education in the United Kingdom.

 8. The countervailing arguments in relation to firm and  fair  immigration
    control are equally worthy of consideration.   Since  then  the  public
    interest consideration under Section 117  makes  it  quite  clear  that
    there is a public interest in effective immigration control.  There  is
    no reasonable prospect of the Appellant succeeding in this appeal.

 9. Accordingly, though I have  given  careful  consideration  to  all  the
    documents before me, I find that the Appellant does not  discharge  the
    burden of proof for the reasons given.

10. On the totality of the evidence before me, I find  that  the  Appellant
    has not discharged the burden of proof and the  reasons  given  by  the
    Respondent do justify the refusal.

11. Therefore, the Respondent's decision is in accordance with the law  and
    applicable Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

12. The appeal is refused.

13. No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Dated

Judge Juss
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal    13th February 2016



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Dated

Judge Juss
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal    13th February 2016

