

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32717/2014

|Heard at Field House                               |Decision Promulgated            |
|On 16 December 2019                                |On 13 January 2020              |

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                     SY
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Briddock instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
(Harrow Office)
For the Respondent: Mr T Lindsay Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is the resumed hearing of an appeal that came before  a  panel
        composed of the Honourable Mr Justice Lane and Upper Tribunal Judge
        Hanson who concluded in  the  determination  of  9  March  2018  as
        follows:


                    41.    At the hearing on 5 March, we  announced  we  had
                      concluded that the respondent did  have  power  under
                      section 76 of the 2002 Act to revoke the  appellant's
                      indefinite leave to remain and  that  the  First-Tier
                      Tribunal Judge had erred in law in  holding  that  he
                      could not substitute his discretion for that  of  the
                      respondent. Accordingly, the decision in  the  appeal
                      fell to be remade.

                    42.         Having heard submissions from Mr Bundock and
                      Mr Wilding, were further concluded  that,  given  the
                      passage of time since the hearing in  December  2014,
                      up-to-date evidence concerning the appellant would be
                      required.  The  Tribunal  accordingly  adjourned  the
                      remaking of the decision (to be taken  in  the  Upper
                      Tribunal), having made  case  management  directions.




Preliminary issue.

     2. Mr Briddock raised as a preliminary issue that although it  appears
        to have been given that the decision to revoke ILR under section 76
        engages article 8 and that the relevant date is  the  date  of  the
        hearing  it  was  necessary  for  this  tribunal  to  decide  as  a
        preliminary issue: (i) whether article 8 ECHR  is  engaged  by  the
        decision to revoke ILR; and (ii) whether the relevant date  is  the
        date of the Secretary of State's decision, which in this case is 22
        July 2014, or the date of hearing, 16 December 2019.
     3. The appellant's case is that article 8  is  engaged  and  that  the
        relevant date is  the  date  of  the  hearing  but  refers  to  two
        decisions which post-date the Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in  this
        appeal, the first of which is  R  (on  the  application  of  J1)  v
        Special Immigration Appeals Commission v  Secretary  of  State  the
        Home Department [2018] EWHC 3193 (Admin) [J1] heard by  Supperstone
        J who handed down judgement on 23 November 2018. The  case  concern
        revocation of ILR under s76 of the 2002 Act in a case brought under
        the previous appeal regime as is this appeal.
     4. At [40] of [J1] it is written:


             40.  I conclude that the appeal against the revocation of  the
                  Claimants ILR is to be  considered  by  reference  to  the
                  facts in existence at the  time  of  the  decision  unless
                  Article 8 ECHR is engaged, in which case, having regard to
                  the approach adopted by SIAC in ZZ, and the observation of
                  the Court of Appeal in that case (see paras 32 - 33 above)
                  the position may  be  different.  I  will  therefore  next
                  consider whether Article 8 is engaged in the present case.


     5. In considering whether article 8 was engaged on the facts  of  [J1]
        it was found at [71]:


             71.  In the present case,  as  a  result  of  the  events  and
                  decisions described in Ms Balmforth's witness statement at
                  paras 10 and 11 (see para  50  above,  and  see  the  SIAC
                  judgement at para 6 set out in Factual Background at  para
                  5 above), the Claimants ILR has been revoked but there  is
                  no  extant  decision  to  grant  him  limited  leave  with
                  conditions. That being so, in my view, Article  8  is  not
                  engaged in this case.


     6. Mr Briddock refers to the later decision of the Court of Appeal who
        on 16  April  2019  handed  down  its  judgement  in  Balajigari  v
        Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  673
        which considered whether article 8 was engaged in a decision not to
        grant ILR and concluded it was engaged.
     7. It was submitted on the appellant's behalf that whilst J1  consider
        the revocation of ILR under section 76 and Balajigari  the  refusal
        to grant ILR under the Immigration Rules, both  considered  whether
        article 8 applies to an ILR decision. The Court of Appeal  set  out
        its main judgement on this point at [90] in the following terms:


        90.  We returned to the case where the effect of the refusal of  an
                  application for T1GM ILR does not  in  itself  render  the
                  applicant  liable  to  removal   forthwith   (subject   to
                  suspension pending administrative review), either  because
                  a period of limited leave granted previously has  not  yet
                  expired or because the appellant is entitled to  leave  on
                  some other basis. This is less straightforward, but we  do
                  not believe that the position is fundamentally  different.
                  The Secretary of State's  decision  that  the  appellant's
                  case falls within paragraph 322(5) necessarily means  that
                  any existing leave can be curtailed  under  paragraph  323
                  and  that  any  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  a
                  different basis would fall to be refused: Part  9  applies
                  of course to leave to remain (or  enter)  on  any  ground.
                  Indeed logically the Secretary of State ought  to  curtail
                  any existing leave to remain in such  a  case,  since  the
                  basis of ground (5) is that the migrants presence  in  the
                  UK is undesirable (and that  there  are  no  discretionary
                  grounds  why  he  or   she   should   be   granted   leave
                  nonetheless). That being  so,  it  seems  to  us  that  an
                  applicant in  this  category  is,  in  substance,  equally
                  "liable to removal" with an applicant who at the moment of
                  refusal only enjoyed section 3C leave.  Any  other  result
                  would inevitably lead to cases with arbitrarily  different
                  results. In the nature of things any period  of  unexpired
                  leave for T1GM ILR applicants is likely to be  short,  and
                  it will be  unsatisfactory  to  say  that  article  8  was
                  engaged  in  the  case  where  the  refusal  renders   the
                  applicant liable to removal forthwith but not where he  or
                  she still had a few days limited leave to run.


     8. The underlying decision in this appeal is the Secretary of  State's
        decision that the appellant is liable to deportation  and  that  he
        will be removed from the United Kingdom if his removal is  possible
        for legal reasons. In this  case  a  letter  dated  22  April  2014
        addressed to the appellant confirms that the  Secretary  of  State,
        having considered and  assessed  the  circumstances  of  his  case,
        decided not to pursue cancellation/cessation of his refugee  status
        which remained intact.
     9. There is merit in Mr Briddock's submission that  decisions  of  the
        Court of Appeal  are  binding  and  are  to  be  preferred  over  a
        judgement of the High Court, although the  position  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal in relation to this matter is that article  8  has  always
        been engaged on the facts, making the relevant date the date of the
        hearing.
    10. In this appeal the Secretary of State in the Notice the Immigration
        Decision also made the decision to grant the appellant [SY] limited
        leave to remain of 6 months, such grant to take effect at  the  end
        of the period when the appellant can  appeal  under  section  82(1)
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  or  one  an  appeal
        brought under that section  is  finally  determined,  withdrawn  or
        abandoned, (or when it lapses under section 99  of  that  Act).  As
        that period has not yet expired there has been  no  such  grant  to
        date or notice of any conditions that may be attached to the same.



Background


    11. On 13 October 2004 the appellant was recognised as a  refugee  from
        Somalia and granted asylum and indefinite leave to remain (ILR).
    12. The printout from the Police  National  Computer  relating  to  the
        appellant shows 6 convictions for 6 offences  the  most  recent  of
        which on 14 September 2010 is a  conviction  at  Blackfriars  Crown
        Court of attempted wounding for which the appellants was  sentenced
        to 2 years imprisonment.
    13. Between  2011  and  2014  the  respondent  considered  whether  the
        appellant's refugee status  should  be  revoked  resulting  in  the
        decision of 22 April 2014 not to revoke.
    14. On 22 July 2014, however, the respondent had decided to revoke  the
        appellant's ILR against which the appellant appealed.
    15. Evidence produced for the  purposes  of  the  Resumed  hearing,  in
        accordance with the earlier directions, includes an updated witness
        statement of the appellant, a statement by Mr  Patrick  Ffrench,  a
        report from a Dr Said a Clinical  Psychologist,  a  letter  from  a
        Recovery Coordinator of the Single Homeless Project, and  a  letter
        from a third party who describes himself as [SY's] cousin.
    16. The appellant in his statement dated  11  September  2019  confirms
        that he was able to spend time talking to Dr Glorianne  Said  about
        events that occurred to him in Somalia  and,  in  relation  to  the
        current issues, states:


             3.   The uncertainty about my status and not knowing about the
                  future has affected me in a very bad way. I think about it
                  all the time. I feel that I am trapped and I am incredibly
                  frustrated. I drink to help me forget my problems but I am
                  doing my best to cut down on my drinking. I  am  supported
                  by my keyworker Patrick and other people which has  helped
                  me a lot but I cannot move forward with my life. I want to
                  be able to do what other people around me do.  I  want  to
                  work, to have my own home and not live in hostels,  to  be
                  able to travel, to have a family, to stop  thinking  about
                  what has happened to me before and to feel better  and  be
                  able to enjoy my life.


             4.   I am very sorry for the offences that I committed.  Being
                  in prison was a terrible experience and I do not  want  to
                  go through that again. I have tried my best to keep out of
                  trouble since then and I have not been  convicted  of  any
                  other offences.


             5.   I would be very happy if the Tribunal allow my appeal  so
                  I can keep my indefinite leave. I just want to have all of
                  my immigration problems and uncertainty behind me  and  to
                  be able to try to live a normal life.


    17.  The  appellant  was  accompanied  to  the  hearing,  and  assisted
        throughout, by Mr Patrick Ffrench of Sapphire  Independent  Housing
        who is employed as a Trainee Project Worker  where  he  has  worked
        since 31 December 2018.
    18. Mr Ffrench notes the appellant arrived at Conway House hostel on  1
        April 2019 having been referred  from  a  hostel  in  Hackney.  The
        appellant had a dual diagnosis of substance abuse and mental health
        issues. Mr Ffrench was assigned as the appellant's project  worker,
        a role he has undertaken since the appellant's arrival.  That  role
        involves assisting the appellant with any benefit  claims,  helping
        him gain access to support with regard to substance misuse,  mental
        health and housing. Mr Ffrench has also attended appointments  with
        the appellant with other professionals to support him.
    19. The appellant is said to engage well with assistance offered at the
        hostel and to  have  attended  all  appointments  assigned  to  him
        although Mr Ffrench notes the uncertainty  around  the  appellant's
        indefinite leave to remain  status  has  resulted  in  him  feeling
        stressed and apprehensive about his future which has been noted  to
        have a detrimental impact upon his mental health  and  his  alcohol
        recovery. Mr Ffrench records that the  appellant  has  reduced  his
        alcohol consumption and  has  been  engaging  in  external  support
        agencies but lack of clarity regarding his status has  resulted  in
        him feeling negativity. In relation to the suggestion the appellant
        should be granted a shorter period of leave Mr Ffrench  writes:  "I
        feel that a grant of a much shorter status would be detrimental  to
        not only [SY's] mental health but the amount of support that I  can
        provide for [SY] in the future".
    20. Dr Glorianne Said is a Clinical Psychologist  who  interviewed  the
        appellant on 13 November 2019 accompanied by Mr Ffrench.
    21. When noting the appellant's psychiatric history Dr Said writes:


             22.  I reviewed [SY's] GP records as part of  the  assessment.
                  His GP records state that [SY] had  a  diagnosis  of  Post
                  Traumatic Stress Disorder in 2006 and 2007. [SY] was  also
                  noted to have alcohol dependence syndrome in  2007.   [SY]
                  was noted  to  have  had  a  transient  psychotic  episode
                  following his use of Khat in  April  2007.  [SY]  reported
                  that he has not used Khat since  this  experience.  [SY's]
                  records also identify a significant  past  event  of  non-
                  compliance with  prescribed  medical  treatment  in  2016.
                  There  were  no  details  within  [SY's]  records  of  any
                  accessed mental health support.


    22. In relation to the psychological assessment Dr Said writes:


             23.  I have assessed [SY's] overall mental distress using  the
                  Clinical Outcomes in Routine Evaluation  10  item  version
                  (CORE-10); Barkham et al., 2012). The CORE 10 is  a  valid
                  and reliable measure  of  global  psychological  distress,
                  which is used widely within mental health services in  the
                  UK. His clinical score was 26 (possible  score  range:  0-
                  40): this lies within  the  clinical  range  and  suggests
                  severe psychological distress.


             24.  Following my  understanding  of  [SY's],  hearing  [SY's]
                  report of his main concerns and my clinical  interview,  I
                  completed  an   in-depth   assessment   using   structured
                  assessment tools for Post-Traumatic  Stress  Disorder  and
                  Major Depressive Disorder.


    23. Dr Said at [75], in which she sets out a summary and recommendation
        for mental health follow-up, writes:


             75.  [SY] is understood  to  be  experiencing  Post  Traumatic
                  Stress Disorder following his experiences in  Somalia,  as
                  well as being assaulted in his first hostel. He  has  been
                  managing  his  mental  health  difficulties  of   reliving
                  traumatic  memory,  feeling  unsafe  and   on   edge   and
                  difficulties sleeping using alcohol. He is  considered  to
                  be vulnerable by virtue of his mental health status and is
                  likely  to  require  ongoing  support  within   safe   and
                  predictable circumstances  to  enable  him  to  engage  in
                  appropriate care and treatment for his mental health.


    24. There is between [61 - 67]  of  the  report  a  discussion  of  the
        implications of maintaining the decision to revoke the  appellant's
        ILR and between [68 - 72] of the implications if ILR is  permitted.
        These are of  importance  and  so  are  set  out  verbatim  in  the
        following terms:

             Implications of maintained decision to revoke ILR


             61.  The challenge to [SY's] Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR),
                  which [SY] reports becoming aware of in 2014, is  believed
                  to have contributed to a gradual  period  of  decline  and
                  vulnerability  experienced  by  [SY],   as   he   reported
                  increased  frustration  and  hopelessness.  Following  his
                  initial appeal and transition to a new place of residence,
                  [SY] became increasingly  distressed,  relapsed  with  his
                  alcohol dependency, eventually  becoming  street  homeless
                  for a period of 4  months  and  residing  in  a  sheltered
                  hostel.


             62.   With   support,   [SY]   has   returned   to   supported
                  accommodation and is striving to regain  sobriety,  return
                  to work and access support for his  mental  health  needs.
                  Practically, it was explained by Mr  Ffrench,  [SY's]  key
                  worker, the uncertainty in relation to [SY's]  status  has
                  implications for [SY] moving  on  within  the  residential
                  pathway, as he is unlikely to be  progressed  into  longer
                  term accommodation and it may be hard for him to gain  new
                  employment as his right  to  work  may  repeatedly  become
                  restricted. [SY] spoke how he felt frustrated with  delays
                  in progressing with his accommodation in the past and  how
                  he felt more stressed when thinking about how he  remained
                  in 'temporary' hostels for several years.  This  was  also
                  echoed by [SY's] previous project worker Ms Costa in 2015.
                  Being engaged in work was reported to be very helpful  for
                  [SY] in the past. Not being able to work and being  unable
                  to move through to more  permanent  accommodation,  it  is
                  likely [SY] will feel frustrated and stressed as he did in
                  the past, which will have  a  detrimental  impact  on  his
                  mental health as increasing stress  scores  are  known  to
                  detrimentally impact mental health conditions (Liddell  et
                  al., 2019).


             63.  [SY] reported additional difficulties as a consequence of
                  his leave restrictions. [SY] described feeling very  upset
                  as he was unable to get permission  to  travel  to  see  a
                  close relative who was very ill  in  summer  2019.  [SY's]
                  keyworker  reflected  that  [SY]  was  very  tearful   and
                  struggled for a few days, requiring additional support.


             64.   [SY's]  current  leave  status  appears  to  be  greatly
                  preoccupying, which is creating a barrier to him  engaging
                  with appropriate care and treatment for his mental  health
                  needs. It was noted by Dr Hemmings that it  was  difficult
                  to elicit a mental health history in her assessment on the
                  10 September 2019 due to  [SY's]  preoccupation  with  his
                  immigration status. Dr Hemmings identified that  this  was
                  creating  increased  frustration  and  anger,  which  [SY]
                  struggles  to  control.  [SY]  was  described  as  feeling
                  'overwhelmed with the lack of control over  his  life  and
                  future'.  In  my  understanding,  [SY]   appears   to   be
                  attempting to  cope  with  his  feelings  of  frustration,
                  stress and overwhelm using  alcohol,  further  compounding
                  his difficulties.


             65.  The uncertainty in relation to [SY's] immigration  status
                  also has implications for his mental state. A  key  factor
                  in the maintenance of PTSD symptoms is  current  sense  of
                  threat (Grey and  Young,  2008;  Ehlers  &  Clark,  2000).
                  Uncertain asylum status typically reduces a person's sense
                  of safety and stability,  which  maintains  post-traumatic
                  stress disorder (Grey and Young, 2008), which  appears  to
                  be the case for [SY]. Empirical research  has  shown  that
                  trauma-related  mental  health  disorders   are   strongly
                  influenced by asylum status (Heeren et al., 2014).


             66.  A long  asylum  process  is  a  significant  contributory
                  factor in the development and maintenance of mental health
                  difficulties and is one of the  strongest  predicators  of
                  reduced  quality  of  life  (Leban  et  al,  2004,  2008).
                  Although [SY] continues to  have  refugee  status  in  the
                  United Kingdom, his current appeal and proposals to  limit
                  his Leave to Remain are considered psychologically similar
                  to the asylum process as the  procedures  involving  legal
                  appeals and further  applications  for  leave  to  remain,
                  create  uncertainty  and   threat   that   resembles   the
                  procedures one would go through to claim asylum.  Insecure
                  immigration  status  has  been  found  to  be   a   strong
                  predicator of emotional regulation difficulties similar to
                  what is encountered within Complex PTSD ((Liddell et  al.,
                  2019). In my professional understanding, if  the  decision
                  to revoke [SY's] indefinite leave to remain is maintained,
                  his quality-of-life  would  be  significantly  reduced.  I
                  consider it likely that [SY] will have a deterioration  in
                  his mental health in the future if  his  ILR  is  revoked,
                  based on how he has previously coped with uncertainty  and
                  feelings of frustration and the known impact of stress  on
                  PTSD symptoms (Hareen et al., 2014; Laban  et  al.,  2004;
                  2008; Liddell et al., 2019).


             67.  It will be significantly challenging for [SY]  to  access
                  appropriate mental health support  for  his  PTSD  if  his
                  indefinite  leave   to   remain   is   revoked.   From   a
                  psychological  perspective,  [SY]  is  likely  to  be  too
                  preoccupied with the uncertainty of his immigration status
                  to meaningfully engage with  evidence-based  interventions
                  for PTSD. The increased stress caused by the situation  is
                  likely to also present an  added  challenge  for  [SY]  to
                  limit  his  alcohol  consumption  to  safe  levels.   Best
                  practice guidance in the UK also recommends  a  period  of
                  relative  stability  before  engaging  in  trauma  focused
                  therapy (NICE, 2018). From a  pragmatic  perspective,  the
                  current waiting times for evidence-based interventions for
                  PTSD within dedicated mental health services for  PTSD  in
                  London exceed 12  months,  which  is  longer  than  [SY's]
                  limited leave status would technically  permit.  Depending
                  on how [SY's] status is interpreted by service  providers,
                  he may not be placed on  a  waiting  list  for  treatment.
                  There is a low recovery rate for PTSD  without  treatment;
                  where PTSD is diagnosed 5 months  after  the  trauma  only
                  36.9%  of  people  recover  without   treatment   (Morina,
                  Wicherts, Lobbrecht & Priebe, 2014).


             Implications if Indefinite Leave to Remain is permitted


             68.  [SY] has demonstrated his ability to  progress  with  his
                  education  and   employment   with   consistent   support,
                  particularly whilst resident at Endsleigh  Gardens  Hostel
                  in 2014, as evidenced by the supporting letters  from  his
                  keyworker in 2015. [SY]  has  attended  appointments  with
                  mental health services and engages well with his  recovery
                  work through Camden Alcohol Service.


             69.  [SY] appeared to struggle  following  the  transition  to
                  semi-independent   accommodation    from    a    supported
                  accommodation hostel, and reported he was less hopeful  as
                  he began to feel his situation had hit a stalemate,  which
                  appeared  to  exasperate  his  PTSD  symptoms   which   he
                  discussed  drinking  alcohol  to  cope  with.  It  is   my
                  understanding, [SY] is currently in a stable  and  hopeful
                  situation and he  is  viewing  his  appeal  hearing  as  a
                  turning point in his life. [SY]  is  believed  to  have  a
                  positive and  protective  relationship  with  his  current
                  keyworker Mr Patrick Ffrench and he has  reconnected  with
                  his family which is considered to be protective. There  is
                  evidence to highlight the protective role support systems,
                  including faith groups, have on  mental  health  (Shields,
                  2004; Harandi et al., 2017).  If allowed to remain in  the
                  UK with indefinite leave to remain and  with  his  current
                  support, it is my clinical opinion that [SY] is likely  to
                  be able to engage in effective care and treatment for  his
                  mental health needs, enabling him to resume employment and
                  gradually work towards living more independently.


             70.  The National Institute for  Health  and  Care  Excellence
                  (NICE, 2018) guidelines for PTSD states  that  all  people
                  with PTSD should be offered a  course  of  trauma  focused
                  psychological therapy provided  on  an  individual  basis.
                  This  treatment  should  be  regular  and  continuous  and
                  delivered by the same person. The trauma focused treatment
                  with the strongest evidence base for people  from  refugee
                  backgrounds  and  those  who  have  experienced   multiple
                  traumas is Narrative Exposure Therapy  (Thompson  et  al.,
                  2018; Nose et al., 2016). There is existing evidence which
                  identifies that trauma focused therapy can be successfully
                  delivered  for   clients   with   co-morbid   difficulties
                  including substance misuse (Boden et al.,  2012;  Hien  et
                  al., 2009; 2015)  and  emotional  regulation  difficulties
                  (Bohus et al., 2019).


             71.  The psychological therapies available, as  identified  in
                  UK  practice  and  existing  literature,  for   PTSD   are
                  effective and have been found to ameliorate PTSD  symptoms
                  and improve functional outcomes (NICE, 2018). The therapy,
                  however is demanding and can be temporarily destabilising.
                  It is recommended by NICE that  psychological  therapy  be
                  offered when  a  client  is  in  a  position  of  relative
                  stability  and  perceived  safety.  Having  a   consistent
                  address, without uncertainty in relation to one's right to
                  remain in the UK and having a supportive personal  network
                  are  considered  to  be  conditions  which  would   enable
                  stability and perceived safety. This may  enable  [SY]  to
                  engage with appropriate care  and  treatment  which  would
                  support him to progress to better psychological health and
                  recover from PTSD and improved occupational functioning.


             72.  [SY] reports that he consumes alcohol to help  cope  with
                  feelings of stress; sleep at night and  avoid  having  bad
                  dreams related to his trauma history. Reduction  of  these
                  difficulties through  effective  treatment  for  his  PTSD
                  difficulties may reduce the perceived need  for  consuming
                  alcohol. [SY] is  noted  to  have  consumed  more  alcohol
                  during more stressful times of his life and times when his
                  PTSD symptoms appear heightened due  to  his  feelings  of
                  reduced safety while in specific hostel settings. [SY]  is
                  reported to only have committed offences while intoxicated
                  by alcohol. If [SY] is able  to  continue  to  manage  his
                  alcohol consumption, it  is  thought  that  he  is  better
                  protected against reoffending. It is noteworthy that  [SY]
                  has not committed any other offences since his  conviction
                  in 2012. If [SY] was able to engage  in  appropriate  care
                  and treatment it is thought likely that both  his  alcohol
                  use and his risk of reoffending are likely to continue  to
                  reduce.


    25. Dr Said's report at [73  -74]  discussed  [SY's]  fitness  to  give
        evidence and concludes that he was able to give evidence but should
        be treated as a vulnerable witness. He was, accordingly, treated as
        a vulnerable witness  in  line  with  the  published  guidance  and
        relevant authorities. Questions put to [SY] were in an  appropriate
        form avoiding openly adversarial challenges the type of concern  to
        Dr Said. Mr Ffrench was  able  to  sit  next  to  [SY]  whilst  his
        evidence was given and at no time during the course of the  hearing
        did either [SY], Mr Ffrench  or  Mr  Briddock  raise  any  concerns
        relating to the manner in which the hearing was conducted or [SY's]
        ability to partake and receive a fair hearing.




Submissions



    26.  Mr  Lindsay  commenced  his  submissions  by  relying   upon   the
        respondent's decision letter. In relation to the position in law he
        stated there was no formal concession that Article 8 was engaged in
        this appeal, his view being that in light of J1  Article8  was  not
        engaged.
    27. It was submitted in assessing the merits  that  things  that  could
        have been  considered  at  the  time  were  considered  and  remain
        relevant but that the Tribunal,  in  light  of  the  decision  that
        Article 8 can be considered in this appeal, needed to look at  what
        had developed since.
    28. It was argued that [SY] had committed a serious offence and that in
        exercising discretion in the refusal letter  all  relevant  matters
        known to the decision maker had been taken into account.
    29. In relation to the witness evidence Mr Lindsay submitted  a  report
        had now been provided but claimed the level of risk  had  not  been
        considered in the report and that it remained as  it  was,  with  a
        real risk to the UK public.
    30. Mr Lindsay submitted that less weight  should  be  attached  to  Mr
        Ffrench's evidence as he did not know [SY] and did not have  enough
        knowledge of him. He had only been involved with  [SY]  since  2019
        did not know him sufficiently well to warrant weight being given to
        his views.
    31. In relation to the report of Dr Said it  was  accepted  this  is  a
        carefully  considered  and  written  report  although  Mr   Lindsay
        submitted there were a number of problems  with  it  sufficient  to
        warrant  little  weight  being  placed  upon  the  same.   Specific
        reference was made to  references  in  the  report  to  [SY]  being
        aggressive and his  inability  to  control  the  same.  Mr  Lindsay
        specifically reference to [8] in  which  Dr  Said,  when  recording
        [SY's] history in the UK, writes:


                  [SY] described living in a residential  hostel  in  Parker
                  Street, in the London Borough of Camden  from  2007.  [SY]
                  reported feeling on edge, agitated  and  "scared  all  the
                  time" while living in this hostel, as he reported  a  that
                  there were often violent incidents within the hostel. [SY]
                  described that the police would often need to  attend  the
                  premises due to violence, aggression  and  damage  to  the
                  property by other  residents.  [SY]  reported  finding  it
                  harder to sleep in this hostel. [SY] reported experiencing
                  "flashbacks" (which he describes as memories) and that  he
                  felt he was "angry  with  everyone",  that  he  felt  that
                  everyone was against  him.  [SY]  described  feeling  like
                  other residents were laughing at  him.  (  [SY]  was  very
                  agitated  within   the   interview   when   relaying   his
                  experiences at this time. He stood up frequently and paste
                  in the room and require the use of clinical skills to  get
                  him to move on from describing his feelings of  irritation
                  about his key worker at the time.)


    32. Reference was made to further paragraphs including  [20  -  21]  in
        which [SY's] presentation was recorded and specifically [38]  which
        Mr  Lindsay  submitted  was  of  particular  importance.  In   that
        paragraph Dr Said writes:


             38.  [SY] reported having pronounced difficulty  with  feeling
                  irritable and angry. He described finding it hard to  calm
                  down and that he can spend a  lot  of  time  shouting  and
                  pacing when he becomes angry. [SY] was observed to  become
                  very angry at different points in the assessment interview
                  and required use of clinical skills and support  from  his
                  keyworker


    33. Mr Lindsay also referred to [40] of  the  report  in  which  it  is
        written:


             40.  [SY] described strong  feelings  of  being  watchful  and
                  alert. He reported that this happens often when he  is  on
                  his own as he believes someone will try  to  come  in  and
                  tried to stab him. [SY] reports  being  very  vigilant  to
                  other people's reactions and will begin to  get  defensive
                  if other people are talking or laughing around  him.  [SY]
                  explained  that  these  difficulties   were   particularly
                  heightened when he lived at Parker Street Hostel in 2007.


    34. Mr Lindsay submitted that the reaction of [SY]  as  recorded  is  a
        broad statement of fact showing a real risk of further offending.
    35. It was submitted that the conclusions of Dr Said are not adequately
        sourced  and  failed  to  deal  with  significant  issues.  It  was
        submitted the assessment of risk at [51 - 55]  is  relevant  as  it
        accepts that the risk of reoffending remains low  to  moderate.  Mr
        Lindsay submitted that  regarding  length  of  time  [SY]  has  not
        offended, Dr Said's views of the  same  this  is  mere  speculation
        unsupported  by  any  evidence.  Mr  Lindsay  submitted  that   the
        conclusions of the report are based upon the findings to  risk  and
        so can carry no weight  especially  in  light  of  there  being  no
        assessment by Dr Said of  whether  what  [SY]  is  said  should  be
        believed.  It  was   submitted   the   report's   conclusions   are
        unsustainable when the report is read as a whole.
    36. In relation to [SY's] refugee status, Mr  Lindsay  did  not  accept
        extrapolated results of the study referred to in Dr  Said's  report
        which are said to originate from a study commissioned by  the  Home
        Office which is being presented as results of a  scientific  study.
        It was also submitted Dr Said did  not  know  the  full  extent  of
        [SY's] antecedents relevant to the claim as recorded at [4] of  the
        report in which [SY] claimed he had not  been  convicted  of  other
        offences. The PNC reveals the following offences:


        27/04/2007    Highbury Corner Magistrates     Disorderly  Behaviour
        Conditional discharge 12 months.


        13/06/07  Horseferry Road Magistrates    common assault        Fine
        �100 or 1 day (served).


        9/11/07   Wood Green Crown       wounding           imprisonment  2
        years. Deportation recommended


        7/11/08   Highbury Corner Magistrates    criminal damage       fine
        �100 or 1 day deemed served.


        29/11/08  Horseferry Road Magistrates    drunk and disorderly  find
        �50 or one day deemed served


        14/09/10    Blackfriars   Crown                attempted   wounding
        imprisonment 2 years.


    37. Mr Lindsay submitted it was not accepted  the  respondent  had  not
        exercised discretion as discretion was exercised and  the  guidance
        regarding revocation  of  ILR  was  properly  considered  in  which
        antecedents are relevant. Though the passage of time  is  a  factor
        since the commission of the last offence it was submitted  the  use
        of alcohol and offending  risk  remain  relevant  issues  and  that
        during the time [SY] has been in  accommodation  it  has  not  been
        shown that he has changed. It is accepted [SY] has not  continually
        offended but submitted the risk remains.
    38. Mr Lindsay submitted that nothing had been produced in the evidence
        to show that at the date of decision the Secretary of  State  could
        have taken any  other  decision  than  that  which  she  did.   The
        conclusion in relation to the exercise of discretion was  exercised
        lawfully at the date of decision and there could  be  no  basis  of
        finding otherwise. It was submitted that [SY] committed  a  serious
        offence which justified revocation of  his  ILR  that  he  had  not
        established any good reasons for concluding otherwise.
    39. In behalf of  [SY]  Mr  Briddock  submitted  it  was  important  to
        consider the issues at the date of the hearing not just at the date
        of decision in accordance with article 8 ECHR.
    40. It was submitted that Mr Lindsay had addressed  the  2014  decision
        and that therefore the issue clearly related to  that  appertaining
        at the date of the  hearing  in  accordance  with  [SY's]  skeleton
        argument that the exercise of  discretion  must  consider  all  the
        circumstances  including  the  respondent's  relevant   policy   or
        guidance and the considerations identified as relevant therein.
    41.  It  was  submitted  the  respondent  had  not  properly   exercise
        discretion as in the reasons for revocation there was no mention of
        the respondent's own policy applicable at the time and no reference
        to the fact the respondent has a discretion or the manner in  which
        the same had been exercised.
    42. Mr Briddock referred to [44] of J1 in which the High  Court  record
        evidence from the Head of the Special Case  Unit  within  the  Home
        Office setting out clearly how the Secretary of State had exercised
        discretion in that case. It is submitted the statement showed  that
        clear reasons  had  been  given  as  to  why  discretion  had  been
        exercised in the manner in which it had, contrary to  the  position
        in [SY's] appeal where there is no mention  of  discretion  or  the
        basis on which it had been considered.
    43. Mr Briddock submitted the respondent conflated  the  revocation  of
        [SY's] refugee status with his ILR and that  although  some  issues
        could be relevant to both the decision-maker does not say  this  is
        so. It was submitted that  the  decision-maker  applied  the  wrong
        test.
    44. It was submitted the respondent's guidance  at  the  relevant  time
        sets out reasons for not revoking ILR in which article  8  ECHR  is
        mentioned.
    45. Mr Briddock  submitted  [SY]  did  not  receive  a  lengthy  prison
        sentence and that 9 years had passed since  the  index  offence  in
        2010. It was submitted that is relevant to assessing  whether  risk
        is reduced and that on the  evidence  the  risk  element  had  been
        reduced. It was submitted that Mr Lindsay's reference  to  previous
        convictions did not establish a current real risk.
    46. Mr Briddock submitted [SY's] mental  health  arose  as  a  lack  of
        access to treatment and that if he was to remain in the UK  without
        ILR there will be no access to mental health support and  treatment
        he requires which could lead to  anger  issues  and  commission  of
        other offences and [SY] presenting as a danger to society.
    47. It was submitted weight could be placed upon  the  evidence  of  Mr
        Ffrench who had known [SY]  since  April  2019  in  a  professional
        capacity where he had had involvement with him on a daily basis. Mr
        Ffrench had given  clear  evidence  that  [SY's]  alcohol  use  had
        reduced. This is his professional assessment.
    48. It was submitted the fact [SY] had not offended for some  time  and
        that there are compelling reasons/circumstances in this  matter  is
        relevant. [SY] is a refugee from Somalia, a  status  which  is  not
        likely to change in the future.
    49. It was further submitted the  respondent's  guidance  states  there
        could be circumstances in a case where it was  not  appropriate  to
        revoke ILR.
    50. It was submitted the issue in this case  is  the  clear  risk  that
        arises from the impact of revocation and replacement  of  ILR  with
        limited leave to remain, which Mr  Briddock  submits  will  have  a
        debilitating effect on [SY] and is  likely  to  hold  him  back  in
        circumstances where he is more likely to lapse into  vulnerability,
        rough sleeping, alcohol abuse and  possibly  antisocial  behaviour.
        The grant of limited leave for a periods of 6 months will mean [SY]
        will not have the security that a grant for a longer period of time
        to remain in the United Kingdom will provide. The  refusal  clearly
        refers to the decision to revoke ILR and replace it with  6  months
        restricted leave but also to keep  [SY's]  position  under  regular
        review creating uncertainty as he could be removed.
    51. Mr Briddock submitted that the article 8 assessment should fall  in
        [SY's] favour with discretion being exercised differently  and  the
        appeal allowed.



Discussion



    52. It was found by the Upper Tribunal in the error of law hearing  and
        decision of 9 March 2018 that the respondent  did  have  the  power
        under section  76  of  the  2002  Act  to  revoke  the  appellant's
        indefinite leave to remain and that the First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
        had erred in law in  holding  that  he  could  not  substitute  his
        discretion for that of the respondent, as a  result  of  which  the
        appeal fell to be remade.
    53.  The  respondent's  decision  is  the  Reasons  for  Revocation  of
        Indefinite Leave dated 22 July 2014.  At [1  -  22  (the  numbering
        appearing to be erroneous as 12 is followed  by  17)]  reasons  are
        given in the following terms:


             1. On 22 April 2014, I wrote to inform you of the intention of
                the Home Office to revoke your Indefinite Leave to  Remain.
                You were  also  provided  with  an  opportunity  to  submit
                representations in support of your  continuing  entitlement
                to Indefinite Leave.
             2. No such representations were received regarding this.
             3. In your particular case,  you  applied  for  asylum  on  23
                January 2004. Your application  was  based  on  a  fear  of
                persecution if returned to Somalia, due to being  a  member
                of a minority clan. You claim that you  were  beaten  on  a
                regular basis and that your sisters were raped  on  several
                occasions. You claim that due to the civil war you fled  to
                Ethiopia for two years but  then  returned  to  Somalia  in
                2003. Whilst in Somalia you  claim  to  have  been  stabbed
                twice and also beaten about the head with  a  rifle  -  one
                such attack left you unconscious for up to three hours.
             4. Your application for asylum was refused on  3  March  2004,
                however it was allowed at appeal on 20  August  2004.  Your
                appeal was allowed first on the basis  that  the  Bravanese
                people was still at risk of persecution and secondly  under
                Article 8 as it was determined that because of your fragile
                mental state, you were dependent on the support provided to
                you by your family, all of whom had  been  granted  refugee
                status in the United Kingdom. On 13 October 2004  you  were
                granted refugee status and Indefinite Leave to remain.
             5. On 14 September 2010 at Blackfriars Crown  Court  you  were
                convicted of one count of attempted wounding, and sentenced
                to two years imprisonment.
             6. On 28 March 2011 you were served  with  a  notice  of  your
                liability for deportation (ICD  0350AD)  which  included  a
                section 72 warning. No  representations  were  received  in
                regard to this notice.
             7. On 4 May 2011 you were notified of our intention to  revoke
                your refugee status.
             8. On 9 June 2011 the UNHCR were notified of our intention  to
                revoke your refugee status and on 6  July  2011  the  UNHCR
                responded.
             9. On 22 April 2014 you were informed that the  revocation  of
                your refugee status  is  not  being  pursued.  However  you
                remain  a  person  liable  to  deportation  but  cannot  be
                deported for legal reasons and  it  was  the  intention  to
                revoke  your  ILR.  No  representations  were  received  in
                response to this notice.
            10. You have been convicted of a crime which is believed to  be
                sufficiently serious to  warrant  your  deportation.  While
                after careful consideration of all the known facts  it  has
                been concluded  that  you  cannot  be  deported  for  legal
                reasons  this  does  not  mean  that  your  crime  was  not
                particularly serious.
            11. Section 72(2) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
                Act 2002 states that 'a person shall be  presumed  to  have
                been convicted of  a  final  judgement  of  a  particularly
                serious crime and to constitute a danger to  the  community
                of the United Kingdom if -


                    . he is convicted in the United Kingdom of  an  offence,
                      and
                    . sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at  least  2
                      years.


            12. It is noted in the Judge's  Sentencing  Remarks,  that  the
                following was stated:


                "What the probation officer says in her presentence  report
                is that your actions  were  extremely  reckless  and  could
                easily have had fatal consequences for the victim..."


                In regard to your offence the Judge states the following:


                "I am quite satisfied that you were drunk at the  time  and
                that is the  background  to  why  you  behaved  in  such  a
                dangerous and life-threatening way at the time".


                The Judge further notes:


                "So the problem is that you are a man who has a tendency to
                be aggressive and indeed violent and it may  very  well  be
                that this is when you drink too  much.  That  is  certainly
                what happened in this case.


                It  is  therefore  maintained  that  the  Judge  noted  the
                seriousness of your crime.


             17.   It  is  noted  that  you  were  sentenced  to  2   years
                imprisonment and  therefore  meet  the  two-year  threshold
                which defines a particularly  serious  crime.  As  you  are
                liable to deportation, but cannot  be  deported  for  legal
                reasons, the  Home  Office  is  proposing  to  revoke  your
                Indefinite Leave in view of the fact that Section 76(1)  of
                the Refugee Convention now applies.
             18.  In light of the above, the Home Office is satisfied that,
                subsequent to obtaining Indefinite Leave, your  conduct  is
                so serious that it warrants the revocation of your status.
             19.  Section 76 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
                2002 gives the Secretary  of  State  the  power  to  revoke
                indefinite leave to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom
                (IL) where:


                      1) The person is liable to deportation, but cannot  be
                         deported for legal reasons.
                      2) Leave was obtained  by  deception  and  the  person
                         would  be  liable  to  removal   because   of   the
                         deception, but  cannot  be  removed  for  legal  or
                         practical reasons.
                      3) The person, or someone  of  whom  is  a  dependent,
                         ceases to be a refugee as a result of


                               a.  Voluntarily  availing  himself   of   the
                                  protection of his country of nationality,
                               b.   Voluntarily    re-acquiring    a    lost
                                  nationality,
                               c. Acquiring the  nationality  of  a  country
                                  other than the United Kingdom and availing
                                  himself of its protection, or
                               d.  Voluntarily  establishing  himself  in  a
                                  country in respect  for  which  he  was  a
                                  refugee.


            20. In light of the above, it has been decided to  revoke  your
                Indefinite Leave in view of the fact that Section 76(1)  of
                the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applies to
                you. This decision has been recorded as  determined  on  16
                July 2014.
            21. You have a right of appeal against the decision  to  revoke
                your Indefinite Leave to Remain under section  82(2)(f)  of
                the Nationality and Immigration Act 2002.


    54. There is arguable merit in  Mr Briddock's submission that there  is
        no indication in the refusal  letter  of  any  consideration  being
        given to the exercise of discretion. Whilst,  as  indicated  during
        the hearing, the difficulty faced by  the  decision-maker  was  the
        failure  of  [SY]  to  respond  to  notices  advising  him  of  the
        respondent's intentions, there was still  an  obligation  upon  the
        decision-maker to consider the discretionary aspects  even  if  the
        result of that consideration  was  on  the  basis  of  the  limited
        evidence available.
    55. The ability to challenge the exercise of discretion  in  this  case
        has already been decided.
    56. There was in existence at the relevant date a policy regarding  the
        exercise of discretion when considering whether it was  appropriate
        in all the circumstances to revoke ILR which  recorded  that  there
        may be exceptional circumstances in an  individual  case  where  it
        would not be appropriate to revoke  a  person's  indefinite  leave,
        notwithstanding the fact that they appear to fall within the  remit
        of this policy. Examples might include, but  are  not  limited  to,
        persons  with  serious  mental  health  issues,  victims  of  human
        trafficking or victims of domestic  violence.  Each  case  must  be
        considered on its individual merits.
    57. The guidance also recognises that passage of time spent in  the  UK
        may constitute a reason for not  revoking  indefinite  leave,  with
        that of more relevance being the length of  time  that  has  passed
        since the incident which  is  causing  the  review  of  a  person's
        continuing entitlement to indefinite leave. The decision maker  was
        required to factor in that the longer the person has been in the UK
        or, more crucially, the more time it has been since  the  incident,
        the less likely it will be appropriate to revoke ILR. There  is  no
        mention of how this aspect has been assessed in the decision.  Even
        if [SY] had not responded to the notification of the  intention  to
        revoke his ILR issues such as length of time that had passed  since
        the commission of the offence are matters of  which  the  decision-
        maker would have been aware and should have given due consideration
        to.
    58. As this is a case in which discretion should  have  been  exercised
        having given consideration to the exercise of the power  accordance
        with the respondent's own guidance's, which has not been  shown  to
        have been the case, the decision is unlawful.
    59. It considering whether to substitute an alternative  decision,  the
        preliminary finding recorded above is that article 8  ECHR  can  be
        considered on the facts  of  this  case  and  so  matters  must  be
        considered at the date of the hearing, especially in light  of  the
        fact that those  matters  relied  upon  by  [SY]  are  relevant  to
        compelling and compassionate circumstances.
    60. The protected right being relied upon by [SY] it his  private  life
        in the UK it not been submitted  that  family  life  recognised  by
        article 8 exists on the facts.
    61. I find weight can be placed upon the report  of  Dr  Said  and  the
        evidence of Patrick Ffrench. The reasons relied upon by Mr  Lindsay
        in support of his assertion little weight  should  be  attached  to
        their evidence have no merit. Dr Said is  professionally  qualified
        to produce the report which sets out her opinion  of  [SY].  Whilst
        the PNC may give rise to questions concerning  the  reliability  of
        some of [SY's] self-reporting the assessment in the report  is  not
        based solely on this factor. It is  also  the  case  that  the  PNC
        records events prior to the event that led to  the  decision  under
        challenge in 2014. It is not a case of [SY] stating that he had not
        offended since 2010 and the PNC disclosing otherwise.
    62. Patrick Ffrench is, arguably, the person best placed  to  give  the
        evidence regarding [SY's] progress as he sees him on a daily  basis
        as his assigned keyworker and  is  a  person  with  whom  [SY]  has
        clearly developed a close and trusting relationship.
    63. Mr Lindsay in his submissions commented upon the assessment of risk
        undertaken by Dr Said at [51 - 55] of the decision under  challenge
        which is in the following terms:


             51.   When  reviewing  risk,  factors  that  are  taken   into
                  consideration include what are understood to  be  'static'
                  factors and others which are known  as  'dynamic'  factors
                  (Coid, 2016).


             Risk to others


             52.  Static factors relating to [SY's] risk to others  include
                  [SY's] exposure to past violence and  his  involvement  in
                  aggressive acts as a  perpetrator  are  considered  to  be
                  static factors.  In  my  clinical  opinion  these  factors
                  increase overall risk but are  not  considered  to  a  big
                  predictor of his increased likelihood of risk or  harm  to
                  others.


             53.  [SY's] subjective experience of stress, his alcohol  use,
                  uncertainty in relation to his future and living situation
                  are understood to dynamically  influence  his  ability  to
                  regulate  his  emotions.  These  are  considered   to   be
                  protective factors, which lower  his  understood  risk  to
                  others.  Protective  factors  include  the   presence   of
                  supportive others such as [SY's] keyworker and his family;
                  predictably in his living situation  and  his  ability  to
                  work are also considered to be dynamic in nature.


             54.  [SY] denied having thoughts or intentions to harm others.
                  Without a decline in his mental health  or  escalation  in
                  his alcohol dependency is understood to  be  low-moderate.
                  This is informed by the long period of time [SY]  has  not
                  been involved in violent or aggressive acts towards others
                  as well as  his  improved  functioning  with  his  current
                  support system in place, his relative sense of  safety  in
                  his current hostel and reduce his alcohol intake.


             Risk to self


             55.  [SY's] risk to self is considered to be low. [SY]  denies
                  any thoughts or intent to harm himself  or  take  his  own
                  life. He denies any previous attempts at  taking  his  own
                  life or harming himself. [SY] is thought to be  vulnerable
                  to  self-neglect  when  his   mental   health   is   poor,
                  highlighted  by  his  increased  alcohol   use   and   his
                  experiences of ill-health as a consequence of his  alcohol
                  consumption.


    64. What the report of Dr Said does is record a situation that  existed
        both at the date of the  respondent's  decision  and  the  date  of
        hearing.
    65. [SY's] situation is one in which he  cannot  be  removed  from  the
        United Kingdom as a result of the fact he has been granted  refugee
        status that the respondent has decided not to revoke.  Had  refugee
        status been revoked the issues at large will have  been  different,
        for if any challenge to that  decision  failed  [SY]  as  a  person
        liable to be deported, would be removed from the United Kingdom and
        the date for such removal would  be  set.  The  current  situation,
        however, is that [SY] is to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
        respondent's stated intention, in line with normal practice, is  to
        grant restricted leave in the hope that at some point in the future
        country conditions  may  change  warranting  revocation  of  [SY's]
        protection status. The power the respondent to  do  so  is  not  an
        issue in this appeal.
    66. The focus is really upon the impact of the removal  of  [SY's]  ILR
        and the imposition of the shorter period of leave and whether  that
        will result in  a  disproportionate  interference  in  a  protected
        right. The importance of the evidence from Dr Said is that it  sets
        out the consequences if the decision to revoke  ILR  is  maintained
        and reinstated. That view is supported by the evidence  of  Patrick
        Ffrench who records the positive progress made by [SY] in a settled
        environment and the potential risk of lack of certainty in relation
        to key life issues.
    67. The evidence, to a certain extent, points to the conundrum in  this
        case, in that [SY] committed a serious offence which  entitled  the
        respondent to consider deporting him from the  United  Kingdom  and
        would no doubt have done so had this  been  legally  possible,  and
        which, absent discretionary circumstances  warranting  a  different
        decision, justify the revocation of his ILR on the  one  hand,  yet
        the clear evidence that without the degree of certainty  the  grant
        of ILR provided, including access to long-term treatment for mental
        health issues and the  ability  to  secure  long-term  housing  and
        employment, there is a real risk [SY] will deteriorate in terms  of
        his mental health, alcohol consumption, and behaviour, such that he
        is likely to present a real risk to members of the public.
    68. Whilst [SY's] refugee status remains in place the  public  interest
        weighs heavily in favour of ensuring that all that can be  done  is
        done to ensure any risk to and from [SY] is  reduced  and  properly
        managed. The evidence of Dr Said is clearly that the only way  this
        can be effectively achieved is through the grant of a stable period
        of leave.
    69. I find it is  made  out  there  are  compelling  and  compassionate
        circumstances in this case as identified in the evidence of Dr Said
        and Patrick Ffrench. There is also  the  undisputed  evidence  that
        since 2010 [SY] has not reoffended and  that  the  chances  of  him
        reoffending are substantially reduced with the recommended  support
        package being made available. There is also clear evidence that the
        circumstances that led to the earlier offending are directly linked
        to his mental health and consumption  of  alcohol  as  a  means  of
        dealing with identified problems which a longer  stable  period  of
        leave  should  enable  him  to  address  in  a  clinical   setting,
        especially in light of the support that is currently  available  to
        him.
    70. I find on the facts that the  Secretary  of  State  has  failed  to
        discharge the burden upon her to establish  that  any  interference
        with [SY's] private life brought about by the revocation of his ILR
        is proportionate. I find that the proper exercise of discretion  in
        this case leads to a conclusion  that  it  is  not  appropriate  to
        revoke [SY's] ILR during a period that he cannot  be  removed  from
        the UK as a result of his  refugee  status.  There  are  identified
        factors clearly attributed to the change of his status which it has
        not been shown can be resolved by the grant of restricted leave  or
        any other proposed solution.


Decision

    71. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed  on  human
        rights grounds.


   Anonymity.


    72. Pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
        Rules 2008, the appellant  [SY]  is  granted  anonymity  throughout
        these proceedings. No report  of  these  proceedings  (in  whatever
        form) shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.  Failure
        to comply with this order could lead to a contempt of court.






Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 7 January 2020












