
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32256/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12th August 2014                           |    On 18th August 2014      |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                           CHIKE CASIMIR EJIFUGHA
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a male citizen of Nigeria born 2 November 1969.   The
      appellant had applied for leave to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds
      (Article 8).   The  application  was  refused  by  the  respondent  by
      reference to Appendix FM to the Immigration  Rules,  by  reference  to
      paragraph 276ADE.

   2. The appellant's appeal came before Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal MA
      Khan sitting at Richmond on 19 May 2014.  The appellant  attended  and
      gave evidence.  For the reasons set out in the determination the judge
      found that the appellant did not satisfy the Immigration Rules,  which
      in themselves dealt with Article 8 considerations and the  judge  also
      found there were no compelling circumstances which would allow  "stand
      alone" consideration of Article 8 ECHR.  In  those  circumstances  the
      appeal was dismissed.

   3. The appellant then sought leave to appeal alleging an error of law  on
      the part of the judge.  In the main, the grounds simply  amount  to  a
      disagreement with the judge, but also  include  allegations  that  the
      judge misdirected himself with regard to the situation  involving  the
      appellant's children.

   4. In granting leave another judge of the First-Tier  Tribunal  gave  the
      following as reasons for granting permission:

         "1.  The appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
      decision  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Khan)   who,   in   a
      determination promulgated on the 5 June  2014,  dismissed  the  appeal
      against the respondent's decision to refuse his application for  leave
      to remain on the basis of his private and family life  in  the  United
      Kingdom.

     2.  Paragraphs 1A - E of the application amount  to  little  more  than
      the appellant's lengthy explanation for  why  he  disagrees  with  the
      Tribunal's conclusions.  It  is  however  arguable,  as  contended  at
      paragraphs 1F and 2D of the application, that the Tribunal  failed  to
      provide any or any adequate explanation  for  its  finding  that  "the
      appellant has a minimum involvement with his children" [paragraph  33]
      and that  it  erroneously  failed  to  attach  weight  to  their  best
      interests  when  concluding  that  there  were  no  "copelling   (sic)
      circumstances  which  would  justify,  exceptionally,   allowing   the
      application under Article 8 on the basis of decision produced a result
      that was unjustifiably harsh" [paragraph 35]".

   5. Hence the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

   6. At the commencement of the hearing I explained the  procedure  to  the
      appellant, he confirmed that he understood.

   7. He referred to his written grounds seeking leave, but did,  with  some
      difficulty, explain his case verbally, which in  essence  referred  to
      his involvement with his children.

   8. The thrust of the appellants contention is that the judge  misdirected
      himself with regard to the evidence of the appellants contact with the
      children and the effect on his family life and that  of  the  children
      should the decision be maintained and  he  be  obliged  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom.

   9. The appellant submitted that there was nothing in UK law  to  say  how
      many times he must have contact with children each month and the judge
      was wrong to say that his contact was minimal.

  10. Mr Deller indicated that the judge at  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  must
      firstly look at the Rules and only  if  there  are  then  sufficiently
      strong circumstances can he go outside the Rules to look at Article 8.
       He referred to Judge Khan's findings  as  "short"  and  contained  in
      paragraphs 35 and 36.

  11. Mr Deller referred to the recent Court of Appeal case of MM  (Lebanon)
      v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985 which might be read  as  authority  to  say
      that the judge had perhaps considered too high a burden and  that  the
      sufficiency of strength of the circumstances maybe somewhat less,  and
      that accordingly the judge's view could well have been to harsh.

  12. Mr Deller conceded that Judge Khan may have "fallen short" of a proper
      consideration of the position of the children and the  impact  of  the
      decision on them.

  13. At the end of the hearing I indicated that based upon the way in which
      Mr Deller had made his submission  and  with  regard  to  the  matters
      raised by  the  appellant,  I  considered  that  there  was  an  error
      contained within Judge Khan's determination and that it was  material.
      It was appropriate therefore to set aside his decision.   Facts  found
      by the judge in respect of the children could not be preserved and the
      appropriate course was therefore to remit the case back to the  First-
      Tier Tribunal for a complete re-hearing de novo.

  14. My reasons for finding a material error of law  are  that  whilst  the
      judge properly directed himself with  regard  to  the  Rules  and  the
      Article 8 involvement therein as a complete code,  and  that  he  went
      onto direct himself following the decision in Gulshan (Article 8 - New
      Rules Correct Approach) [2013] UKUT 640, I was of the opinion that the
      judge had fallen into error with regard to the position regarding  the
      appellant's children.   The  judge  had  come  to  a  conclusion  that
      (paragraph  33)  the  appellant  has  "minimum  involvement  with  his
      children".  The  judge  may  well  have  reached  conclusions  on  the
      evidence which were, in effect, contrary to the evidence that had been
      placed before him.  The circumstances of the  appellant's  case  could
      well be that his  involvement  with  the  children  was  greater  than
      "minimum".  But for this the judge may well have come to  a  different
      conclusion.

  15. The matter is therefore remitted back to the First-Tier Tribunal to be
      heard by a First-Tier Tribunal Judge other than Mr MA Khan.


Signed                                  Date



Upper Tribunal Judge Poole

