
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Number: IA/32905/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 30 October 2017                |On 18 December 2017              |
|Prepared 30 October 2017          |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                         mr md shah JALAL MIA SOHEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:          Mr Hosein, Legal Representative from Redman
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.       The Appellant a nation of Bangladesh, date of  birth  1  July  1979
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 29 September 2015  to
    refuse an application to vary leave to remain.  His appeal against that
    decision came before First-tier Tribunal Judge C  Greasley  who  on  10
    November dismissed the appeal on  all  grounds.   In  somewhat  unusual
    circumstances  he  then  issued  a  different  decision  which  I  have
    previously concluded he had no jurisdiction to do.

2.       At a hearing on  14  August  2017  Mr  Wilding,  Senior  Presenting
    Officer appeared for the Respondent and  as  a  result  of  the  issues
    raised and particularly the Judge's findings on whether  the  Appellant
    had dishonestly taken an ETS language certificate, TOEIC test  using  a
    proxy test taker resolved the matters, Mr Wilding would consider  again
    whether or not other  than  the  issue  of  suitability  the  Appellant
    succeeded on the five year route in Appellant  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules HC 395 as amended (the Rules).  The  parties  were  in  agreement
    there was an error of law and accordingly I set a  timetable  and  gave
    directions for a further response from the Respondent.

3.       In the light of Mr Wilding's letter  of  5  September  2017  it  is
    agreed that the suitability issue no longer stood and that was the only
    basis on which to refuse the application to vary leave to remain  under
    the Rules.

4.       Accordingly Mr Wilding wholly correctly accepted that there was  no
    outstanding basis for refusal under the five year route and accordingly
    invited me to determine the appeal on that basis.

5.       In the circumstances having considered the papers I find  that  the
    Appellant met each relevant requirement of  the  five  year  route  and
    accordingly was entitled to leave to remain.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed.


ANONYMITY ORDER

No anonymity order was sought nor is one required


Signed
       Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal succeeded on the basis of the considerations of  matters  arising
after the date of the Respondent's decision and accordingly I  decided  that
no fee award is appropriate.


Signed
       Date 10 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
