
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/32564/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 19 February 2018 (on the papers)       |On  27 February 2018          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                            Muhammad faizan nasir
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.

 2. The Appellant with permission, appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Lenier), who in a determination  promulgated
    on the 18th July 2017 dismissed his appeal against the decision of  the
    Respondent  to  refuse  his  appeal  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006  based  on  the  want  of  jurisdiction
    following the decision in Sala.

 3. Permission to appeal is listed before the  Upper  Tribunal,  permission
    having been granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Saffer  on  the  4th
    January 2018.


 4. In the light of Khan v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1755, the First-tier  Tribunal  granted  permission  to
    appeal on the basis that it was arguably wrong in law to have concluded
    that it did not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal.


 5. On the 11th January 2018  the  following  direction  was  sent  to  the
    parties:

         "In the light of Khan v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2017] EWCA Civ 1755, the First-tier Tribunal granted permission to
         appeal on the basis that it was  arguably  wrong  in  law  to  have
         concluded that it did not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal.


         The Upper Tribunal is minded to find an error of law, set aside the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the case to the First-
         tier Tribunal.


         A party who is opposed to this course is  directed  to  inform  the
         Tribunal in writing (giving reasons), not later than  7  days  from
         the date this decision is sent by  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Following
         that period, the Upper Tribunal will issue its decision."

 6. There has been no response from either party to that direction  and  in
    the circumstances, based on the decision in Khan  (as  cited)  the  FTT
    erred in law in reaching the decision that there was no jurisdiction. I
    therefore set aside the decision. It will be remitted to the FTT to  be
    heard afresh.

Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law. The decision is set aside and will be remitted to the First-
tier Tribunal



Signed                              Date: 19/2/2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
