
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32282/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 October 2014                           |On 31 October 2014            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                              MR ARVIN APPADOO
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Gibson-Lee, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, born on 12 July 1976, is a citizen of Mauritius.

 2. He appealed against a decision of the respondent made on 17  July  2013
    to refuse to grant him further leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
    and to remove him from the United Kingdom.  That appeal  was  heard  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cooper sitting at Taylor House who, in
    a determination promulgated on 10 June 2014, dismissed it.

 3. On 5 September 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal P J M Hollingworth
    gave reasons for allowing the appellant's application for permission to
    appeal.  It state:

         "1.  The application is out of time but is admitted as good  reason
             has been shown.  The  application  is  granted.   An  arguable
             error of law has arisen in relation to the standard  of  proof
             in the context of Article 3."

    Thus the appeal came before me today.

 4. I mooted whether there was in fact anything for me to decide by  reason
    of the application having been granted  erroneously  as  the  issue  of
    standard of proof in the context of Article 3 had not  been  raised  in
    the grounds.

 5. Mr Gibson-Lee acknowledged the difficulty but asked me to look  at  the
    application in the context  of  the  background  to  the  appeal  which
    included the appellant not being  represented  at  the  hearing  before
    Judge Cooper.   He  drew  my  attention  to  the  judge's  comments  at
    paragraph 8 of his determination in relation to the  "regrettable,  and
    indeed reprehensible" fact that the respondent had not included in  her
    bundle all the documents referred to in the application.  He  addressed
    me on this giving rise to a potential procedural  unfairness  which  he
    acknowledged had not been within  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to
    appeal but ultimately he asked me to conclude that the judge's analysis
    of the appellant's Article 3 claim was  flawed  and  in  particular  in
    relation to the adopted standard of proof.  He emphasised that he  only
    wished to rely on an error within the judge's Article 3 assessment.

 6. Mr Kandola urged me to accept that there is  no  error  made  by  Judge
    Cooper in coming to his conclusions in relation to Article 3.  Even  if
    there were it was not material as he had properly looked at the  issues
    of both  internal  relocation  (which  had  not  been  challenged)  and
    sufficiency of protection.  Nothing within the determination gave  rise
    to a material error of law.

 7. The first thing to say is that permission has been granted  in  respect
    of an arguable error of law in relation to the standard of proof in the
    context of Article 3.  This  ground  is  not  pleaded  in  the  grounds
    seeking permission to appeal.  Therefore there is nothing before me.

 8. The grounds seeking  permission  to  appeal  are  "rambling"  and  make
    reference to the appellant's private life, Article  3,  Article  8  and
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act  2006.   They
    conclude by stating at paragraph 24:

         "24. It is submitted  for  the  above-mentioned  reasons  that  the
             FTTJ's  determination  is  flawed  both  in  respect  of   the
             evaluation of evidence in respect of the failure  to  consider
             the private life of the appellant and decision against removal
             direction under Section 47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
             Nationality Act 2006."

 9. Today the appellant's Counsel emphasised that he relied solely  on  the
    Article 3 issue.  That is referred to at paragraph  9  of  the  grounds
    seeking permission to appeal.  It states:

         "9.  This finding is  fundamentally  wrong  as  the  FTTJ  has  not
             considered appellant's (sic) case under Article 3 of the ECHR.
              The appellant evidently stated during the course  of  hearing
             that he was afraid to go back to Mauritius because he  had  an
             affair with a married woman in Mauritius for eight  years  and
             her husband had warned him and threatened him  that  he  would
             kill him."

10. At paragraph 52 onward Judge Cooper dealt with the appellant's  Article
    3 claim.  In so doing he has given cogent and sustainable  reasons  for
    coming to the conclusions that he did in relation thereto.  There is no
    material error whatsoever in his analysis.  The appellant's  claim  was
    inevitably doomed to failure.

11. There is here no material error of law.

12. The conclusions  of  the  judge  were  open  to  be  made  in  all  the
    circumstances.

Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date 30 October 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

