
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/32758/2015
                                                               IA/32760/2015
                                                               IA/32766/2015
                                                               IA/32763/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 June 2017                               |On 13 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                                   Mr N P
                                    ms kp
                                    Mr ep
                                   miss ep
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents
                                     and

               TEH SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr D O'Callagan of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellants. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department. To
    avoid confusion I will refer to the Secretary of State  throughout  and
    to Mr NP, Ms KP, Mr EP and Miss EP  as  the  appellants  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellants are all nationals  of  Albania  and  comprise  a  single
    family unit.  The first and second  appellants  are  husband  and  wife
    respectively and the third and fourth appellants are their children.

 4. The first, second and third appellants  all  travelled  to  the  United
    Kingdom from Greece in 2007 on a six month  visa.  They  had  lived  in
    Greece since 1998 and could travel to  and  from  Albania  having  been
    given temporary residence in Greece at that time.  The third  appellant
    was born in Greece in 1999. At the time of the hearing before the First-
    tier Tribunal he was aged 17. The appellants  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully when their six month visa  ran  out  in  2008.   The
    fourth appellant was born in the United Kingdom in February 2009.  On 6
    February 2015 the appellants applied for leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of their private and family life.   On  5  October
    2015 the Secretary of State refused the appellants' applications.   The
    Secretary of State considered that the  appellants  did  not  meet  the
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  there   were   no
    exceptional circumstances to consider the  grant  of  leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellants appealed against the Secretary of  State's  decision  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated on 21 November 2016
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Barber allowed the appellants' appeals.   The
    First-tier Tribunal focused on the third appellant, Master  EP,  as  it
    was accepted by the representatives that all appeals  would  stand  and
    fall on the basis of the outcome of the third appellant's appeal.   The
    judge found that if the third appellant  were  to  have  to  return  to
    Albania  this  would  have   a   catastrophic   outcome   which   would
    significantly undermine his social and  educational  development.   The
    judge accordingly found that it would not be reasonable to  expect  the
    appellant to leave the United Kingdom.  The judge  found  that  if  the
    third appellant is to remain in the United Kingdom it follows that  for
    the  rest  of  the  family  to  leave  would  be   a   disproportionate
    interference with his and their rights to family life as  he  would  be
    separated as a child from his parents and  sister  and  they  would  be
    separated from him.

 6. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal against  First-
    tier Tribunal decision.  On 4 May 2017 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Page
    granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 7. The grounds of appeal assert that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred
    by  failing  to  take  into  account  all  the  factors  required  when
    considering  the  'reasonableness  test'  in  respect  of   the   third
    appellant.  Reliance is placed on the decision of the Court  of  Appeal
    in MA (Pakistan) and Ors, R (on the application of)  v  Upper  Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Another [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  at
    paragraphs 22 and 45 in particular.  It is asserted This case makes  it
    clear that the public interest considerations  need  to  be  considered
    when considering paragraph 276ADE and the same test in Section  117B(6)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The Secretary  of
    State asserts that the judge's assessment is flawed because  he  failed
    to  consider  the  public  interest  considerations,  specifically  the
    unlawful status of the appellants in the UK over a considerable  period
    of time.  Reliance is also placed on the fact that the  judge  did  not
    engage with other public  interest  considerations  such  as  financial
    independence and maintenance of immigration controls.

 8. Reference is made to paragraph 40 of the  decision  in  PD  and  Others
    [2016] UKUT 00108 where  it  sets  out  that  the  application  of  the
    reasonableness test involves  a  balance  of  all  material  facts  and
    considerations.  It was further submitted that the judge failed to give
    any  adequate  consideration   to   the   mandatory   public   interest
    consideration in Part 5A of the 2002 Act  when  considering  Article  8
    outside the Rules in respect of the first, second and fourth appellants
    when finding the interference disproportionate.

 9. Mr Bramble relied on the grounds of appeal.  He invited me to  give  an
    indication as to my preliminary view regarding  on  the  error  of  law
    grounds in this case.  I indicated to Mr Bramble that,  subject  to  Mr
    O'Callagan's submissions, there appeared to be an error of law in  that
    the First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  factored  in  the  public  interest
    considerations as relevant factors when determining whether or  not  it
    would be reasonable to expect the third appellant to leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  However, I indicated that the question to be  addressed  was,
    if it was an error of law, was it a material error  of  law  given  the
    findings of the judge with regard to the negative effect  that  removal
    would have  on  the  third  appellant's  development  when  considering
    whether it would be reasonableness to expect him to leave the  UK.   Mr
    Bramble submitted that once it was accepted that  the  third  appellant
    would be significantly disadvantaged by being removed from  the  United
    Kingdom it was clear that the Secretary of State would struggle to find
    something of sufficient significant weight to outweigh the  effects  on
    the third appellant as found by the judge.

10. Mr O'Callagan submitted that the issue was whether or not if the  judge
    had had in mind the public interest considerations it would  have  made
    or could have made a material difference to the outcome of the  appeal.
    He submitted that it could not have made  a  material  difference.   He
    referred to paragraph 7 of First-tier Tribunal decision where the judge
    found that it would have a catastrophic outcome if the  appellant  were
    to have to return to Albania.  He submitted that  even  if  the  public
    interest in effective immigration control and the  unlawful  status  in
    the United Kingdom had been taken into account it could not have made a
    material difference on the facts of this case as found by the judge.



Discussion

11. First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraph 7 set out:

    7.   I heard much evidence from the third  appellant  and  two  of  his
         friends.  The third appellant has integrated well into  UK  society
         and whilst I have no doubt that he is reasonably proficient in  the
         Albanian  language  (having  spoken  this  language  as  the  first
         language for at least the first seven years  of  his  life),  I  am
         almost certain, having heard evidence from him,  that  were  he  to
         have to return to Albania this  would  be  a  catastrophic  outcome
         which  would  significantly  undermine  his  social  and  education
         development. ...

12. This is a significant finding that  has  not  been  challenged  by  the
    Secretary of State. From paragraph 14 the judge set out:

    14.  The third appellant has lived for the majority of his life in  the
         UK.  He came here as a young boy and he has  integrated  very  well
         into UK life.  He has been educated to a high level in the  UK,  he
         has made very good friends in the UK and he has a clear  aspiration
         to get on  in  the  UK  by  furthering  his  education  or  perhaps
         embarking on skills based training.  He impressed me as a sensitive
         and well mannered young man who was well liked by his  peers.   The
         third appellant was clear that the UK is his home and that he could
         not view anywhere else as his home.  He told me that he  considered
         himself British; that his friends are an important part of his life
         in the UK and that he sees his future in the UK.

    15.  On the other side of the balance is the issue  of  his  return  to
         Albania.  I was told and I accept that the third appellant  has  no
         memory of Albania and has never resided in  Albania.   He  told  me
         that he does not know anyone well in  Albania  and  would  have  to
         start his life afresh there.  As mentioned above, he told  me  that
         his knowledge of the Albanian language is poor and  that  when  his
         grandparents call on Skype he is unable to interact with  them.   I
         suspect that the third appellant was attempting to  play  down  his
         ties to Albania by reference to  his  language  skills  and  family
         there but in any event, even if he told me that he  was  fluent  in
         the language and spoke regularly to his grandparents,  my  decision
         would have remained the same, so I could discount  this  aspect  of
         his evidence.  I accept that notwithstanding his abilities  in  the
         language he would find it very difficult to integrate into Albanian
         society, a country he has never visited within his memory and where
         the culture and social environment is perhaps strikingly  different
         to that in the UK.  I also accept that he would lose  contact  with
         the close friends he has developed here  and  though  he  would  be
         returning to Albania with the rest of his family, he would probably
         face isolation and a considerable degree of distress in  having  to
         go to live there.

    16.  Accordingly, I accept that the third appellant's  enforced  return
         to Albania at such a significant and important point  in  his  life
         would have a significant  and  highly  detrimental  impact  on  his
         educational and emotional development and that in the circumstances
         of this appeal it would not be reasonable to expect  him  to  leave
         the UK.

13. The findings of the judge when undertaking the assessment  required  to
    reach a conclusion as to whether or  not  it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect  the  third  appellant  to  leave  the  UK  did  not  take  into
    consideration any of the factors that the judge was  required  to  take
    into account including the unlawful status in the  UK  and  the  public
    interest in effective immigration control.  Whilst this amounts  to  an
    error of law I do not consider that this would  have  made  a  material
    difference to the outcome of this appeal.  There are factors that might
    be sufficient to have outweighed the judge's finding on  reasonableness
    such as criminality. It is clear that the judge did not simply take the
    evidence of the third  appellant  at  face  value  but  approached  the
    evidence with a degree of circumspection, for example  in  relation  to
    the third appellant's ability to speak Albanian. Given the very  strong
    findings made by the judge as to the adverse effect of removal  on  the
    third appellant, described as a "catastrophic outcome", the judge would
    not have arrived at a different  conclusion  had  he  factored  in  the
    public interest consideration and unlawful status.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain a material  of  law.
The appeal of the Secretary of State is  dismissed.   The  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal stands.



Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 11 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

