

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: IA/32621/2015
                                                               IA/32622/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field house                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 July 2017                           |On 10 July 2017                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SMM
                                     IMM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms K Pal Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr R Deepchand of Lambeth Solicitors


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge M J Gillespie promulgated on 24  November
        2016 in which the Judge allowed the appeals against  the  Secretary
        of States refusal of an application for leave to  remain  on  human
        rights grounds and direction for the removal of SMM  and  IMM  from
        the United Kingdom.



Background


     2. SMM and IMM are twins born on 14  August  1998.   SMM  entered  the
        United Kingdom as a visitor on 7 July 2013 with leave  valid  to  7
        January 2014. IMM entered the United Kingdom on 7 November 2013  as
        a visitor with leave valid until 7 May 2014.
     3. SMM and IMM are nationals of  Mauritius  who  formerly  lived  with
        their parents in Mauritius but who claimed their father was abusive
        and physically violent both to them and  their  mother.  The  Judge
        records the allegation of facts at [3] to [10] of the decision.  An
        assessment of the evidence and findings of fact are  set  out  from
        [13] which can be summarised in the following terms:


   a. The core of the factual account has not been challenged [13].
   b. When SMM came to the United Kingdom there was no deliberate  intention
      that he should remain indefinitely although it seems  clear  from  the
      prompt arrangements made for SMM in the United Kingdom that by  August
      or September it had been decided he should not  return  to  Mauritius.
      This was said to imply that by the time IMM was brought to the  United
      Kingdom  it  was  intended  he  would  remain  and  that  each   would
      immediately  prior  to  the  expiry  of  their  visit  visas  make  an
      application for leave to remain. It was found this further implies  an
      intention from late 2013 following divorce proceedings that the  twins
      mother would marry and make a home together with SMM and  IMM  in  the
      United Kingdom [13].
   c. There was no documentary evidence as to the financial circumstances of
      the appellant's mother or stepfather.  It  was  accepted  that  monies
      alleged or expected constitute funds from which SMM and IMM  might  be
      supported in the United Kingdom or in Mauritius [14].
   d. Named relatives are present  in  Mauritius.  SSM  and  IMM's  maternal
      grandparents could not be expected to accommodate and support them and
      funding would have to be made available by  their  mother  to  provide
      accommodation. The situation is  that  SMM  and  IMM's  mother  is  or
      expects to be in a position where she must be seen as  being  able  to
      make potentially adequate financial provision  for  the  twins  should
      they be obliged to return to Mauritius [15].
   e. In relation to Appendix  FM  -  it  was  found  the  Secretary  States
      consideration of the Rules potentially available was inadequate [17  -
      18].
   f. In relation to paragraph 276 ADE - it was found it ought to have  been
      unreasonable to return the twins to  Mauritius  as  children  "because
      they had there suffered abusive treatment". It was  said  their  uncle
      and mother protected them in  the  United  Kingdom  and  their  mother
      intended to join them and was winding up  her  business  and  personal
      affairs in Mauritius. The decision on unreasonableness was  not  based
      on all the facts and was not a lawful and correct decision [20].
   g. Assuming the decision under the Rules is correct it  is  necessary  to
      consider the matter by reference to Article 8 ECHR. The removal of the
      appellants will bring about interference with their family and private
      life. The question was one of the proportionality of the  interference
      [21].
   h. The Judge acknowledged  the  obligation  under  section  117A  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum act 2002 to  consider  the  public
      interest question and to attach due weight to the public interest  set
      out in section 117B. The appellants are English speakers,  assimilated
      into United Kingdom society where they live with their  stepfather,  a
      British national, married to their mother. They  have  benefited  from
      education  and  psychological  support  in  the  United   Kingdom   in
      circumstances where "they had  suffered  significantly  from  paternal
      abuse during their childhood". Family and private  life  to  date  has
      been accomplished while the parents  have  been  present  precariously
      though have been lawful throughout. There is reduced  public  interest
      in enforcement for the purposes of deterrence [22].
   i. There was no  clear  evidence  of  the  financial  circumstances.  The
      application form did not show they  were  not  in  receipt  of  public
      funds. They were supported by bank  statements  and  the  payslips  of
      their stepfather. No point of lack of finances or potential burden  on
      the public funds was raised in the refusal letter. [23].
   j. In favour of  the  appellants  are  the  "significantly  compassionate
      circumstances which they demonstrate" it is said  they  have  suffered
      abusive childhoods before being brought to the United Kingdom and  the
      home of their paternal uncle in order to escape the violent  behaviour
      of their father. The mother and maternal uncle  are  now  married  and
      will be pursuing a family life in the United Kingdom [24].
   k. There are relatives in Mauritius although they cannot  accommodate  or
      support  the  appellants.  This  is,  however,  insignificant  as  the
      evidence of the  mother  and  father  serves  to  show  they  will  be
      financially able to fund accommodation and  provide  support  for  the
      appellants in Mauritius [25].
   l. At [26] it is written "I do not think that the appellants  are  likely
      to be at real risk from their father. Were they to return to him, then
      no doubt they would suffer further abuse. They  could  not  return  to
      him, and could not live with various relatives, but need  not  do  so.
      They could take, with funding from their mother and stepfather in  the
      United  Kingdom,  their  own  rented  accommodation  while  completing
      education.  Such  an  expedient,  however,  would  be  a   substantial
      interference in their private and family lives. Although they are  now
      over 18, there is, as is said, no bright line  between  adulthood  and
      minority. Both appellants remain dependent financially and emotionally
      on their mother and stepfather. They are  not  in  a  position  to  be
      independent, to form their own independent family units or to be self-
      supporting. While this dependency remains, and bearing  in  mind  that
      the applications were brought while both remained minors,  their  best
      interests ought to be given, if not a primacy of importance, at  least
      considerably more weight than would be  extended  towards  independent
      adults. While they remain so dependent upon their protectors over  the
      last three years, their enforced removal from the daily  companionship
      and emotional support of those protectors would be disproportionate".


     4. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  noting  in  her
        grounds that both SMM and IMM arrived as  visitors  and  have  only
        been in the UK since 2014, that both were 18 years old  and  adults
        at the date of the hearing, that their mother has no status in  the
        United Kingdom  although  their  mother  married  their  uncle  and
        intends to make an application on that basis, and  that  the  uncle
        did not meet the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules.
     5. The Grounds also asserts there was no evidence about the  claim  of
        domestic abuse asserted to be perpetrated by SMM and  IMM's  father
        despite the claimed involvement of the police and court proceedings
        in Mauritius. There was no  evidence  that  their  father  had  any
        connection with  politicians  and  there  was  evidence  of  family
        members living in Mauritius.  There  was  no  detailed  psychiatric
        report and neither SMM nor IMM could satisfy the Immigration  Rules
        at the date of the hearing or indeed date  of  application  on  the
        facts of the case.
     6. The grounds also assert the consideration of Article  8  is  flawed
        and that even if the Judge was correct to venture into  considering
        the matter outside the Rules the consideration of the full  factual
        matrix of the case and of section 117B at [22]  is  incomplete  and
        inadequate. It is said it is not clear how the Judge concluded  SMM
        and IMM are assimilated and it cannot be disputed that their status
        at the date of  hearing  was  precarious  and  that  there  was  no
        financial independence.
     7. The Secretary State also asserts the fact the family life with  the
        uncle/stepfather is clearly precarious has not been  factored  into
        the Judges analysis - Rejendran (s117B - family life)  [2016]  UKUT
        00138 refers.
     8. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal and the matter comes before the  Upper  Tribunal  for  the
        purposes of an Initial hearing to establish whether the Judge  made
        an error of law material to the decision to allow the appeals.



Error of law


     9. I find the Judge erred in law in a manner material to the  decision
        to allow the appeals. This was clearly illustrated in the  question
        put to Miss Pal when she  was  asked  if  she  understood  why  the
        Secretary of State had lost the appeal to which she stated that she
        did not.
    10. The Judge finds that there was manipulation at [13]  but  fails  to
        factor that into the Article 8 proportionality exercise.
    11. At [18] the Judge suggests  the  Secretary  of  State  should  have
        considered an application under the Rules but  no  application  was
        made on this basis as the application was  for  leave  outside  the
        Rules and no claim has been made for leave on the basis of SMM  and
        IMM's mothers marriage.
    12. It is accepted the Judge was right to go on to consider  Article  8
        outside the Rules, but there is a clear obligation upon  the  Judge
        to do so properly. It is claimed for example that SMM and  IMM  are
        assimilated with no explanation of  how  this  is  so  or  adequate
        reasoning. Their status has always been precarious and there  is  a
        clear lack of adequate analysis, reasoning, or application  of  the
        facts appertaining  to  the  financial  aspects  in  light  of  the
        conclusion that there was no clear evidence  before  the  Judge  of
        financial issues. The economic well-being of the United Kingdom  is
        a legitimate aim pursuant to Article 8(2) yet there  is  no  proper
        analysis of this element of the appeal.
    13. The precariousness of the status applies to both private and family
        life but does not appear to have been adequately factored into  the
        proportionality assessment.
    14. In a case like  this  there  is  a  need  to  identify  "compelling
        circumstances" sufficient to override the public interest.
    15. The Judge refers to  abusive  childhoods  but  provides  inadequate
        reasoning and/or findings as to what  is  meant  by  this  or  what
        evidence was relied upon. It  is  also  necessary  to  examine  any
        evidence regarding the impact upon SMM  and  IMM  of  returning  to
        Mauritius. There is, as noted  in  the  grounds,  no  psychological
        evidence to support an adverse effect.
    16. The Judge found SMM and IMM have relatives in Mauritius  and  could
        be adequately accommodated and maintained by their mother, who  has
        adequate resources to do so, but  the  Judge  seems  to  make  this
        observation without factoring this element into the proportionality
        assessment adequately.
    17. The reason Ms Pal was unable to understand  why  the  Secretary  of
        State lost the appeal  is  because  in  what  purports  to  be  the
        balancing exercise undertaken by the Judge, which led to the appeal
        being allowed, a proper analysis of the public interest is missing.
        A reading of the decision clearly explains why SMM and IMM  won  by
        reference to the positive factors they sought to rely upon but does
        not indicate that the correct approach has been taken to  assessing
        the proportionality of the decision or proper and adequately argued
        reasons have been given.
    18. I find the extent of the error is such that the Judge has failed to
        undertake the proportionality  exercise  properly  in  relation  to
        which it is necessary for the matter to be considered further  with
        a view to extensive findings of fact being made and  a  proper  and
        detailed  proportionality  exercise  conducted  in  the  structured
        manner set out in Razgar.
    19. Article 8 does not give a person the right  to  choose  where  they
        wish to live.  IT is about preventing unwarranted interference with
        protected family and/or private life.
    20. I therefore set the decision aside. There  shall  be  no  preserved
        findings. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at
        Hatton Cross to be heard afresh by a judge of that  Tribunal  other
        than Judge Gillespie.

Decision

    21. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remit the appeal to be  heard
        afresh by a judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Hatton
        Cross, other than Judge Gillespie.


   Anonymity.


    22. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 7 July 2017










