
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/32490/2014
     IA/33600/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                      |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 14th April 2015                     |                On 22nd May 2015     |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               muhammad imran
                         rita alexandra bento magni
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr S Mahmud, Counsel instructed by Platt Halpern
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Caswell made following a hearing at Bradford on 17th November 2014.

Background

 2. The claimants are husband and wife.  The first claimant came to the  UK
    in 2011 and was granted leave as a Tier 4 (General)  dependant  partner
    until 9th May 2015.  His marriage ended in 2013 and he subsequently met
    the second claimant who had recently  arrived  in  the  UK  as  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty rights.  They had  an  Islamic  marriage  in
    January 2014.

 3. On 14th August 2014 they were arrested  at  Blackburn  Registry  Office
    because, in the view of the Secretary of State, the marriage which they
    were attempting to celebrate was a sham.

 4. On 14th August  2014  a  notice  was  served  on  the  second  claimant
    notifying her of her liability to removal on the grounds that  she  had
    attempted to enter a  sham  marriage  of  convenience  with  the  first
    claimant, in breach of  Regulations  19(3)(c)  and  24(2)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations.

 5. On the same day a further decision  was  made  to  refuse  to  issue  a
    registration certificate to the first claimant  as  confirmation  of  a
    right of residence in the UK under EEA law, and on  the  following  day
    his leave to remain was curtailed.

 6. The judge heard oral evidence from both claimants  and  concluded  that
    they were in a genuine  and  durable  relationship.   She  allowed  the
    appeals under the Immigration Rules and the EEA Regulations.

 7. The Secretary of State sought and was granted permission to  appeal  on
    the grounds that it was the first claimant's evidence that  the  reason
    he was granted leave under the Immigration Rules as a Tier 4  dependent
    no longer subsisted, having separated from  his  original  partner  and
    started a new relationship with the other party to the appeal.  He  was
    therefore no longer  entitled  to  that  leave  and  it  was  correctly
    curtailed.  Second, the judge had erred in allowing  the  appeal  under
    the EEA Regulations in finding that  the  claimants  were  entitled  to
    remain in the UK because she had failed to consider whether the  second
    claimant was a qualified person exercising treaty rights in the UK.

Findings and Conclusions

 8. Both parties agreed that the grounds are misconceived.  There seems  to
    have been some confusion in relation to this matter although Mr Diwnycz
    made it clear that there was no challenge to  the  Immigration  Judge's
    primary finding that the claimants are living together as  husband  and
    wife and expecting their first child together.

 9. So far as the second claimant is concerned, given that the judge  found
    that she had not attempted to enter a sham marriage there is clearly no
    basis for finding that she had breached Regulations 19(3)(c) or 24(2).

10. Second, it is unclear to me whether an application was ever made by the
    first claimant for a residence card.  If there had been, the  Secretary
    of State has a discretion as to whether one should be issued and  would
    only do so if the second claimant was exercising treaty rights.

11. The judge's decision  is  not,  as  characterised  in  the  grounds,  a
    decision that the claimants are entitled to remain in the UK.  It is  a
    decision that the basis for the decision under Regulations  19  and  24
    was wrong and, if an application for a registration certificate on  the
    basis of the marriage  was  refused  because  the  Secretary  of  State
    believed that the marriage was  a  sham,  that  belief  was  erroneous.
    Clearly it does not mean that a  residence  card  will  necessarily  be
    issued, that being  dependent  upon  whether  the  second  claimant  is
    exercising treaty rights.

12. So far as the Immigration  Rules  are  concerned,  the  basis  for  the
    curtailment decision, as described in the reasons for refusal, was  not
    that the first claimant no longer satisfies  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis of his previous relationship,  which  is
    undoubtedly correct, but  that  he  was  attempting  to  enter  a  sham
    marriage.  On the basis of the unchallenged findings, the Secretary  of
    State was wrong in that belief.

13. There is therefore no error in the judge  concluding  that  the  appeal
    should be allowed under the Immigration Rules.  Of course, as Mr Mahmud
    accepted, that does not necessarily assist the first  claimant  because
    he cannot in fact satisfy the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The fact that his appeal was allowed will not result in any leave being
    granted to him, under the Rules, although  he  may  be  entitled  to  a
    residence card under the EEA Regulations if his  wife  is  a  qualified
    person.

Notice of Decision

14. The original judge's decision will stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


