
[pic]
IAC-AH-cj-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/32416/2014
                                                               IA/32423/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6 April 2016                          |On 14 April 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                                Fatma Yilmaz
                                Aydin Yilmaz
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Aslam, of  Linkworths Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery of the Specialist Appeals Team

                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellants

 1. The Appellants, Fatma Yilmaz and Aydin Yilmaz,  are  wife  and  husband
    born respectively on 9 October 1983 and 21  December  1985.   They  are
    citizens of Turkey.  On  23  February  2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Colyer  granted  the  Appellants  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Blundell promulgated on 16
    September 2015 by which he dismissed  the  wife's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision of 13 July 2014 to refuse to vary  her  leave  to
    remain by way of reference to paragraph 21 of HC 510  implementing  the
    terms of the Ankara Agreement  in  relation  to  her  proposal  to  set
    herself up in business as a domestic and  commercial  cleaner  and  the
    appeals of both Appellants against the refusal of  their  claims  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1) of HC 251 (the current Immigration Rules) and  also
    with reference to their right to a private and  family  life  protected
    outside the Immigration Rules by Article 8 of the European  Convention.



 2. The Appellants sought permission to appeal on the following grounds:-

      1) The Judge had erred in finding the wife's  failure  to  attend  for
         interview by the Respondent to have been  deliberate  and  to  have
         been a matter relevant for consideration by reason of  paragraph  4
         of HC 510.  The grounds assert she  had  not  deliberately  avoided
         attending for interview by the Respondent and did not meet  any  of
         the adverse criteria referred to in paragraph 4.  There had been  a
         telephone interview and the Respondent had not shown  any  evidence
         of a formal request to  the  Appellant  to  attend  a  face-to-face
         interview.

      2) The wife's "intentions" were not relevant to an assessment  of  her
         appeal by reference to paragraph 21 of HC 510  which  required  the
         decision maker to limit himself to the substance and merits of  the
         wife's application.  Additionally the wife's lack  of  English  was
         not relevant to the running of  her  intended  business  which  was
         intended to serve the Turkish and  Kurdish  communities.   Cleaning
         did not require formal training.

      3) The Respondent had not challenged whether the wife would be able to
         support herself and her husband from the profits  of  her  intended
         business and the Respondent  had  not  challenged  the  Appellant's
         business plan or the viability of the proposed business.  There had
         been no challenge to the financial forecasts in the business  plan.



         The Judge's consideration of the  Appellant's  business  plan,  the
         viability of her business and whether she would be able to  support
         herself and her husband from its profits had not been raised by the
         Respondent and the Judge's consideration  of  them  amounted  to  a
         procedural unfairness.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 3. An interpreter had been  booked  and  appeared  in  the  Tribunal  room
    towards the end of the hearing.  She later told me she had been in  the
    interpreters' room since 9.30am.  In the event her  services  were  not
    used although had she appeared at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings
    they would doubtless have  improved  the  quality  of  the  Appellants'
    experience of the hearing. The Appellants were not required actively to
    participate in the hearing save to confirm their current address.

Submissions for the Appellants

 4. Mr Aslam acknowledged the Judge's summary  at  paragraphs  6-8  of  his
    decision of the Respondent's reasons for refusing the  claims  of  both
    Appellants.  He emphasised that at paragraphs 33-36 the Judge had found
    the wife had not been served with any notice bringing her leave  to  an
    end and so her leave  had  not  been  curtailed.   He  then  turned  to
    paragraph 39 of the Judge's decision and in particular his finding that
    the wife had deliberately avoided being interviewed by the  Respondent.
    It was accepted she had not attended for interview.  The fact was  that
    there was no legal requirement for her to attend an  interview  and  no
    formal notice of such requirement had been given.   He  submitted  that
    consequently it could not be said  that  the  wife  did  not  meet  the
    desiderata identified at paragraph 4 of HC 510.

 5. At paragraphs 6 and 7 of  the  Judge's  decision  he  had  queried  the
    genuineness of the wife's intention to establish herself in business by
    reason of the timing of her application, made in May 2014 subsequent to
    the refusal following an oral hearing on 8 May 2014 to grant permission
    for judicial review.  He had also found the  wife's  proposed  business
    was not viable because of her lack of English and  lack  of  "start-up"
    funding.  At paragraph 41 the Judge considered  that  of  more  concern
    than the apparent  lack  of  funding  was  the  wife's  timing  of  her
    application leading to the decision under appeal and how that reflected
    on her intentions.  Mr Aslam submitted the Judge had erred  in  looking
    at the wife's  intentions  before  considering  the  substance  of  her
    application.  Additionally at paragraph 44 he had taken issue with  her
    apparent lack  of  facility  in  English  although  subsequent  to  her
    application she had taken some lessons.  He had not made  any  specific
    findings how this impacted on his decision or on what he  had  recorded
    at paragraph 22 of his  decision.   Facility  in  English  was  not  an
    important factor because she intended to conduct  her  business  within
    the Turkish and Kurdish communities.

 6. The Judge had referred at paragraphs 43 and 44 to the  wife's  lack  of
    business experience.  This went to the issue of viability  rather  than
    intention.  However, the Judge had been in error in treating the wife's
    situation as similar to that  of  a  wife  with  considerable  training
    having the ability to earn considerable sums staying at home with young
    children.  Domestic and commercial cleaning  required  no  training  or
    special skills and the possession or application of skills  was  not  a
    requirement imposed by paragraph 21 of HC 510.

 7. The grounds for permission to appeal at paragraph 10  identified  areas
    which the Respondent had not raised as  reason  to  refuse  the  wife's
    application but the Judge had addressed them at  paragraphs  43-46  and
    this procedural error was a material error of law.

 8. I pointed out that the first half of page 3 of the Respondent's Reasons
    for Refusal Letter 30 July 2014 did query whether the  wife's  proposed
    business would be viable although perhaps not in the clearest of terms.
     Mr Aslam continued that the Respondent  had  failed  to  consider  the
    Appellant's business plan which had been sent to her on 4 July,  almost
    four weeks before the decision under appeal was made on 30  July  2014.
    The Judge had not considered the detail of the  business  plan  in  his
    decision.  These were material errors of law  such  that  the  decision
    should be set aside.

Submissions for the Respondent

 9. Mr Avery submitted the decision was a very thorough one  and  disclosed
    no material error of law.  Paragraph 4 of HC 510 provided that  meeting
    the requirements of the relevant Immigration Rules was not  conclusive.
    The decision maker had to look at all  the  relevant  circumstances  of
    which paragraph 4 listed some examples.  At paragraph 28 of the Judge's
    decision he had referred to the nature of the Immigration Rules in 1973
    of which HC 510 is a part.  He found at that time "the Rules  ...  were
    an open textured exercise in discretion in the round having  regard  to
    the general policy  and  particular  factors  identified;  so  was  the
    practise in applying them  ..."   The  Judge  had  looked  at  all  the
    relevant circumstances, those identified in paragraph 4 of HC 510  were
    examples and not an exhaustive list and the conclusions which the Judge
     had reached at paragraph 39 of his  decision  were  sustainable,  even
    taking into account the content of the wife's statement  of  17  August
    2015 prepared shortly before the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

10. Intention was a relevant aspect in the assessment of the  viability  of
    any proposed business because if there was no intention then  it  could
    not be  said  there  was  a  real  business.   The  Judge  had  rightly
    identified at paragraph 28 that the rationale of the  Ankara  Agreement
    and the Rules made consequent upon it was the facilitation  of  genuine
    economic activity.  The lack of intention to operate  a  real  business
    was fatal to meeting the requirements of paragraph 21 of  HC  510.   If
    the wife did not intend to run a business  then  consideration  of  its
    viability was effectively an academic exercise.  Nevertheless the Judge
    had dealt expressly with viability at  paragraphs  45  and  46  of  his
    decision and found that even if domestic and  commercial  cleaning  was
    itself unskilled work,  the  wife  would  require  certain  skills  and
    abilities successfully to operate her business.  The wife had failed to
    address the weaknesses identified in her claim and the Judge  had  made
    no material error of law.  His decision should stand.

Further Submissions for the Appellants

11. Mr Aslam added that if the Tribunal was not with the Appellants on  the
    basis  of  his  submissions,  it  should  take  into  account  of   the
    Respondent's failure fully to address the criteria of paragraph  21  of
    HC 510 in the reasons letter and  that  the  Appellants  could  not  be
    expected to address issues not raised by  the  Respondent.   There  had
    been no challenge to the wife's business plan, only challenges  to  the
    wife's funding obtained from her father and her  lack  of  facility  in
    English.   The  Respondent  had  failed  to  address  the  criteria  of
    paragraph 21 of HC  510  and  indeed  the  first  time  they  had  been
    addressed was by the Judge at paragraph 46 of his  decision  but  these
    issues should have been put to the  Appellants  at  the  hearing.   The
    decision contained material errors of law and should be set aside.



Findings and Consideration

12. These appeals focus on paragraphs 4 and 21 of HC 510  which  the  Judge
    reproduced at paragraph  24  of  his  decision.   The  Judge  found  at
    paragraph 35 that the wife's leave had not been curtailed or  otherwise
    come to an end.  In her statement of 17 August 2015 the wife gives some
    explanation why the first half of 2013 was  personally  very  difficult
    for her as the Judge set out at paragraph  37  of  his  decision.   The
    gravamen of the findings adverse to the wife at  paragraph  39  of  the
    decision is that she did not maintain contact with the Respondent but I
    find it cannot be said that the failure  to  maintain  contact  was  an
    accident.  There was therefore a  degree  of  deliberation  or  decided
    reluctance about maintaining contact.  The two appearances of the  word
    "deliberate" or a cognate" at paragraph 39 are perhaps unnecessary  but
    if they are excised from the paragraph the sense  and  findings  remain
    intact and consonant with and adequate for the subsequent findings made
    by the Judge.  It is to be noted that he made his comments at paragraph
    39 in the light of his opening comment in the  paragraph  acknowledging
    that the wife had leave until November 2014.

13. At the hearing the wife told the Judge that  she  had  enrolled  on  an
    English course in June 2014 (after her application and  shortly  before
    the Respondent's decision) and had last attended class sometime in 2014
    but she was unable to remember the  date.   There  was  no  explanation
    before the Judge why the wife's application was made three weeks  after
    her husband's own appeal had effectively come to an end and yet it  was
    some five months or more before on the most generous reading, her leave
    expired in November 2014.  The timing was an obvious  issue  which  the
    wife has failed to address.  This coupled with her previous desire  not
    to or failure to maintain contact with the immigration authorities does
    not lend support to  her  claim  to  intend  to  establish  herself  in
    business.  The wife was questioned about aspects of her  business  plan
    at the hearing before the Judge.  The Record of Proceedings shows  that
    questions were raised about her professional indemnity insurance policy
    for business risks.  Her reply indicated  some  lack  of  understanding
    about  the  nature  of  and  reason  for  such  a  policy   of   which,
    incidentally, no mention is made in her business plan or budget.

14. The Judge noted at paragraph 28, to which reference  has  already  been
    made, that the rationale behind the  agreement,  the  facilitation  and
    implementation of which HC 510 is an essential part, is  to  facilitate
    genuine economic activity.  I accept the Respondent's submissions  that
    the intention to establish and  operate  a  business  is  an  important
    factor in assessing the viability of the business.  Nevertheless, it is
    a truism in this jurisdiction that it is difficult to assess intention.



15. The wife's appeal succeeds if there  are  insufficient  or  no  adverse
    factors which are of a material nature identified in paragraph 4 of  HC
    510 and if she meets the requirements of paragraph 21.  The Judge  made
    findings about the viability of the proposed  business.   At  paragraph
    46, he gave sustainable reasons for  considering  the  wife's  proposed
    business not to be viable.  These were based on  hearing  her  evidence
    and examination of the documents relating  to  the  proposed  business.
    The grounds for appeal refer to the  Appellant's  business  plan.   The
    financial information in the monthly expenditure list at  page  102  of
    the Appellant's bundle filed on 9 March 2015 at pages 102 and  for  her
    intended business at page 184-192 are unsupported by, in  the  case  of
    the living  expenses,  any  documentation  whatsoever.   The  financial
    summary at page 184 is materially different even for the first year  of
    the three year financial projections.  .  I conclude that the Judge had
    good reason to reach his conclusion that the proposed business was  not
    viable set out in paragraph 46  of  his  decision  without  relying  on
    issues of the history of the  wife's  relations  with  the  immigration
    authorities, lack of English and unexplained timing of her application.



16. There was no challenge to the Judge's findings on the  claims  made  by
    way of reference to paragraph 276ADE(1) of  the  Immigration  Rules  or
    Article 8 or otherwise engaging Article 8 of the  European  Convention.
    It follows that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain
    any errors of law such that it should be set aside and it shall  stand.



Anonymity

17.  There was no request for an anonymity direction or order and I  see  no
    reason to make one.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  contain  any  material
    errors of law and shall stand.


    The appeal of each Appellant is dismissed.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed/Official Crest                                                   Date
12. iv. 2016




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

