
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32890/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Considered at Newport                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 23 January 2018                    |On 24 January 2018                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                            MUYHAMMAD YABUB TAHIR
                       (Anonymity DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representative

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Pakistan.   In  a  decision  dated  18
    December 2017,  I  granted  the  appellant  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of Judge Birk dated 28 October 2017 who had concluded that the
    FtT had no jurisdiction to hear his appeal following Sala  [2016]  UKUT
    00411 (IAC) in the following terms:
         "1. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Birk) dismissed the  appellant's
         appeal against a decision to refuse him  a  residence  card  as  an
         extended family member of an EEA  national  under  the  Immigration
         (EEA) Regulations 2006.  The basis of the decision was that the FtT
         had no jurisdiction applying Sala (EFMs - Right of  Appeal)  [2016]
         UKUT 00411 (IAC).
         2. This application was lodged out of time on 23 November 2017  but
         shortly after the Court of Appeal overruled Sala  in  Khan  v  SSHD
         [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 (judgment handed down  on  9  November  2017).
         Although the application should have been filed before 19 May  2015
         and so the delay is serious and significant, any application to the
         UT at the time was very likely to be refused because of Sala.   The
         law has now changed and the FtT did have jurisdiction to  hear  the
         appellant's appeal.  I acknowledge the importance that time  limits
         be observed.  However, I note that the respondent will  not  suffer
         any specific prejudice if  time  is  extended.   By  contrast,  the
         implications for the appellant may be serious.  Despite the  delay,
         and given that this application was made promptly after  Khan,  and
         applying   the   overriding   objective   and    considering    the
         proportionality of maintaining the time  limit,  I  consider  that,
         balancing all the circumstances, it is just to extend time.
         3. In the light of Khan, the FtT was wrong to conclude that it  did
         not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal.
         4. The Upper Tribunal is minded to find an error of law, set  aside
         the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the case  to  the
         FtT.
         5. A party who opposes this course of action is directed to  inform
         the Tribunal in writing (with reasons), not later than 7 days  from
         the date this decision is sent by the  Upper  Tribunal.   Following
         that period, the Upper Tribunal will issue its decision."

 2. My decision was sent to the parties on 3 January 2018.  On  12  January
    2018, the appellant responded objecting to the appeal being remitted to
    the FtT rather than being dealt with by the UT.  There was no  response
    on file from the respondent when the file was returned to me.

 3. No hearing has been requested by either party.  Given the nature of the
    issues,  and  having  regard  to  the  appellant's  submissions,  I  am
    satisfied that the appeal should be determined without a hearing  under
    rule 34 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI
    2008/2698 as amended)

 4. The FtT clearly erred in law in concluding,  in  line  with  Sala  (now
    overruled by Khan), that it had no  jurisdiction  to  hear  the  appeal
    against the refusal of a residence card as an extended  family  member.
    I set that decision aside.

 5. Although the appellant contends that the matter should be  retained  by
    the UT, there are no findings of fact.  There is no valid  decision  on
    the substance of the appellant's appeal: the FtT has yet to  do  so  in
    the light of its conclusion on jurisdiction.  It is appropriate that it
    do so and that the UT should not be the primary, indeed, first judicial
    body to consider the substance of the appellant's appeal.

 6. For these reasons, it is appropriate to remit the appeal to the FtT for
    the substance of the appellant's appeal to be  determined  by  a  judge
    other than Judge Birk.




                                                 Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             23 January 2018
