




                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32550/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 9 March 2016                             |On : 24 March 2016           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                           michael chizoba ibekwe
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Haji, instructed by Nathan Aaron Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 20 April 1975. He has  been
   given permission  to  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision  of  7
   August 2014 refusing his application for a Permanent  Residence  Card  as
   the family member of an EEA  national  under  the  Immigration  (European
   Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

2. The appellant was issued with a residence card on 17  June  2009.  On  16
   June 2014 he applied for a permanent residence card as  the  non-European
   Economic Area  (EEA)  national  family  member  of  his  wife,  a  German
   national, who claimed to have exercised Treaty rights  for  a  continuous
   period of five years in the UK in accordance with the EEA Regulations.


3. The appellant's application was refused on 7 August  2014  on  the  basis
   that he had failed to provide sufficient evidence to show  that  his  EEA
   family member had been exercising treaty rights for a  continuous  period
   of five years. It was considered that he had  provided  evidence  showing
   that the EEA national had exercised treaty rights between 2009 and  2011,
   but not before or after that period. He  did  not,  therefore,  meet  the
   requirements of Regulation 15(1)(b) of the EEA Regulations.

4. The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Dickson  on
   31 March 2015 and dismissed in a decision promulgated on 10  April  2015.
   The judge, having considered the evidence before him, was satisfied  that
   the EEA national sponsor had been working throughout the  period  covered
   by the tax years ending 5 April 2012, 5 April 2013 and 5 April  2014.  He
   noted that the respondent accepted that she had been working from January
   2009 to February 2011. He also noted that she was currently  working  for
   an employer who had offered her a job commencing in July  2014.  However,
   on the basis that there was no evidence of the sponsor having  worked  or
   having sought jobseekers' allowance between 5  April  2014  and  16  June
   2014, the judge found that the appellant had failed to satisfy  him  that
   his EEA national sponsor was exercising treaty rights for the  five  year
   period and that he was therefore  not  entitled  to  permanent  residence
   under Regulation 15(1)(b).

5. Permission to appeal was sought on the grounds that  the  sponsor  should
   have been considered as exercising treaty rights during the period  April
   2014 and June 2014 as she was actively seeking work.  The  appellant  was
   self-sufficient and not a burden on the state during that period and  was
   therefore entitled to permanent residence.

6. Permission to appeal, having been initially refused, was then granted  on
   13 August 2015 by Upper Tribunal Judge Storey on  the  grounds  that  the
   judge was arguably under the misconception that the sponsor had  to  show
   continuous employment or that in periods of unemployment that she was  in
   receipt of jobseekers' allowance, rather  than  considering  whether  her
   record showed that she continued to be engaged with the labour market.

7. At the hearing before me, Mr Jarvis asked me to find that the  judge  had
   erred in law in his decision, since the EEA  national  sponsor  had  been
   exercising treaty rights during the period that she was looking for work,
   having previously been in employment and having  then  found  employment.
   She had therefore been exercising treaty rights  for  the  relevant  five
   year period. Mr Jarvis asked me to set aside the judge's decision and re-
   make the appeal by allowing it.


8. Ms Haji, understandably, was content with that outcome  and  had  nothing
   to add.


9. Accordingly, for the reasons given by Mr Jarvis, I set aside the  judge's
   decision and re-make it by allowing the appellant's appeal.  In  view  of
   the fact that Mr Jarvis, for the respondent, has conceded the appeal both
   with respect to the error of law and the re-making of the decision, there
   is no need for me to make any detailed findings.  I  would  simply  state
   that, on the basis that the appellant has provided evidence to show  that
   his EEA national sponsor was exercising treaty rights  for  a  five  year
   period  during  which  he  was  her  family  member  residing  with   her
   continuously in the  UK,  the  appellant  has  met  the  requirements  of
   Regulation 15(1)(b) for the acquisition of a right to reside  in  the  UK
   permanently under the EEA Regulations. Accordingly the appellant's appeal
   against the respondent's decision is allowed under the EEA Regulations.

DECISION

10.  The  original  Tribunal  made  a  material  error  of  law   in   their
   determination. The  decision  is  therefore  set  aside.  I  re-make  the
   decision and allow the appeal.










                               Signed                                  Date




                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
