
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32270/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 November 2016                   |On 11th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     F K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hoshi, Counsel, instructed by Mishcon de Reya


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to FK as the Appellant in this case and the Secretary  of
    State as the Respondent for ease of reading.

 2. The Appellant's appeal against her cancellation of leave was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Porter and in a decision promulgated  on  4th
    April 2016 she concluded that the  Respondent  had  not  satisfied  the
    burden of proof to  establish  that  the  Appellant  had  obtained  her
    English language certificate dishonestly.  She  therefore  allowed  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 3. The Grounds of Appeal refer to the bundle of documents  lodged  by  the
    Respondent including witness statements from Mr Peter Millington and Ms
    Rebecca Collings and a witness statement from Ms  Sonia  Poulter.   The
    evidence was clear that the test sat by the Appellant was "invalid" and
    as such there was evidence of proxy test taking or impersonation.   The
    Tribunal had failed to provide adequate reasons for its findings to the
    contrary. As such the decision  should  be  set  aside.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted.

 4. A detailed Rule 24 response was lodged and it  was  said,  in  essence,
    that the judge had given numerous and good reasons for finding  as  she
    did. The Grounds of Appeal amounted to no more than a bare disagreement
    with the decision. Thus the case called before me on the above date.

 5. For the Respondent Ms Isherwood referred me to SM and Qadir v SSHD (ETS
    - evidence - burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC) and in particular
    to paragraphs 63 and 68 where it was said that the Secretary  of  State
    had discharged  the  evidential  burden  of  proving  deception.   With
    reference to SM and MA (ETS -TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 00450 (IAC) the
    Secretary of State had proved deception and  accordingly  the  decision
    should be set aside and the Appellant's appeal dismissed.

 6. For the Appellant Mr Hoshi relied on and expanded upon the terms of the
    Rule 24 notice and with reference to the case law referred  to  in  the
    Appellant's bundle.  The Respondent was engaging in  a  simple  quarrel
    with the judge who had given twelve discrete reasons why the appeal was
    being allowed. The Grounds of Appeal were silent on those  reasons  and
    given that there was no identifiable error of law. It  was  not  enough
    for the Secretary of State to refer to well-known generic evidence when
    the judge had made detailed findings  in  an  area  of  law  where  the
    President of the Tribunal had said that each case was fact  specific  -
    the case of MA above was based on very different  facts.   Given  there
    was no error in law the decision must stand.

 7. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 8. I have to say that I consider there is no merit in this appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State.  It maybe questioned why permission to  appeal  was
    granted in the first place as it was merely said that it  was  arguable
    that the judge had failed to give adequate reasons without  giving  any
    further specification for such a conclusion.

 9. It is worthwhile referring to some of the findings of the  judge,  none
    of which were challenged in the Grounds of Appeal.  In  particular  she
    did not consider that she could rely on the generic statements provided
    by the Respondent for the reasons stated in the judicial review case of
    Gazi (R (Gazi) v SSHD (ETS) - judicial review) (IJR) [2015] UKUT  00327
    (IAC). She noted  that  the  information  stated  to  be  contained  in
    Appendix A attached to the statement of  Ms  Poulter  was  without  any
    explanation or information that could establish  that  the  Appellant's
    tests should be regarded as invalid.  Rather  the  Appendix  served  to
    show that the tests  were  regarded  as  invalid  but  without  further
    details or specification.  In particular no explanation was offered  as
    to why the official score report was only produced at the  hearing  and
    no reference and submissions were made to the fact that the  photograph
    contained in the report was suggested in evidence as being that of  the
    Appellant.  The judge noted that the character of the Appellant had not
    so far been impugned and her immigration history was faultless.

10. The judge went on to accept that while it would have been preferable to
    have heard directly from the Appellant that was not possible  owing  to
    her health problems.  She  noted  that  the  Appellant  had  previously
    attended at the court venue on a number of occasions.

11. Crucially she regarded the oral evidence of the two  witnesses  led  at
    the hearing to be both credible and careful in their testimony and that
    criticisms of their evidence was speculative and "without  merit".  She
    considered that any alleged discrepancies between their oral  testimony
    and their witness statements were minor  and  were  explicable  on  the
    basis stated by the witnesses.

12. This evidence was central to the Appellant's success in the appeal.  In
    particular the witness Ms Jilili stated that she  had  accompanied  the
    Appellant to both her tests and that she had left the Appellant in  the
    exam room (paragraph 18 of the  judge's  decision).   The  witness  had
    confirmed that she had never had any suspicion that the  Appellant  had
    not undertaken the test.  If this witness was speaking the  truth,  and
    the judge found she was, then that evidence  was  an  extremely  strong
    pointer  indeed  to  the  proposition  that  the  Appellant   had   not
    dishonestly obtained an English language certificate.  The  judge  gave
    clear evidence on why she was accepting the witness's evidence and  the
    Grounds of Appeal simply ignore that finding.  There is no error of law
    in the judge's approach to her finding that the witness'  evidence  was
    credible. As I say, that finding was not challenged in the  Grounds  of
    Appeal and nor was it challenged before me.

13. In these circumstances the judge was correct to find that she could not
    rely on the generic statements  provided  by  the  Respondent  for  the
    reasons she set out and with reference to the case of Gazi.  As is  now
    well established, each case in this area of law is fact specific -  see
    the head note in MA above where the President said that the question of
    whether a person was engaged in fraud of this kind would invariably  be
    "intrinsically fact  sensitive".  The  Grounds  of  Appeal  effectively
    ignore the judge's findings and as such do not  disclose  any  arguable
    error in law.  It follows that the decision must stand.  I am making an
    anonymity direction, as requested, for reasons given by Mr Hoshi in his
    Rule 24 response. It was not suggested I should make a fee order and  I
    follow what was said by Judge Porter in that regard.







Notice of Decision

14. The making of the decision by the First- tier Tribunal did not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

15. I do not set aside the decision.

Direction Regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award for reasons stated above.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

