
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Numbers:
IA/32940/2015

                                                   IA/32942/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |          Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 27 July 2017                       |          On 08 August 2017           |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                     NG
                                     SG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr D Shrestha, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellants against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  dismissing  their  appeals  against  the   respondent's
    decision  of  24  September  2015  refusing   the   first   appellant's
    application for leave to remain as a general  student  and  the  second
    appellant's application as his dependent wife.

2.   The first appellant ("the appellant") is a citizen of Nepal born on  25
    January 1991 and the second appellant is his wife, also  a  citizen  of
    Nepal and born on 31 December 1988.  They were initially granted  leave
    to enter the UK on 9 March 2011 until 28 June 2013.  On 24 April  2013,
    they applied for further leave to remain but  their  applications  were
    refused on the basis that the appellant had fraudulently  obtained  his
    TOEIC certificate by using a proxy to  take  the  test.   Further,  the
    appellant had provided a CAS, valid when issued, but  his  college  had
    had its licence revoked and for this reason he was not entitled to  any
    points under Appendix A of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules").

3.   The appellants appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  and  their  appeal
    was listed for  hearing  on  1  November  2016.   At  that  hearing  an
    application was made for an adjournment,  firstly  on  the  basis  that
    their representative had only been  instructed  the  previous  day  and
    whilst he had the appellants' bundle of documents, he did not have  the
    respondent's  bundle.   The  judge  put  the  matter   back   for   the
    representative to take instructions and for the Tribunal to arrange for
    copies of the respondent's documents to be provided with a view to  the
    hearing re-starting in the afternoon.

4.   Shortly after the first application,  the  appellants  applied  for  an
    adjournment on the basis that in the previous week the decision  in  SM
    and Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229  had  been
    heard  in  the  Court  of  Appeal  and  it  was  the   representative's
    understanding that the respondent had indicated that she did not intend
    to pursue her appeal and would be changing her  policy.   However,  the
    representative was unable to refer to any record of what  had  happened
    in the Court of Appeal and the matter was put back again.

5.   Then yet another application for an adjournment was made on  the  basis
    that the respondent sought to rely on a report  from  Professor  French
    but this had only been served on the day of  the  hearing.   The  judge
    considered the applications on the  various  grounds  put  forward  and
    decided that a fair hearing was still possible.  He heard evidence from
    the appellants and considered the statements and reports relied  on  by
    the respondent.  He found that the onus of showing that  the  appellant
    had used a proxy had been discharged and the appeal was dismissed.

6.   In the grounds it is argued that the judge erred  in  law  by  refusing
    the adjournment applications, had further erred  by  finding  that  the
    respondent could discharge the initial burden of showing  that  on  the
    face of it there was  evidence  of  deception  but  in  any  event  the
    appellant  had  given  a  plausible  innocent   explanation   and   the
    respondent's evidence was not sufficient to discharge the legal burden.
     Finally, it is argued that the judge  failed  to  consider  article  8
    outside the Rules and in particular failed to  take  into  account  the
    best interests of the appellants' young child.

7.   At the hearing before me Mr Shrestha adopted  his  grounds.   Mr  Tufan
    indicated that he did not seek to resist the appeal as  there  must  be
    concerns arising from the fact that the respondent had sought  to  rely
    on an expert report produced on the day of the  hearing  and  secondly,
    the judge had failed to give any or any adequate consideration  to  the
    best interests of the appellants' child.

8.   I agree that Mr Tufan's concession is rightly made.  The fact that  the
    appellants' representative did not have the respondent's  bundle  would
    not have justified an adjournment nor would the  fact  that  there  had
    been a hearing in the previous week before the Court of  Appeal  in  SM
    and Qadir.  However, the fact that the respondent was seeking  to  rely
    on an expert report from Professor French produced on the  day  of  the
    hearing to supplement the statements of Mr Millington and  Ms  Collings
    about how proxy tests were detected satisfies me that the appellant was
    entitled to an adjournment and, in the light of the  issues  raised  in
    this appeal, was disadvantaged by the failure to grant one.  I  further
    accept the submission that the judge erred  by  finding  at  [47]  that
    there were no circumstances  requiring  him  to  consider  the  appeals
    outside the Rules when the appellants were parents to a child  born  in
    the UK on 26 July 2012.   His  best  interests  were  relevant  to  the
    assessment of article 8 and did merit consideration outside the Rules.

9.   In these circumstances, I am satisfied that the proper  course  is  for
    the decision to be set aside and for the appeal to be remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing before a different judge.

Decision

10.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such  that  the  decision  is  set
    aside.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  full
    rehearing by a different judge.  The anonymity order made by the First-
    tier Tribunal remains in force until further order.





Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 7 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter




