
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32744/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 5th October 2015                           | On 14th October 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           Grace Folusho Ademisoye
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Parkin, Counsel instructed by Highland
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The First-tier Tribunal considered an appeal by Grace Folusho Ademisoye
    on the 24th March 2015 at Hatton Cross.  It was an application under
    the Immigration Rules under paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM and also
    under article 8.  The case was heard by Judge Owens on the 24th March
    and the decision was promulgated on the 22nd April 2015.

 2. In the decision the Judge at paragraph 31 found that the Appellant's
    husband would face very significant difficulties if he were to relocate
    to Nigeria.  He had lived all his life in the UK, his family were
    settled here, a British citizen with no connection to Nigeria apart
    from his now deceased grandparents and it was found that as a person
    born in the UK he is fully integrated here.  He does not travel
    frequently to Nigeria and does not speak any of the languages in
    Nigeria and with close family here he would not be familiar with the
    way of life there.  Apart from the fact that he speaks English, which
    is spoken widely in Nigeria, he has qualifications which would enable
    him to obtain employment. Paragraph 31 is inadequate because that is
    simply a list of the difficulties that anybody relocating from one
    country to another would face such as those faced by the Appellant
    herself when she came to the UK.

 3. The Secretary of State, however, challenged only the decision under
    EX.1.  The Judge had gone on to consider article 8.  No consideration
    was given to the case of Chen (appendix FM-Chikwamba-temporary
    separation-proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00198 (IAC), which dealt
    with the issues of Chikwamba and the rules, and it was found under that
    heading that the factors were finely balanced and that the Appellant
    would succeed.

 4. It is lucky for the Appellant that no challenge was made to that side
    of the decision.  The Appellant's illegal entry to the UK using a false
    document, remaining here for many years illegally and entering into a
    relationship with that status is a factor which under section 117 of
    the 2002 Act attracts little weight.  However as I have noted that
    aspect of the decision has not been challenged.  Consequently it is
    irrelevant whether there is an error under Appendix FM and paragraph
    EX.1 because the part of the decision that allowed the appeal under
    article 8 is unchallenged and remains extant.  Accordingly in those
    circumstances I find that there is no material error of law and the
    Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision contains no error of law and the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal stands as the disposal of the Appellant's appeal.

Fee Award

This was an appeal by the Secretary of State which has been dismissed there
can be no fee order.

Signed                              Date 13th October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes

