
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/32473/2015
                                                               IA/33136/2015
                                                               IA/33146/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Heard on 3rd January 2018            |On 30th January 2018                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                          MRS E O  - 1st Appellant
                           JO       -2nd Appellant
                          SO       - 3rd Appellant
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Y Alabi, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

   1. The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria. The first Appellant to whom  I
      shall refer as the  Appellant  is  the  mother  of  the  2nd  and  3rd
      Appellants. She was born on [ ] 1975, JO was born on [ ] 2000  and  SO
      was born  on  [  ]  2002.  They  appealed  against  decisions  of  the
      Respondent dated 14th of September 2015 refusing to grant  them  leave
      to remain. Their appeals were  allowed  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Freer sitting at Taylor House on 18th of November  2016.  The
      Respondent appealed with leave  against  that  decision  and  for  the
      reasons which I have set out in more detail below, see paragraph 16, I
      have set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  have  re-
      made the decision in this appeal. Although the appeal came  before  me
      in the first place as an appeal by the Respondent, I have for the sake
      of convenience continued to refer to the parties as they were known in
      the First-tier.


   2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in 2006 after, she states,
      she had separated from her husband in Nigeria. She  was  then  granted
      entry clearance valid for two years from 31st of  January  2007  until
      31st of January 2009, it appears as a visitor. She  and  her  children
      overstayed thereafter. The two children have received  schooling  here
      since arrival.


   3. The Respondent refused the application stating that it was in the best
      interests of the children that they should return to  Nigeria  in  the
      company  of  the  Appellant  as  they  had  all  failed  to  meet  the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The  Appellant  had  spent  30
      years residing in Nigeria prior to her arrival  in  this  country  and
      there  was  no  evidence  of  very  significant   obstacles   to   her
      reintegration back into life in Nigeria.


   4. The Appellants appealed against that  decision  on  two  grounds.  The
      first was under the Immigration Rules paragraph 276ADE (iv)  that  the
      two children had lived continuously in the United Kingdom for at least
      7 years and it would not be reasonable to expect  them  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom. The 2nd ground was outside the Immigration Rules under
      Article 8 jurisprudence taking into account section 117B  (6)  of  the
      Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (which is broadly  to  the
      same effect as the Rules).

The Appellants' Case

   5. The Judge summarised the Appellant's claims at [22]  to  [25]  of  the
      determination. The Appellant had established a private life,  she  had
      made a significant  contribution  to  her  church  community  and  her
      character was commended by a letter  from  her  church,  the  Redeemed
      Christian Church of God. She had been in the United Kingdom  for  over
      10  years  and  had  resided  with  the  writers  of  the  letter   of
      commendation without recourse to public funds. The writers pledged  to
      continue  to  provide  accommodation,  feeding,   transportation   and
      whatever else was needed to avoid recourse to  public  funds.  JO  was
      intelligent, fully settled here in terms of his private life  and  was
      about to take his final examinations. His GCSE results  showed  passes
      mostly at grade B and with a grade A in religious studies.  There  was
      no information about A-level subjects or future plans beyond the  bare
      information that JO was in his A-level class preparing for university.
      Both children had won several awards and  were  active  in  sport  and
      committed to football. They were members of an under 17 club.  JO  was
      at a crucial stage in his education and it would be devastating to his
      emotional well-being to send him back to Nigeria. The lives of  others
      would be affected by the Appellants' removal.

The Decision at First Instance

   6. The Judge accepted the credibility of the evidence given to  him  with
      one exception, he found no proof of any entry into the United  Kingdom
      prior to 2007. All of the family members were in  the  United  Kingdom
      not in Nigeria. Removal would not lead  to  any  constructive  contact
      with the biological father of the children. He was not a family member
      in terms of contact or parenting. Against the Appellants  it  was  not
      unduly harsh to remove an overstaying family from  London  to  Nigeria
      after 10 years. English is widely spoken in Nigeria and  football  was
      very popular there.


   7. The Judge took into account the policy of the Respondent contained  in
      the Immigration Directorate Instructions (IDIs) which required  strong
      reasons in favour of removal of qualifying children otherwise  removal
      would not be reasonable. The Appellant could not succeed  on  her  own
      merits either inside or outside the Rules. She  would  succeed  behind
      the children as a family unit or not at all.


   8. The Judge criticised the wording of the refusal letter at  [39]  which
      he found had made a number of errors of fact. This was evidence of the
      Respondent's failure to take account of all  material  considerations.
      The Appellants would  be  readily  employable  in  Nigeria  and  their
      experiences in the United Kingdom would  be  a  positive  addition  to
      their CVs. Their use of education and healthcare in this  country  had
      been a burden  on  the  state  which  was  solely  the  fault  of  the
      Appellant. At the dates of application, decision and  hearing  JO  had
      resided for more than half of his  life  continuously  in  the  United
      Kingdom which when he attained the age of 18 years in June 2018  would
      trigger the private life provisions of paragraph 276 ADE (1)(v).  This
      was a case of a "near miss". SO was 4 years old at date of entry  into
      United Kingdom and  had  resided  for  more  than  half  of  his  life
      continuously in the  United  Kingdom  at  the  dates  of  application,
      decision and hearing. JO was not  prepared  to  take  examinations  in
      Nigeria but there was more time for  SO  to  adapt  to  the  different
      syllabus there using skills learned in this country.


   9. Section 55 of the Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 had not
      been properly considered by the Respondent. It was not  reasonable  to
      expect JO to leave the United Kingdom now and follow the Appellant  to
      Nigeria but to leave it, if at all, only after he had finished  school
      in this country. Great weight had to be given to JO's position in  the
      proportionality exercise outside the rules. Removal to  Nigeria  would
      sabotage the school work completed by JO and to a lesser extent by SO.
      In order to avoid splitting a parent from minor children it was  right
      that the Appellant should be allowed to stay at  least  until  JO  had
      completed schooling or reached the age of 18 years.


  10. The Appellant had spent most of her life in Nigeria and since then had
      been continuously involved with the Nigerian diaspora  in  London.  It
      went against her that she was not financially independent as  required
      by section 117B. It was not unduly harsh or disproportionate to remove
      her but for the considerations which  related  to  the  children.  The
      Respondent's decision was not pursuant to a legitimate aim because  of
      the unlawful elements in the  decision  letter  which  the  Judge  had
      referred to at [39]. No strong reason had been identified in favour of
      removal.

The Onward Appeal

  11. The Respondent appealed against this decision arguing that  the  Judge
      had treated the reasonableness assessment as one  relating  solely  to
      the private life of the 2nd and 3rd Appellants JO and  SO.  The  Judge
      had failed to put the educational ties relied upon into  a  real-world
      setting. The Appellant had no basis for staying in the United  Kingdom
      herself and the children had no future right to  education.  It  would
      not be unreasonable for them to return to Nigeria with the support  of
      the Appellant with whom they resided and retained  a  cultural  nexus.
      The Judge had only focused on those  ties  which  the  Appellants  had
      established in the United Kingdom and did not consider whether private
      life could be reconstituted in Nigeria. There was no finding that  the
      children could not pursue their education in Nigeria should they  wish
      to do so. The Judge had failed to  undertake  the  relevant  balancing
      exercise  and  only  considered  those  factors  which  fell  in   the
      Appellant's  favour  without  recognising  the  need   for   effective
      immigration control and the importance of the economic  well-being  of
      the United Kingdom.


  12. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy on 25th of October 2017.
      In granting permission to appeal he extended time to  the  Respondent.
      The grounds were late because the Respondent had attempted to fax them
      to the Tribunal but had been unable to do so because of administrative
      difficulties at the Tribunal's end. The Designated  Judge  noted  that
      the principal argument advanced was that the First-tier  Tribunal  had
      failed to engage with the Court of Appeal decision in MA (Pakistan)  v
      SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705 when assessing the reasonableness of removal.
      It was unclear what weight the Judge had given to the failure  of  the
      Appellants to comply with immigration control and the public  interest
      in maintaining effective immigration control.


  13. The Judge had implied that he  did  not  need  to  assess  the  public
      interest.  Although  he  had   extensively   examined   the   personal
      circumstances of the Appellants and the best interests of the children
      it was arguable whether he had properly assessed the  public  interest
      factors. If he had not done  so  the  proportionality  assessment  was
      arguably  flawed.  There  was  a  further  point  not  raised  by  the
      Respondent but described by the Designated Judge as obvious. This  was
      the apparent  inconsistency  between  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
      Appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules and his  decision  that
      her appeal was allowed under the Rules.

The Hearing Before Me

  14. For the Respondent the Presenting Officer relied upon the  grounds  of
      onward appeal. MA was authority for the proposition that  one  had  to
      look at the immigration history of the Appellant when determining  the
      reasonableness of expecting the children to leave the United  Kingdom.
      It was a one-sided argument in the decision made by the Judge  without
      carrying out a  balancing  exercise.  The  Judge  had  looked  at  the
      Appellants'  ties  without  considering  their  mother's   immigration
      history. The case of MA now superseded the Upper Tribunal authority of
      Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 197.


  15. For the Appellant it was argued there was no material error of law  in
      the decision. The Judge had noted the relevant case law. The  children
      had arrived at the ages of 5 and 3 respectively. JO  was  now  in  the
      final year of his A-level course which he would sit in June. SO  would
      be embarking on his GCSEs next year.  The  Judge  had  looked  at  the
      length of the  Appellant's  residence,  they  had  lived  here  for  a
      substantial number of years, well over 7 as they had been here for  11
      years. Apart from their educational achievements they had social  ties
      to the country playing football for a local  club.  These  were  facts
      which the Judge had analysed in detail. It was not just a question  of
      education. The decision should be upheld.

Findings

  16. The first issue I have to decide is whether the Judge made a  material
      error of law such that the decision should be set aside  and  re-made.
      For the reasons I give in more detail below I do set it aside as it is
      not at all clear from the determination that the  Judge  has  assessed
      the public interest in  immigration  control  when  carrying  out  the
      balancing exercise outside the Immigration Rules under Article 8.


  17. Although the Judge indicated that the Appellant's appeal  was  allowed
      under the Immigration Rules, as the Designated Judge  pointed  out  in
      granting permission to appeal this contradicted  what  the  Judge  had
      said at [37] that the Appellant could not succeed on  her  own  merits
      either inside or outside  the  Rules.  It  appears  that  the  Judge's
      decision to  allow  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  the  Rules  is  a
      typographical error but for the reasons given by the Designated  Judge
      in granting permission to appeal cannot be corrected  under  the  slip
      rule. I find that there was a clear error of law in  the  decision  to
      allow the Appellant's appeal under the Rules and I set  that  decision
      aside since that is obviously not what the Judge intended to say.


  18. That means that the  appeals  of  all  three  Appellants  fall  to  be
      determined outside the Rules under the Article 8 jurisprudence  taking
      into account the Respondent's own policy guidance  (see  SF  Albania).
      The Judge appears to have come to the view that he  did  not  need  to
      take into account the public interest because of his criticisms of the
      refusal letter. The  Judge  took  three  points  against  the  refusal
      letter. The first was that it  referred  to  the  Appellants  entering
      United Kingdom in 2007, the 2nd is that there was an error in  stating
      the children's ages at date of entry and thirdly there  was  reference
      to a partner when there was no support that the Appellant  could  rely
      upon. On closer examination these difficulties in the  refusal  letter
      are not such as to  make  the  Respondent's  decision  unlawful  under
      section 55 or otherwise.


  19. Firstly, the Judge himself acknowledged that the Appellants  may  have
      entered in "early 2007". Secondly, it would not necessarily have  been
      obvious to the Respondent at the date of decision that the  father  of
      the children had no part to play in their lives. Thirdly, whilst there
      was an error in that at the date of entry the children were not 11 and
      14 but rather 5 and 3 a careful reading of the  refusal  letter  shows
      that the Respondent was aware of the ages of the children at  date  of
      decision see for example the first line of  page  5  (of  10)  of  the
      refusal letter. The  Judge  fell  into  error  in  deciding  that  the
      Respondent's decision was by reason of the errors "irrational  at  its
      core" as he put it.


  20. The Judge also criticised the Respondent for not taking  into  account
      her own policy but did not consider whether the policy  applied  where
      there had been a serious breach of Immigration Rules as there  was  in
      this case by the Appellant. It was necessary for the Judge to consider
      the public interest factors  when  carrying  out  the  proportionality
      exercise  outside  the  Rules.  There  is   no   evidence   from   the
      determination the Judge did in fact  do  that  and  that  is  a  clear
      material error of law. I therefore  set  aside  the  decision  of  the
      Judge.


  21. I canvassed with the parties whether there was any further evidence in
      this case but it appears that  that  is  not  necessary,  the  Judge's
      assessment of the facts  having  been  described  by  the  Appellant's
      solicitor as full. I therefore proceed to remake the decision in  this
      case on the basis of the facts as found  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      which were not in dispute.


  22. The Appellant can  only  succeed  if  her  children  do.  She  is  not
      financially independent and consequently fails under section 117B  (3)
      of the 2002 Act. Her status here was unlawful and little weight if any
      could be given to it in the balancing exercise. The Appellants JO  and
      SO rely primarily on the length of time they have been in this country
      and the need for their education to be completed.  The  Judge  himself
      appeared to leave open the possibility that it would be reasonable for
      the children to return to Nigeria once their education  was  completed
      see for example [58]. The Judge referred to  the  preparation  of  the
      children for independent life as  adults.  Many  children,  he  wrote,
      leave their parents at around the age of 18 years in order to start an
      undergraduate course at university. The Judge found this was a natural
      stage at which to expect the Appellant to arrange the departure of the
      family if they were not lawfully present  in  the  United  Kingdom  by
      then.


  23. The Respondent's counterargument is that there is no obligation on the
      United Kingdom to educate persons who are in this  country  unlawfully
      (see EV Philippines) and the children's future educational  needs  are
      not of such significance that they outweigh all  other  considerations
      (contrary  to  what  the   Judge   appeared   to   conclude   in   his
      proportionality  assessment).  There  is  force   in   this   argument
      particularly as JO's education appears to be coming to its end and  SO
      can adapt to education in his country of origin.


  24. In remaking the decision in this case, I must consider  as  a  primary
      consideration,  although  not  the  primary  consideration,  the  best
      interests of the children. Their best  interests  are  undoubtedly  to
      remain with their mother and to continue their education for the  time
      being in this country. As the Judge pointed out there was no  evidence
      of any long-term plans for education. They have  social  ties  as  one
      would expect given the length of time they have been here but  as  was
      pointed out the 2nd and 3rd Appellants could continue  their  sporting
      interests in Nigeria. There was little  if  any  evidence  before  the
      Judge that their playing of sports was of such importance  that  great
      weight could be placed upon it.


  25. On the Respondent's side of the  balance  is  the  legitimate  aim  of
      immigration control. The Appellant has a bad immigration history,  she
      has overstayed her visit visa by a substantial period of time and  has
      had substantial access to public funds in the form of  both  education
      and healthcare (the Judge does not give any particular details of  the
      latter but refers to it in general  terms).  She  is  not  financially
      independent and it is difficult to gauge the reliability of the future
      support she put forward (in letter form only) that she would  continue
      to be supported by the charity of others. The children have been  here
      for a substantial period of time, 11 years,  but  JO  is  only  a  few
      months away from completing his schooling and  SO,  the  Judge  found,
      would be able to adapt to education in Nigeria.


  26. The Court of Appeal authority of MA confirms that very strong  reasons
      are needed to remove children who have  been  here  for  more  than  7
      years. As the Respondent pointed out in submissions,  it  also  states
      that when assessing the reasonableness of removing  children  one  can
      take into account the immigration history  of  the  adult  parent.  In
      considering whether children who had lived in the UK  for  over  seven
      years could be removed, it is inherent in the reasonableness  test  in
      section 117B (6) of the 2002 Act  and  paragraph  276ADE(1)  that  the
      Court should have regard  to  wider  public  interest  considerations,
      particularly the need for effective immigration control, see AM [2017]
      EWCA Civ 180.


  27. The burden of establishing the very strong reasons  required  by  both
      the IDIs and MA, rests on the Respondent to the usual  civil  standard
      of balance of probabilities. Those very strong reasons  are  bound  up
      with the Appellant's poor immigration record. The Appellant has evaded
      the immigration authorities whilst taking advantage of  scarce  public
      resources. In my view these are very strong reasons why the  Appellant
      and the children should be removed as a family unit  to  Nigeria.  The
      children cannot be a trump card. They  have  had  the  benefit  of  an
      education in this country and the Judge himself at [43] fully expected
      that the Appellants  would  be  readily  employable  in  Nigeria.  The
      Appellants do not have a right to a further education in this  country
      while their status here is unlawful. The children cannot of course  be
      blamed for the actions of their parent but her actions  can  be  taken
      into account in assessing the overall reasonableness of expecting  the
      children to leave.

  28.  The Appellant and the children have been able to live in this country
      because the Appellant has evaded the attention of the authorities. The
      argument that the children might have been able to meet the provisions
      of paragraph 276 ADE in a few months' time and thus  the  case  was  a
      "near miss" is not a valid argument. There is no such thing as a  near
      miss under the Immigration Rules, one either meets the  Rules  or  one
      does not. None of these Appellants could  meet  the  Rules  and  their
      argument for succeeding outside the rules was the length of time  they
      had been here and their engagement with the educational system in this
      country. That has  to  be  balanced  against  the  legitimate  aim  of
      immigration control and in the circumstances, I find that  the  scales
      weigh more heavily on the Respondent's side of the balance than on the
      Appellants' side.


  29. The children can continue with their education in Nigeria and  utilise
      the skills they will have obtained in this country. The Appellant  who
      lived the first 30 years of her life in Nigeria and who  has  remained
      in the cultural diaspora whilst in the United  Kingdom  will  have  no
      difficulties in readjusting to life in Nigeria and can no doubt assist
      the children should they require  any  assistance  in  the  future.  I
      therefore set aside the decision at  first  instance  and  remake  the
      decision by dismissing the  Appellant's  appeals  against  refusal  to
      grant leave.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
    law and I have set it aside. I remake the decision  by  dismissing  the
    Appellants' appeals

Appellants' appeals dismissed

I continue the anonymity order in relation to the 2nd and 3rd Appellants.  I
    make no anonymity order in relation to the first Appellant as there  is
    no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 22nd of January 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 5  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or  court  direct  otherwise  the  2nd  and  3rd
    Appellants are granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings  shall
    directly or indirectly identify them or any  member  of  their  family.
    This direction applies both to the Appellants and  to  the  Respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have set aside the  decision  at  first  instance  on  the  grounds  of
material errors of law, I set aside the decision to make fee awards in  this
case. As the appeals have been dismissed I make no fee awards.

Signed this 22nd of January 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



