
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32697/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Notice Promulgated            |
|On 6 December 2016                            |On 3 January 2017             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           mrs monique do rosario
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    No appearance


                                   NOTICE


Background

 1. The appellant in this case is the Secretary of State and the respondent
    is Mrs Monique Do Rosario.  However  for  the  purposes  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal I refer to the parties as  they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal where Mrs Do Rosario was the appellant.  Mrs Do Rosario  is  a
    citizen of Brazil born on 22 June 1986 and appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the respondent's decision  of  10  September  2015  to
    refuse her a residence card as confirmation of a right to reside in the
    United Kingdom as a family member of an EEA national exercising  treaty
    rights under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006
    ("the EEA Regulations").

 2. In a decision promulgated on 12 April  2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Wilson  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal.   The   respondent
    appealed to the Upper Tribunal with permission.  The appeal came before
    me.  In a decision promulgated on 20  October  2016  I  set  aside  the
    decision of Judge Wilson in its entirety with  no  findings  preserved.
    That decision is appended to this Decision and Reasons.

 3. The appellant's appeal  therefore  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision of 10 September 2015 was  due  to  be  re-made  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal by me at a hearing on  6  December  2016,  the  hearing  on  5
    October having been adjourned by consent  at  the  request  of  Mrs  Do
    Rosario's representatives due to late instructions.  However, the Upper
    Tribunal received a letter dated 5 December 2016 by  fax  and  by  post
    from the appellant's  representatives,  RBS  Solicitors  informing  the
    Upper Tribunal that their client no longer wished to proceed and  asked
    for the appellant's appeal to be withdrawn.

 4. Although the Upper Tribunal in a notice, also dated  5  December  2016,
    indicated that the application to withdraw had been received at 15:36pm
    and therefore the Upper Tribunal Judge was not prepared to withdraw  it
    at such  a  late  stage  without  giving  the  Secretary  of  State  an
    opportunity to respond to the application, there was no  appearance  by
    or on behalf of Mrs Rosario.  In the absence of a decision by the Upper
    Tribunal to consent to the withdrawal  Mrs  Rosario's  appeal  remained
    before the Upper Tribunal and  it  is  regrettable  that  she  and  her
    representative choose not to attend.

 5. I  considered  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    including Rule 2 -  the  overriding  objective  and  Rule  28.   I  was
    satisfied that the parties had been properly notified and that  it  was
    in the interests of justice to proceed.   However  a  further  fax  was
    received after  the  hearing  from  Mrs  Do  Rosario's  representatives
    indicating that they  were  withdrawing  from  acting  and  that  their
    instructions were that Mrs Do Rosario wished to  withdraw  her  appeal.





 6. Mr Staunton indicated that he had no objection to  the  withdrawal.   I
    therefore considered Rule 17 of the Procedure Rules.  I consent to  Mrs
    Rosario withdrawing her case from the Upper Tribunal.  This is a notice
    therefore pursuant to Rule 17(5) to inform the parties that Mrs Rosaria
    has withdrawn her appeal.

 7. The effect of the case being withdrawn from the Upper Tribunal is  that
    the proceedings before the Upper Tribunal are now at an  end.   As  the
    Upper Tribunal set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision promulgated
    on 20 October 2016 the effect is that the Secretary of State's decision
    dated 10 September 2015,  refusing  Mrs  Rosario's  application  for  a
    residence card remains a lawful decision.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is withdrawn.

No anonymity direction was sought or is appropriate in this  case  and  none
is made.


Signed                                  Date:  30 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee application was made or no fee award is appropriate in this case.


Signed                                  Date:  30 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


                                  APPENDIX

                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32697/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                              |
|On 5 October 2016                             |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MRS MONIQUE DO ROSARIO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Rene, Counsel, instructed by RBS Solicitors


                   DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW AND DIRECTIONS


 1. Although the appellant in this case is the Secretary of State  I  refer
    to the parties as they were before the First-tier  Tribunal  where  Mrs
    Monique Rosaria was the appellant.  Mrs Rosaria is a citizen of  Brazil
    born on 22 June 1986.  She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  against
    the respondent's decision of 10 September 2015 to refuse the  appellant
    a residence card as confirmation of her right to reside in  the  United
    Kingdom as the family member  of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights, under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006
    ("the EEA Regulations").

 2. The appellant's appeal was considered on the papers  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge MJH Wilson. In a decision promulgated  on  12
    April  2016  Judge  Wilson  allowed  the  appellant's   appeal.     The
    respondent appealed with permission.

Error of Law

 3. The appellant's original application was refused on the basis that  the
    appellant had failed to show  that  her  EEA  national  sponsor  was  a
    qualified person within the meaning of the EEA Regulations as there was
    insufficient evidence that he was a worker. The  respondent  had  noted
    that he was unable to verify that the sponsor was employed with  Cofley
    Gdf-Suez, because the sponsor had said he was no  longer  working  with
    the company  and  the  respondent  was  further  unable  to  verify  by
    telephone another claimed employer, Appsolute Solutions  Brazilian  Ltd
    as the respondent was unable to make no contact with this employer.

 4. Judge Wilson was satisfied that the sponsor was employed by Cofley GDF-
    Suez in the three months prior to the application, which was made on  4
    April 2015, as this was confirmed by the evidence  including  payslips.
    The payslip evidence also confirmed that the sponsor  continued  to  be
    employed by Cofley GDF-Suez for just short  of  two  months  after  the
    application. Judge Wilson went  on  to  find  that  there  was  further
    evidence that the sponsor was a worker in the  form  of  payslips  from
    Appsolute Solutions Ltd Brazil Limited covering a period from  February
    2015 until the end of August 2015.  The judge was  satisfied  therefore
    that there was satisfactory evidence showing that  the  sponsor  was  a
    worker in the United Kingdom.  The judge noted that the sponsor was due
    to commence employment  with  a  third  company,  Compass  Group  UK  &
    Ireland,  the  appellant  having  submitted  the   sponsor's   pre-work
    documentation on appeal.   It  was  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    sponsor had wasted little time in obtaining  new  employment  following
    what was said to be  the  collapse  of  Appsolute  Solutions  Brazilian
    Limited restaurant business.

 5. The judge was satisfied having regard to all of the evidence  that  the
    sponsor was a worker within the meaning of  Regulation  6  of  the  EEA
    Regulations.

 6. It was the respondent's case that the judge erred as he had no evidence
    before him that  as  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  the  sponsor  was
    exercising EEA treaty  rights.    The  Secretary  of  State  relied  on
    Boodhoo and Another (EEA Regs: relevant  evidence)  [2013]  UKUT  00346
    (IAC) which confirms that the relevant date is the date of the hearing.
    The respondent noted that although  the  appellant  provided  documents
    showing the sponsor was employed in  August  2015,  these  predate  the
    hearing by eight months and do not confirm employment  at  the  correct
    time.

 7. It seems to me that much of the difficulty in this case arises  because
    the  case  was  considered  on  the  papers.  The  appellant  submitted
    information that was available at the time of  the  appeal,  which  was
    made shortly after the decision by the respondent, in  September  2015.
    Although arguably it is difficult to see what further  information  the
    appellant and the sponsor could have submitted at that date, the letter
    provided dated 20 July 2015 from Compass Group UK &  Ireland  confirmed
    that  the  appellant  was  commencing  employment  on  21  July   2015.
    Therefore the sponsor may have had payslips by 17 September  2015  when
    the appeal was submitted.  In any event, the matter was not  considered
    by the First-tier Tribunal until Judge Wilson considered it on 1  April
    2016.  There was initially an issue in relation to the appeal being out
    of time which may have led to the delay.

 8. However, on 5 February 2016 the Tribunal  issued  a  notice  indicating
    that the Tribunal had decided that the  appeal  should  proceed,  being
    satisfied that by reason of special circumstances it  would  be  unjust
    not to extend time. The Tribunal then issued another  notice,  dated  9
    February 2016, to both the appellant and the respondent in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  It was indicated that both parties were to provide  any
    further written evidence or submissions that they wished to make to the
    Tribunal by 8 March 2016.  No further information was received.

 9. Although it may be argued that the appellant might not have been  aware
    that further evidence of the  sponsor's  employment  should  have  been
    submitted, given that she would not have been aware when  the  decision
    was to be made, there are a number of difficulties with  this  argument
    not least that the First-tier Tribunal issued a notice in February 2016
    in relation to the submission of any further evidence. I note  that  Mr
    Rene, although he did not concede the appeal did not pursue it with any
    force and in effect did not dispute that further evidence  should  have
    been submitted.

10.  The appellant's original appeal  in  September  2015  did  not  submit
    evidence of actual employment at that date.  Rather there was  evidence
    that the appellant was due to take employment in July  2015.   Although
    arguably at that date the sponsor  remained  a  qualified  person,  the
    judge failed to address the circumstances at the date  of  the  hearing
    over six months later.  The judge's findings at [10] were only that the
    sponsor 'was' a worker.  I am further satisfied that the  judge  erred,
    in this context, in not adjourning his consideration of the  appeal  to
    allow the appellant an  opportunity  to  produce  further  up  to  date
    information as to whether the sponsor remained a qualified person under
    Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations.

Remaking the Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal therefore contains  a  material
    error of law and is  set  aside  in  its  entirety.   No  findings  are
    preserved.  Although I was minded to remake the decision at the hearing
    the appellant's representative indicated that  instructions  were  only
    received by instructing solicitors the night before the Upper  Tribunal
    hearing and further information had therefore  not  been  produced.  Mr
    Bramble had no objection to a short adjournment. It was agree  by  both
    parties that the Upper Tribunal could remake the  decision  given  that
    the issue is narrow and confined to whether or not  the  sponsor  is  a
    qualified person. The appeal will therefore be  reheard  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 6 December 2016.

Notice of Decision on Error of Law


12. The appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  is  allowed.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination contains an error of law capable of  affecting
    the outcome of the appeal and is set aside.


13. The decision on the appeal will be remade by  a  single  judge  of  the
    Upper Tribunal on 6 December 2016.

                                 Directions

        The appellant is to file and serve a consolidated bundle of evidence
        so that it is received no later than 22 November 2016. The bundle is
        to separately tabulate: (i) the  evidence  relied  upon  before  the
        First-tier Tribunal; and, (ii) the additional evidence  that  it  is
        now sought to rely upon before the Upper Tribunal. The  bundle  must
        include (a) evidence of the sponsor's current  employment  including
        in the form of original pay slips with corresponding  original  bank
        statements, (b) evidence of the sponsor's employment since the  date
        of decision in the same form.


   Any failure to comply with these directions  may  lead  the  Tribunal  to
   exercise its powers to decide the appeal without a further oral  hearing,
   or to conclude that the defaulting party  has  no  relevant  information,
   evidence or submissions to provide.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:  19 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.

Signed                                  Date:  19 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
