
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/32008/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Stoke on Trent
Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 20th March 2015
On 26th June 2015


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                             Mr kennedy asumadu

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Basiri-Desfouli
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone, a Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal with the permission of FTTJ
    Chohas who thought that the FTTJ who heard this appeal, FTTJ  Williams,
    had arguably failed to consider the case of Kareem (Proxy Marriages -EU
    Law) [2014] UKUT 00024.

 2. The case was listed before me on 18th December 2014 following  which  I
    decided that there had been a material error of law in the decision  of
    the FTT but I directed a further hearing  at  which  the  parties  were
    given the opportunity to adduce  updated  evidence  to  deal  with  the
    validity of the marriage between the sponsor, a Dutch citizen  born  on
    15 July 1959, and the appellant, a Ghanaian citizen  born  on  2  March
    1968.

The adjourned hearing

 3. At the adjourned hearing Ms Basiri-Desfouli applied for an  adjournment
    on the basis that she said her client wanted to adduce  fresh  evidence
    from a Dutch lawyer that she had come across in a  different  case  who
    would be able to confirm that the marriage between  the  appellant  and
    the sponsor was indeed recognised in Dutch law.

 4. I reminded to Ms Basiri-Desfouli  that  her  client  had  been  legally
    represented throughout the appeal but she explained that  her  client's
    legal advisers had not  discharged  their  duty  to  their  client.  In
    particular they had not obtained the documents needed  to  advance  her
    client's appeal.

 5. I considered the situation to be highly regrettable, but  applying  the
    overriding objective of trying cases fairly and allocating  appropriate
    resources  to  the  appellant's  case,  I  decided   to   refuse   that
    application. In making this decision I took into account the fact  that
    Ms Basiri-Desfouli was unable to produce a copy of the lawyer's  letter
    and even if she  could  it  had  not  been  filed  in  compliance  with
    directions.

 6. I then proceeded to hear  the  case.  Miss  Basiri-Desfouli  said  that
    despite the lengthy adjournment no additional steps had been  taken  on
    the appellant's behalf since the previous hearing.  She said  this  was
    the fault of her instructing solicitor.

 7. Ms Basiri-Desfouli then said she had a case report on which she  wished
    to rely and this dealt  with  the  issue  of  proxy  marriages  in  the
    Netherlands. Miss  Johnstone  said  that  she  objected  to  that  late
    evidence which she had no proper time to consider  and  which  did  not
    even relate to the case before the Tribunal. She also pointed out  that
    very little weight could  attach  to  that  document  as  it  had  been
    prepared for a different case.

 8.  The  application  to  adjourn  having  failed,  I  proceeded  to  hear
    submissions by both representatives. Ms Basiri-Desfouli considered that
    there was additional evidence which may have  been  placed  before  the
    Tribunal and in particular evidence relating to the expert evidence  of
    a general nature (not yet available  in  this  case)  relating  to  the
    recognition by the Dutch authorities of this marriage.  By  implication
    she accepted that without that evidence her client faced difficulty  in
    advancing her appeal further.

 9. Miss Johnstone, on the other hand, pointed out that the case of  Kareem
    had not been  properly  considered  by  the  FTT  and  were  it  to  be
    considered it would have shown that this appellant did not qualify  for
    a residence card because there was no durable relationship between  the
    appellant and Ms Acheampong.  Furthermore, she submitted, the appellant
    had put no evidence of a durable relationship before the respondent  so
    that  she  had  not  had  an  opportunity  to  consider  it.  In   such
    circumstances before the Upper Tribunal would be able to  consider  the
    existence of a durable relationship this would need to be considered by
    the respondent.

10. I then heard further argument from  Ms  Basiri-Desfouli  who  submitted
    that the requirements of Dutch law were in fact clearly set out in  the
    case of Kareem. In particular I was referred to paragraphs 26 -  29  in
    which the Upper Tribunal state that Dutch law only refuses to recognise
    proxy marriages where they are contrary to public order. That would not
    be the case here. Having established a durable  relationship  I  should
    therefore allow the appeal.

Conclusions

11. I am not satisfied that the quoting of reports or evidence in different
    cases or the assertion that the appellant and  the  sponsor  are  in  a
    durable  relationship  is  sufficient  to  justify  finding  that   the
    conclusion of the FTT was erroneous. It is clear based on the  case  of
    Kareem that a dual test must be satisfied before the spouse of  an  EEA
    national is entitled to a residence  card.  In  particular,  before  he
    qualifies for residence  and  free  movement  rights  in  the  EEA  the
    applicant must show that his marriage to the EEA national is recognised
    both in the country where it was celebrated and also in the country  of
    the EEA member who is the other partner in  that relationship.

12. The appellant has failed to establish that he qualifies  for  residence
    as the spouse of an EEA national because he has not satisfied me to the
    required standard that his marriage was conducted  in  accordance  with
    Ghanian law and was recognised in Holland, the country of the sponsor's
    nationality. Accordingly I am not satisfied to  the  required  standard
    (that of a balance of probabilities) that the appellant qualifies under
    regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations for a residence card. He has failed
    to prove that he is family member of an EEA national.

13. Having found a material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  qualified  for  a
    residence card on the basis on which he had sought one.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  FTT  to  allow  the  appeal
against the respondent's decision is hereby set aside.  The  Upper  Tribunal
re-makes  the  decisions  which  is  to  dismiss  the  appeal  against   the
respondent's decision. Accordingly the  respondent's decision  to  refuse  a
residence card stands.

No anonymity direction was made by the FTT and I make no such direction.

The FTT made no fee award and I have not  been  invited  to  interfere  with
that decision.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
