
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  IA/32842/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
              Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On                     30 July                     2015
                   On 14 August 2015


                                   Before

                           THE HON. LORD MATTHEWS
                 (Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MS ALEXANDRA KOLODENKO
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office, Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ian MacDonald QC, Direct Access Counsel

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  decision  of
     Judge Ievins, promulgated on 13 April 2015, which  allowed,  on  human
     rights grounds under article 8 of  the  Convention,  the  respondent's
     appeal against a decision of the Secretary  of  State  dated  4 August
     2014.  Hereafter I will refer to Ms Kolodenko as the applicant and  the
     Secretary of State as the respondent for the sake of consistency.

2.    The respondent's decision was to refuse  the  applicant's  application
     to vary her leave to enter or remain  in  the  United Kingdom  and  to
     remove  her  from  the  United Kingdom  by  way  of  directions  under
     section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  It was
     proposed to remove her to the Russian Federation.

Background

3.    The applicant was born on 19 February 1985 in the  USSR,  as  it  was
     then.  She  came  to  the  United Kingdom  as  a  Tier 4  Student  on
     17 September 2010 and was granted leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Post-
     Study Work) Migrant from 2 February 2012 until 2 February 2014.  Soon
     after she arrived in the United Kingdom she met David James Collins and
     they were married on 19 October 2013.  Before her  leave  expired  she
     applied for leave to remain as a  spouse  on  23 December  2013.   The
     applicant has been a freelance interior and graphic  designer  and  now
     works as an architect, qualified in the Russian Federation but  not  in
     the United Kingdom.  Her husband hopes to become a Blue  Badge  travel
     guide and earns his living as a professional poker player.  The  couple
     did not meet the financial threshold requirements at the  date  of  the
     application and it failed.

4.    The application was first considered by  the  Secretary  of  State  on
     19 May 2014 and was refused under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules
     because the income threshold requirements set out in  Appendix FM  and
     FM - SE were not met.  At that time the case of MM and others was under
     appeal and the application was put on hold.

5.    Thereafter on 4 August 2014 the Secretary of  State  decided  against
     granting the application.  The reasons for refusal letter explains  why
     and refers to the  financial  requirements.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
     judge points out  that  in  deciding  to  refuse  the  application  the
     Secretary of State had considered the applicant's right to respect  for
     family life protected by article 8 of the Convention.  The judge  goes
     on in paragraph 5 to say the following:


         "At  the  relevant  time  this   fell   for   consideration   under
         Appendix FM - EX.1.   The  appellant  met   the   suitability
         requirements.  The Secretary of State considered paragraph EX.1(b)
         which would apply if -


             'the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British  citizen,  settled
             in the UK or in the UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
             protection, and there are insurmountable obstacles  to  family
             life with that partner continuing outside the UK. '


         The  Secretary  of  State  understood  the  phrase  'insurmountable
         obstacles' to mean the very significant difficulties which would be
         faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their  family
         life together outside the UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or
         would entail very serious hardship for applicant or their  partner.
         The Secretary of State  considered  there  were  no  insurmountable
         obstacles why the appellant and her husband could not pursue family
         life in the Russian Federation.  Thus the application  was  refused
         under R - LTRP.1.1(d)."


6.    The Secretary of State also considered the private life aspect of  the
     application, which fell to be considered under paragraph 276ADE(1). It
     was concluded that the applicant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
     paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  She had lived in the UK continuously for less
     than 20 years but it  was  not  accepted  that  there  would  be  very
     significant obstacles to her integration into Russia.

7.     Finally  the  Secretary  of  State  concluded  that  there  were   no
     exceptional circumstances which might warrant consideration of a  grant
     of leave under article 8 outside the rules.


8.    The applicant gave notice of appeal and asked  for  an  oral  hearing.
     The substance of  her  grounds  is  set  out  in  paragraph 7  of  the
     determination of the First-tier Tribunal in the following terms:

         "Her grounds of appeal are  in  thirteen paragraphs.   Inter  alia
         those grounds point out, as is indeed the case,  that  her  present
         income and savings qualify her under the Immigration Rules.  It was
         asserted that the respondent's failure to take account of that  new
         material, submitted as a variation  of  the  application,  breached
         section 3C(5) of the Immigration Act 1971 and so was unlawful.  The
         immigration threshold requirements were  intended  to  comply  with
         article 8(2).  The full circumstances of each individual case  had
         to be considered and mechanical application of the requirements was
         unlawful.  There had been no proper consideration of the effect  of
         refusal of leave on the appellant's husband's article 8 rights.  To
         require him to leave the United Kingdom would amount to  what  had
         been described as a  'colossal  interference'  with  his  right  to
         respect for family life.   It  would  be  disproportionate  to  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United Kingdom.   The
         insurmountable obstacle test set out at EX.1(b) was too high as the
         Court of Appeal had suggested in  MF  Nigera  (well-known,  but  no
         citation given). Home Office guidance required the  decision  maker
         to consider the abilities of the parties to lawfully enter and stay
         in the country concerned.  While it was for the appellant  to  show
         that that was  not  possible  there  was  no  indication  that  the
         appellant's husband could  even  obtain  leave  to  enter  or  find
         employment in Russia.  To assert that married life could be carried
         on there was  unreasonable.  Furthermore,  Parliament  had  in  the
         Immigration Act 2014 set out in section 19 its view of the public
         interest considerations applicable in all cases.  The appellant met
         the positive requirements of section 117B a substantial quantity of
         supporting documents were also enclosed and these showed  (as  must
         be accepted) that at the time of decision, and now,  the  appellant
         met the only requirements of the Immigration Rules  ever  disputed,
         the financial requirements."

9.    Evidence was led before the First-tier  Tribunal,  including  evidence
     as to the financial circumstances  of  the  parties.   Furthermore,  in
     answer to a question from the judge, the applicant said  that  she  did
     not know if her husband would be entitled to a spousal visa for Russia.
      The Russian authorities required evidence of employment for  a  travel
     visa.

10.   There was evidence as to the circumstances of the parties, into  which
     I need not go for present purposes.

11.   The Home Office presenting officer relied on the reasons  for  refusal
     letter. It was accepted that the applicant did  then  meet  the  income
     requirements. In context that can only mean that she did not meet  them
     at the time of the application. The letter had considered whether there
     were insurmountable obstacles preventing the couple from relocating  to
     Russia, where the applicant had previously worked  and  where  she  had
     gained her qualification.   There  were  no  exceptional  circumstances
     which might warrant allowing the appeal on article 8  grounds  outside
     the Rules.  She referred to the judgment of Underhill LJ  in  Singh  at
     paragraph 64. The decision was proportionate and in accordance with the
     law, the legitimate aim being the public interest in the maintenance of
     effective immigration control.

12.   Before the FtT,  Mr MacDonald  accepted  that  at  the  time  of  the
     application the applicant could not  meet  the  financial  requirements
     but, said that she was now able to meet the rules.   The  Secretary  of
     State should have served a  one-stop  notice,  although  that  was  not
     pleaded.


13.   It was argued that the Secretary of State should also have  considered
     article 8 as part of her decision and Mr MacDonald relied on  Pankina
     [2010] EWCA Civ 719.

14.   He further submitted that an appeal under article 8 had to be decided
     on the facts as they were at the date of the  hearing.   There  was  no
     countervailing public interest because as at the date of the hearing it
     was unchallenged that the applicant satisfied the requirements  of  the
     Immigration Rules.  The Secretary of State could not say if the sponsor
     could enter  Russia.   It  was  not  reasonable  to  expect  a  British
     citizen's spouse to relocate to another country.  Mr MacDonald sought a
     direction that if the appeal was allowed the applicant should be  given
     leave to remain on a par with the leave she would have  received  as  a
     spouse.

15.   In reaching  his  decision  the  FtT  judge  set  out  Mr MacDonald's
     skeleton argument at paragraphs 20 to 22 of his determination.  It was
     submitted that she met the financial requirements of the rules and that
     the sections in EX.1 and EX.2 did not apply because they were parasitic
     on a particular rule in  Appendix FM.   They  were  not  freestanding.
     Reference was made to Sabir  Appendix FM - EX.1  (not  freestanding)
     [2014] UK UT 63.  Reference was also made to sections 117A and B of the
     Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act 2002  as  amended.   It  was
     submitted that the appellant spoke English excellently,  that  she  was
     not a burden on tax payers and that she had integrated very  well  into
     United Kingdom society.  Paragraph 22 is in the following terms:

         "When as the new deportation provisions provide a complete code for
         the applicability of article 8 to deportation appeals, the case of
         MF (Nigera v SSHD) [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  makes  clear  that  the
         private life Rules in paragraphs 276ADE to 276DH and  the  family
         life Rules in Appendix FM are  not  a  complete  code  so  far  as
         article 8  compatibility  is  concerned.   The  Court  of  Appeal,
         reflecting the jurisprudence of Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ
         558 and Nagre v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 has approved the  notion  that
         it is necessary  to  find  'compelling  circumstances'  to  justify
         instances of article 8 outside the rules.  However  a  differently
         constituted Court of Appeal has found that there was little utility
         in imposing an intermediary test as a preliminary to  consideration
         of article 8 outside the Rules for a person who (as this appellant)
         fails under the Rules.  That is a reference to MM (Lebanon) v  SSHD
         [2014] EWCH Civ 985.   Paragraph 16  of  Mr MacDonald's  skeleton
         argument is central.  The Rules do set out the  matters  which  the
         Secretary of State regards as attracting  the  greatest  weight  in
         respect of the public interest and  where  the  Rules  apply  cases
         should first be considered under them but  where  the  requirements
         were not met it is, I am satisfied, necessary to make an assessment
         of article 8 applying the criteria establish  by  case  law.   The
         criteria in the Rules  do  not  accord  with  the  criteria  of  an
         article 8 assessment established by case law. "


      The judge then went on to consider article 8 and to follow the  five-
     stage approach set out in Razgar v SSHD [2004] (UK HL 27)  and  in  the
     light of section 117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
     Act 2002.

16.   He found that the proposed removal  would  be  an  interference  by  a
     public authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to  respect
     for her private and/or family life.   She and  her  husband  enjoyed  a
     genuine and committed family life.  That consisted not  only  of  their
     relationship with each other but of their relationship with  the  wider
     and  extended  family.   She  was  in   settled   employment   in   the
     United Kingdom.  Paragraph 26 runs as follows:

         "That being so, would such interference have consequences  of  such
         gravity as potentially to engage the operation of  article 8?   It
         would.  While the appellant could, presumably, find  some  kind  of
         employment in the Russian Federation there is no reason to  suppose
         that her husband would be  able  enter  there  as  a  spouse.   The
         Russian Federation, like the United Kingdom,  appears  to  require
         proof of income before allowing such applications.  To require this
         couple to live apart undoubtedly is  a  consequence  of  sufficient
         gravity to engage the operation of article 8."


     The judge found that the interference was in accordance  with  the  law
     and went on at paragraph 28 to say the following:


         "The  fourth  Razgar  question  is  whether  such  interference  is
         necessary in a democratic society in the interests of one  or  more
         of the legitimate aims set  out  in  article 8(2).   There  is  no
         question of national security, public  safety,  the  prevention  of
         disorder or crime or the protection of health or  morals  being  at
         issue in this appeal.  The  only  legitimate  aims  that  might  be
         considered to be at  issue  are  the  economic  well-being  of  the
         United Kingdom and the protection and the rights and  freedoms  of
         others.  What is meant by those legitimate  aims  is  amplified  by
         section 117B and here I note that the appellant is in a  fortunate
         financial position.  There can be no question  of  her  becoming  a
         burden  on  public  funds.   The   economic   well-being   of   the
         United Kingdom is not harmed in any way by her been granted  leave
         to remain in this country.  The appellant speaks good English.  The
         only legitimate  aim  that  might  arguably  be  at  issue  is  the
         protection of the rights and freedoms of others by the  maintenance
         of effective immigration control.  I observe however in that regard
         that the appellant has scrupulously followed  the  requirements  of
         the Immigration Rules.


     At  paragraph 29  the  judge  indicated  that  he  was   turning   to
     proportionality.  He said that there was no question  of  a  burden  or
     standard of proof but that he must  carry  out  a  balancing  exercise,
     taking into account all the facts and factors of the  case  and  having
     regard to section 117B(1) in particular.


     Paragraphs 30 and 31 of his determination are as follows:


         "30.     The facts of the case are not in issue.  It is  undeniable
             that this appellant has a strong private life in terms of both
             her employment and her social networks.  She now satisfies the
             financial requirements of Appendix FM and indeed she  did  so
             before the refusal decision.  For at least six months she has
             been earning a salary and possessing savings  well  above  the
             required financial limit.  She has an unblemished  immigration
             record.  Her husband is a British citizen.  It is important to
             note that there is no reason to suppose that he would be  able
             to gain entry to the Russian Federation as a spouse.  Although
             he would be willing to accompany  his  wife  (for  this  is  a
             genuine relationship) he would be unable to do so.  It follows
             that the refusal of this application involves  a  serious  and
             long-term separation of husband and wife.   The  deteriorating
             situation between the Russian Federation and United Kingdom is
             but one of a multitude of factors to make it  unreasonable  to
             force the sponsor  to  relocate.   The  answer,  Mr MacDonald
             suggests, is clear.  I  have  exercised  my  own  judgment  in
             carrying out the balancing exercise and I  am  satisfied  that
             the balance falls clearly in favour of the appellant.


         31.      There remains but one  possibility.   As  the  appellant's
             leave  to  remain  has  expired,  she  cannot   make   another
             application now, although if she could  it  would  undoubtedly
             succeed.  But could she go back  to  the  Russian  Federation,
             without her husband, and make an application - which would be
             successful -from there.  This is a situation that the case of
             Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UK HL 40 has to deal with.  It is  not
             necessarily unlawful to require an appellant to return to  her
             country of origin to make an application for entry  clearance.
             The rationale behind  the  Home  Office  policy  of  routinely
             requiring appellants to apply from abroad was to deter  others
             from entering without entry clearance.  But this appellant did
             enter with entry clearance.  There  is  no  question  of  this
             appellant attempting to manipulate the Immigration Rules.  The
             circumstances of each particular case need to  be  considered.
             This is not  (as  with  Chikwamba)  a  case  where  there  are
             presently children involved.  The case  of  Hayat  (nature  of
             Chikwamba principle) Pakistan [2011] UK UT 444 holds  that  in
             appeals where the only matter  weighing  on  the  respondent's
             side of an article 8 proportionality balance  is  the  public
             policy of requiring  an  application  to  be  made  under  the
             Immigration Rules from abroad, that legitimate objective  will
             usually be outweighed by factors resting  on  the  appellant's
             side of the balance.  The Chikwamba principle is not therefore
             confined to cases where children are involved.  When that case
             reached the Court of Appeal  in 2012  it  was  held  that  an
             application for leave to remain in the  United Kingdom  which
             did not succeed under the  Immigration  Rules  but  was  being
             pursued under article 8 should not be rejected simply on  the
             procedural ground that the applicant  could  apply  for  entry
             clearance from abroad.  The claim should  be  allowed  if  the
             applicant does in fact have an article 8 right to  remain  in
             the United Kingdom.  If the requirement to  apply  for  entry
             clearance from abroad constitutes a disruption  sufficient  to
             engage  article 8,  there   will   be   a   disproportionate
             interference unless there is a sensible reason  for  insisting
             on it.  Whether there is a sensible reason will depend on  the
             facts of the case.  There is no sensible reason in this  case.
             This is a case where the likelihood  of  being  granted  entry
             clearance is more than very strong.  I am in no doubt that  if
             the appellant was required to return to the Russian Federation
             to make an application  which  would  inevitably  succeed  the
             interference with her right to respect for private and  family
             life (and that of the sponsor and the wider family)  would  be
             disproportionate to any legitimate aim."


The respondent's appeal

17.   The respondent appealed against that determination.

      The first ground is that the  FtT  judge  failed  correctly  to  apply
     Appendix FM.  It is said that the judge found that the applicant could
     not meet the requirements of Appendix FM and  reference  was  made  to
     paragraph 23.  This seemed to  be  on  the  basis,  according  to  the
     respondent,  that  the  applicant  could  not  satisfy  the   financial
     requirements but it was not clear as there were later references to her
     ability to meet those Rules and reference was  made  to  paragraph 30.
     This is disingenuous as it is perfectly plain that the judge means that
     she could not meet the Rules at the time of the  application  but  that
     she can now.

18.   The judge is criticised for not going on to consider EX.1 despite  the
     refusal letter acknowledging that this was a case in which  EX.1  could
     be  reached.   It  is  said  that  the  judge  allowed  himself  to  be
     misdirected by the skeleton argument and consequently  no  finding  was
     made as to whether or not there were insurmountable obstacles to family
     life with the partner continuing outside the UK, which is  said  to  be
     the main issue in the appeal.



19.   Ground 2 alleges  that  there  were  unsupported  findings  that  the
     applicant's husband would not be able to accompany the  applicant.   If
     that were the case then the matter would have to be determined  in  the
     applicant's favour under EX.1 and within the rules.  The ground goes on
     in the following terms:

         "However, these findings  appear  to  be  based  upon  the  Judge's
         conjecture that the appellant's husband might not be able  to  gain
         entry clearance to Russia.  No evidence for this flight of fancy is
         cited in the determination."


20.   I cite that ground in full because I find it unfortunate  to  say  the
     least that the use of such language is employed when a judicial  office
     holder is being criticised  by  those  representing  the  Secretary  of
     State.

21.   Ground 3 claims  a  material  misdirection  in  law  in  relation  to
     Chikwamba and Hayat.  It is in the following terms:

         "The Chikwamaba (sic) principle was distilled in Hayatt (sic) thus:


             ...  in  appeals  where  the  only  matter  weighing  on   the
             respondent's side of an article 8 proportionality balance  is
             the public policy of requiring an application to be made under
             the Immigration Rules from abroad, that  legitimate  objective
             will  usually  be  outweighed  by  factors  resting   on   the
             appellant's side of the balance.


         In the instant case there was a failure  to  meet  the  substantive
         requirements of the rule, which was  not  the  case  in  Chikwamaba
         (sic) or Hayatt (sic).   In those  cases,  the  applications  would
         have been successful, but for a requirement that the application be
         made out country.  That is not the case here.


         The appellant has failed to satisfy the  financial  and  evidential
         requirements contained within Appendix FM and Appendix FMSE.  The
         judge speculates that were the application to be  made  abroad  now
         that (sic) the appellant would succeed.  With respect that  is  not
         the ratio decidendi of Chikwamba or Hayatt (sic)."


22.   Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  a  judge  of  the  First-tier
     Tribunal.

 23. In opening his argument in support of the appeal, Mr Clarke relied  on
     the grounds.

      As I understood him, he submitted that there  were  two routes  under
     the Rules which the applicant could have negotiated.  She could  either
     meet the financial requirements or succeed under R - LTRP 1.1(d)  but
     paragraph EX.1 would have to apply in  the  latter  circumstance.  The
     financial requirements  had  not  been  met  as  at  the  time  of  the
     application and if the First-tier Tribunal had  considered  EX.1  under
     the Rules the appeal would have failed.  The  Rules  fully  dealt  with
     family and private life  and  it  would  not  have  been  necessary  to
     consider article 8 thereafter.

24.   There was no reason to think that the sponsor  would  not  be  allowed
     into Russia.  In dealing with this matter the First-tier  Tribunal  had
     effectively reversed the burden of proof.  It was for the applicant  to
     show that he could not enter Russia.  Saying that there was  no  reason
     to suppose that he would was not good enough.  He had  found  that  the
     sponsor would be willing to go  to  Russia.   If  he  had  applied  the
     correct burden of proof EX.1 could not have been met. That also went to
     the assessment of article 8 outside the rules. Such evidence as  there
     was available was not confirmed independently.  Reference was  made  to
     the case of Kareem (Proxy Marriages - EU Law) [2014] UKUT 24.

25.   As far as the third point was concerned the approach of  the  FtT  was
     incorrect.  Reference was made to the case of R (on the application  of
     Chen) v  SSHD  Appendix FM  -  Chikwamba  -  (temporary  separation  -
     proportionality) IJR [2015] UK UT 00189 (IAC).  The  evidence  did  not
     support the speculative finding that the applicant could not  meet  the
     financial requirements.  Chikwamba  fell  away  because  the  applicant
     could not show that she could succeed under the rules.

26.   In reply Mr MacDonald submitted that the appeal by the  Secretary  of
     State was       misconceived.  The applicant had accepted from the word
     go that she could not succeed under FM because she  could  not  satisfy
     the financial requirements. That was the  sole  point  upon  which  the
     Secretary of State took issue, as was made clear in preliminary letters
     written to the applicant. The refusal letter of 4 August 2014 confirmed
     that the applicant had been notified that the application  fell  to  be
     refused solely because the applicant did not meet the income  threshold
     requirements under Appendix FM.  That was never contested and did  not
     form part of the appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal.   That  appeal
     was based solely on article 8.

27.   Turning to the specific  grounds,  it  was  submitted  that  EX.1  was
     parasitic on particular rules and did not stand  alone.   Mr  MacDonald
     took me through the various Rules to which  it  was  an  exception  and
     referred to the case of Sabir.  EX.1 did not apply to  certain  of  the
     requirements in certain circumstances.  It only applied where  it  said
     it applied.  However, the FtT judge had in fact had regard to  EX.1  as
     paragraph 5 of the determination showed.  Thereafter his  approach  in
     paragraphs 22  and 23  was  entirely  in  accordance  with  the  law.
     Reference was made to MF (Nigeria) [2014] 1 WLR 344 and R  (Agyarko)  v
     SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 440.

     In the latter case  the  court  confirmed  at  paragraph 24  that  the
     "insurmountable obstacles" criterion was not an absolute requirement in
     applying article 8 outside the Rules.  The FtT judge's  assessment  of
     proportionality in paragraphs 24 to 30 was not wrong in law.  As  was
     made in Beoku Betts [2008] 3 WLR  166  the  article 8  rights  of  the
     sponsor  had  to  be  taken  into  account.   The  respondent  had  not
     considered them and the FtT judge did not need to, having regard to his
     decision in relation to the applicant's Convention rights.  They  would
     however be seriously interfered with if the respondent's  decision  was
     upheld.  It was extraordinary that  the  respondent  should  require  a
     British citizen to pursuer his married life in Russia where  there  was
     now no conceivable damage to the economic well-being of the UK  but  on
     the contrary a real benefit if the applicant were allowed to remain.


28.   If there were insurmountable obstacles it  mattered  not  whether  the
     appeal was allowed pursuant to EX.1 or article 8.  There was  evidence
     before the FtT judge from the applicant that  the  Russian  authorities
     required evidence of employment and means to grant a visa and if  their
     requirements were anything like the UK's, the sponsor would not  obtain
     the necessary visa.  The suggestion that the judge's  conclusions  were
     "unsupported" "conjecture" and "flights of fancy" was, apart from being
     offensive and inappropriate, wrong.  The UT (IAC)  had  made  it  clear
     that when an issue was raised the respondent should check  through  the
     British Embassy  what  the  relevant  requirements  were.   Immigration
     appeals were not just about burdens of proof.  Migrants would not be in
     a position to get an expert in Russian law but the Secretary  of  State
     could contact the Embassy and obtain information.  In any  event  there
     was no need for corroboration and no point was taken before the  First-
     tier Tribunal.  If an assertion was not challenged then the  First-tier
     Tribunal could accept it.  Where particular evidence was wanted it  was
     set out in rules, for example in relation to bank statements.

29.   As far as Chikwamba was concerned the ratio was nothing like what  was
     being suggested.  Lord Browne at paragraph 44 had held that:

         "Only comparatively rarely  ...  should  an  article 8  appeal  be
         dismissed on the basis that it  would  be  proportionate  and  more
         appropriate for the appellant to apply for leave from abroad."


     The applicant met the financial requirements at the date of the hearing
     and continued to do  so.   It  would  clearly  be  disproportionate  to
     require an application to be made from abroad.  That might also  result
     in  her  losing  her  employment,   which   would   also   be   clearly
     disproportionate.


     The evidence about the income  was  in  the  bundle  and  the  FtT  was
     entitled to make the decision he did.


     The article 8 claim per se was not challenged in terms of the  balance
     drawn. Reference was made to Nagre.  This  applicant  had  a  faultless
     immigration  history,  the  length  and  degree  of  family  disruption
     involved in sending  her  abroad  would  be  disproportionate  and  her
     present financial status would be able to  satisfy  the  conditions  of
     Appendix FM.  There was no sensible reason to sustain  the  submission
     that the FtT got it wrong on Chikwamba.


30.   Mr MacDonald submitted that the case called out for the Secretary  of
     State to have issue a one-stop notice.

31.   In reply Mr Clarke submitted that finances were not the  only  issue.
     EX.1 was dealt with by the Secretary of State so there was a burden  to
     show that there were insurmountable obstacles.  There was  no  need  to
     look outside the Rules when all the issues had been  dealt  with  under
     the rules.   The  argument  that  the  Rules  could  be  by-passed  was
     erroneous.  It was incumbent on the appellant to rebut  the  suggestion
     in  the  letter  that  there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles.   An
     article 8 case could not be one  on  the  basis  of  choice.   It  was
     incumbent on a person who raised something as part  of  their  case  to
     prove it.  If the rules had to specify what evidence  was  required  in
     each case they would infinitely long.  There was no duty to issue a one-
     stop notice.

32.   In final submissions Mr MacDonald referred to the case of  Singh  and
     Khalid v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74.  That case endorsed Nagre.  Nagre  in
     turn  endorsed  the  approach  in  Izuazu.   Unlike  the  position   in
     deportation cases the Rules did not provide a complete code.   In  this
     case there was an enormous gap between the Rules and article 8.  It was
     important to note that in this case no point was taken against the fact
     that the judge had embarked on an article 8  analysis.   On  occasions
     choice could trump the UK's borders.

Decision

33.   It seems to me that this is a somewhat unusual case.  I do  not  think
     it correct to say that the Secretary  of  State's  refusal  letter  was
     based only on the financial requirements since, as I have indicated  in
     my reference to the determination under appeal, the refusal letter  did
     in fact go on to consider article 8 in terms of R - LTRP 1.1(a), (b)
     and (d) and EX.1.  The point was made that EX.1 was not a  stand-alone
     provision and while this is correct, it seems to me to be academic.  In
     the first place, the case of Sabir was one where the  applicant  sought
     to rely on EX.1 as a freestanding route to entitlement to leave.   That
     is not the situation here.  Secondly, and perhaps more relevantly,  the
     refusal letter makes it plain to which rules EX.1 is an adjunct in  the
     current circumstances.

     However, I do not consider that the respondent's first ground of appeal
     is well-founded.  It seems clear to me  from  the  determination  as  a
     whole, but particularly from paragraph 5, that the First-tier Tribunal
     judge did consider paragraph EX.1.  He noted  that  the  Secretary  of
     State considered that there were no "insurmountable obstacles"  to  the
     applicant and  her  sponsor  continuing  family  life  in  the  Russian
     Federation.  The judge did not go behind  that  and  the  only  logical
     conclusion which can be drawn is that he accepted  that  that  was  the
     position.  His whole approach was on the basis that the applicant could
     not meet the Rules.  As Agyarko, along with other  cases,  makes  clear
     and, as is well-known in any  event,  applications  can  be  considered
     under article 8 outside  of  the  Rules  where  that  is  appropriate.
     Whether it was appropriate to do so in this case is debatable but I  do
     not detect in the grounds of appeal any proper challenge to  the  FtT's
     making of  an  article 8  assessment,  nor  to  the  results  of  that
     assessment.  The FtT's views as to where the balance  should  be  drawn
     are not themselves challenged.


34.   Ground 2, of course, goes on to say that one of the factors on  which
     the judge relies was unsupported  by  evidence.   That  factor  is  the
     difficulties, if any, which the sponsor would have in  entering  Russia
     to continue family life with the applicant.   There  is  some  evidence
     that there would be such difficulties.   The  determination  refers  to
     evidence from the applicant that she did not know if her husband  would
     be entitled to a spousal visa  but  the  Russian  authorities  required
     evidence  of  employment  for  a  travel  visa.   This   reflects   the
     applicant's answer to question 6.12 in the application form which asks
     whether she and the sponsor could  live  together  outside  the  UK  if
     necessary.  Her answer was in the negative and she went on to  say  the
     following:

         "My sponsor does not  have  any  qualification  or  eligibility  to
         obtain Russian business visa  in  order  to  support  ourselves  in
         Russia.   My sponsor has strong family and cultural ties in the UK.
          All our friends are mutual now in the UK  and  I  have  been  very
         close with my sponsor's family."


35.   This is prima facie evidence that the sponsor would face  difficulties
     in entering Russia and it was  a  matter  which  the  judge  took  into
     account in the  balancing  exercise,  which  of  itself  has  not  been
     challenged.

     The evidence was before the FtT  and  does  not  appear  to  have  been
     challenged by the presenting officer.  The case of Kareem  was  a  case
     involving the evidence required to establish a foreign marriage.   This
     can be a complex area of law and it can easily be seen that it would be
     unsatisfactory,  to  say  the  least,  to  proceed  on  the  basis   of
     unsupported  assertions  by  a  private  individual.   Difficulties  in
     obtaining visas seem to me, to some extent at least, to be  matters  of
     practical experience as well as law and the observations in Kareem  may
     not carry quite the same weight.  While Kareem does give guidance which
     I think should be regarded as general  and  not  confined  to  marriage
     cases, I do not read it as holding that no judge is entitled to  accept
     evidence  which  he  finds  credible,  particularly  where  it  is  not
     challenged. Another judge might have rejected the evidence but that  is
     not the point. There is no merit in the submission that the  FtT  judge
     subverted the onus of proof. The remarks complained of simply  made  it
     clear that there was no contradictory evidence.


36.   I therefore reject ground 2.

37.   As far as ground 3 is concerned, it appears from paragraphs 10 and 11
     of the determination that Mr MacDonald submitted, before the  evidence
     was completed, that the applicant now fully complied with the financial
     requirements of the Rules.  That assertion does not appear to have been
     challenged  before  the  FtT.   The  judge  did  not  set  out  in  the
     determination all  of  the  material  in  the  payslips  and  the  bank
     statements. He did not need to since it appears clear that no issue was
     taken before him by the presenting officer that the assertion that  the
     applicant now met the Rules was false.  If ground of appeal 3 wanted to
     challenge the finding that she now met the Rules it should have said so
     in terms rather than merely accusing the judge of speculation.   It  is
     fair to say that the fact, as the judge found it, that  she  now  meets
     the Rules, was something the judge took into account in his  article 8
     assessment but it seems to me that the Chikwamba point was very much an
     afterthought and had no effect on the article 8 assessment, which  had
     already been made.

     I do not consider that ground 3 is well-founded but even if it  was  I
     would have held it to be immaterial for the foregoing reason. The  case
     of Chen is of no assistance to the respondent in the circumstances.


Notice of decision

40.   I refuse the appeal of the Secretary of State on all grounds.

     At the conclusion of the hearing I indicated that if  any  question  of
     costs or fees arose parties could, if they chose, deal with that by way
     of written submissions  in  due  course.   If  there  are  to  be  such
     submissions they should be lodged no later than four weeks after  this
     decision is promulgated.




     Signed                             Date



     Lord Matthews

