
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/32663/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 23 April 2014                              |On 23rd April 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                   YING HOU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Morton
Fraser, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

No anonymity order requested or made.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant is a citizen of China, born on 15 August  1984.   She  came
   to the UK as a student in 2002 and was most recently granted leave  until
   23 January 2013, to  undertake  a  PhD  at  the  medical  school  of  the
   University of Dundee.

2) On  18  July  2011  (not  2001  as  stated  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   determination) the appellant married Wan Ho Fan, a UK citizen of  Chinese
   background.  He is a postgraduate student at the Medical Research Council
   Centre for Virus Research, University of Glasgow.

3) On 21 January 2013 the appellant, through  her  solicitors,  applied  for
   settlement in the UK on the basis of 10 years residence.

4) The respondent refused that application by letter  dated  16  July  2013.
   The appellant could not meet the requirement at  paragraph  276B  of  the
   Rules for 10 years continuous lawful residence, because she had spent 785
   days outside the UK, the maximum absence permitted being 540  days.   The
   respondent referred also to the Rules in relation  to  family  life,  but
   said that the appellant could not meet these because she had not provided
   evidence that her partner is a British national.  (The decision  did  not
   deal with other requirements of the Rules in relation to family life.)

5) The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  on  the  following
   grounds:

    The decision is not in accordance  with  the  law  or  the  Immigration
    Rules.  It is unlawful and breaches my right to a  private  and  family
    life and such interference is disproportionate.


6) In an accompanying statement of additional grounds of why she  should  be
   allowed to stay in the UK the appellant said:

    I have a British husband and meet the Rules in that regard.


    The decisions interfere with my family life.


     No discretion has been exercised in  relation  to  the  10  year  rule
    application.


7) In his determination promulgated on 24 January 2014  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge  Burns  observed  at  paragraph  3  that  it  ought  to  have  been
   appreciated that the application based on 10 years residence  was  doomed
   to failure.  At paragraph 21  he  found  that  the  suggestion  that  the
   appellant and her husband should return to China to make a new life there
   was "not sustainable".  He considered that there  was  an  insurmountable
   obstacle to the appellant's husband, as a UK citizen, being  required  to
   leave the country to start again in China.  He thought that alternatively
   such an outcome would be disproportionate to the general intentions of UK
   immigration policy. He concluded at paragraph 23 that the  appeal  should
   be allowed:

    ...  to  the  limited  extent  of  allowing  a  fresh  and  appropriate
    application to be made by the appellant within a period  of  3  months,
    and that during the same  period  the  respondent  reconsider,  without
    prejudice to the foregoing, whether leave outside of the  Rules  should
    be granted in the light of what is now known.


8) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  are  along  the
   following lines.  In allowing the appeal only on those "limited grounds -
   namely to allow the appellant an opportunity to make  a  new  application
   ... it is not clear what type of application she ought to make or why she
   ought to do so when  he  clearly  finds  that  there  are  insurmountable
   obstacles to her removal  from  the  UK."   The  appropriate  and  lawful
   disposal would have been to allow  the  appeal  "outright",  because  the
   finding of "insurmountable obstacles to relocating to China" required the
   appeal to be allowed under EX.1 of Appendix FM.

9) On 30 February 2014 permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
   granted, on the view that the judge might have misdirected himself as  to
   the manner of disposing of the appeal, which appeared to be "unusual  and
   questionable".

10) The SSHD filed a response  under  Rule  24  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
   (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008:

      ... the respondent will submit that the judge  has  clearly  erred  in
law, as he appeared to have no    authority for  allowing  [the  appeal]  to
the limited extent that he did.  He  does  not  find  that  the     decision
itself was not in accordance with the law ... following his acceptance  that
Article 8   should not be used to circumvent the Immigration Rules and  that
there is nothing exceptional on the      facts  of  this  case,  the  appeal
could not have succeeded on this basis.

11) Mr Mullen accepted that the response does not amount to a  dispute  with
   the judge's findings on "insurmountable obstacles" or on proportionality,
   and that the judge did not find that  there  was  "nothing  exceptional".
   (In fact, the judge found to the contrary.)

12) Mr Winter did not insist on the grounds to the extent  that  the  appeal
   should have been allowed under EX.1 of Appendix FM, pointing out that  it
   is not a free-standing provision.  He said  that  the  appellant  accepts
   that she cannot make her case under any of the Rules.  He submitted  that
   it was open to the judge to find as he did that it  was  unreasonable  to
   expect the appellant's husband to move to China, and that  this  amounted
   to an insurmountable obstacle.  The respondent had not cross-appealed  or
   responded under Rule 24 so as to dispute the judge's conclusions on  that
   point, or on proportionality.  The appeal should have been allowed  under
   Article 8.

13) I am of the view that even if the  judge's  findings  on  insurmountable
   obstacles and on the proportionality of requiring the appellant to  leave
   the UK might have been debatable, the respondent has laid  no  basis  for
   the Upper Tribunal to displace those findings.  I uphold  the  submission
   by Mr Winter as to what follows from those findings.

14) The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside,  and  the
   following determination is substituted: the appeal is dismissed under the
   Immigration Rules, and allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.





                               [pic]
                                23 April 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
