
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32246/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 September 2014                           |On 12 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Mr adesanya adelene somuyiwa
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble (Home officer presenting officer)
For the Claimant: Mr T Ogunnubi (Legal Representative)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   In this appeal the appellant is referred to as the Secretary  of  State
    and the respondent is referred to as the claimant.

2.   This matter comes before me for consideration as to whether or not  the
    determination   before   First-tier   Tribunal   (Judge   Bart-Stewart)
    promulgated on 23 June 2014 discloses a material error of law.

3.   The claimant is a citizen of Nigeria and was born on 19 November 1974.

Background

4.   The claimant was granted leave as a student from 2003 to 2005 to  study
    on an ACCA course.  On 15 October 2012 the Secretary of  State  refused
    the claimant's application under paragraph 245ZX(ha) and on maintenance
    grounds.  The reason for refusal was that the overall period  of  leave
    for degree level study was limited to  a  period  of  five  years.   An
    earlier Tribunal allowed an appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  on  the
    maintenance issue and under the Immigration Rules to  the  extent  that
    the removal decision made under  Section  47  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006 was unlawful.  As a consequence of that Tribunal's
    decision the Secretary of State granted to the claimant a short  period
    of leave (seventeen days) from 17 April 2013 - 4 May 2013 in  which  to
    pursue his application.

5.   The claimant submitted a further application on 4  May  2013  but  this
    was not supported with a valid CAS.  The Secretary of State refused the
    application to vary leave to remain on 24 June 2013 and made directions
    under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006.
    The claimant appealed to the First Tier Tribunal which was heard before
    First Tier Tribunal Bart-Stewart.

6.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart dismissed the appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules. She found that the  appellant  had  not  produced  a
    valid CAS.  She allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  under
    Article 8 ECHR (private life) having found that the grant of  leave  of
    seventeen  days  was  insufficient  to  give  effect  to  the  previous
    Tribunal's determination.

7.   The Tribunal  concluded  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  unfairly
    exercised discretion by granting only seventeen days' leave  which  was
    insufficient [12].

Grounds of Appeal

8.    The  Secretary  of  State  argued  that  the  Tribunal  erred  in  its
    assessment of Article 8 ECHR by failing to follow MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 1192 which confirmed that the Immigration Rules are a complete
    code forming the starting point  of  any  Article  8  assessment  which
    should  only  be  carried  out  after  consideration  of  the  relevant
    immigration  Rules.   Furthermore,  the  Tribunal  did   not   identify
    "compelling circumstances" as per Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640  (IAC)  and
    Nagre [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)  as  to  the  meaning  of  exceptional
    circumstances.  The Tribunal failed to provide adequate reasons why the
    appellant's circumstances were either compelling or  exceptional.   The
    claimant was granted a sufficient period of leave in order to give  him
    an opportunity to make another application and obtain a  CAS  which  he
    did not do.

Permission to appeal

9.   Permission to appeal was granted on 14 July 2014  by  Designated  Judge
    Garratt on the grounds that it was arguable that the  judge  failed  to
    adopt the approach recommended in Gulshan  and  did  not  identify  any
    compelling circumstances justifying consideration outside of the Rules.

Submissions

10.   Mr Bramble submitted that having found  the  case  could  not  succeed
    under the Rules and dismissed same, the Tribunal went on to pursue  the
    issue of fairness using the mechanism of Article 8 ECHR.  The  Tribunal
    was effectively attempting to rectify what she perceived as  unfairness
    caused to the claimant by granting him insufficient time  in  which  to
    pursue his application.  Mr Bramble submitted that this issue  did  not
    form the basis of a human rights claim. The  Tribunal  failed  to  make
    proper findings under Article  8.   Mr  Bramble  relied  on  the  Upper
    Tribunal  decision  in  Marghia  (procedural  fairness  )  [2014]  UKUT
    00366(IAC) which emphasised the clear  distinction  between  procedural
    fairness and a decision that was unfair.

11.  Mr Ogunnubi responded by emphasising the  delay  on  the  part  of  the
    Secretary of State in complying  with  the  earlier  Tribunal  decision
    promulgated on 25 January 2013.  That delay  together  with  the  short
    period of leave, seventeen days as opposed to 28 days, resulted in  the
    claimant being unable to obtain a valid CAS.  He therefore  was  forced
    to submit a further application without the CAS.  The decision made  by
    the Tribunal at [12] was correct in finding that Article 8 private life
    was engaged.

12.  Mr Bramble  submitted  that  the  appellant  was  fully  aware  of  the
    decision made once the determination  was  promulgated  on  25  January
    2013.  It was questionable therefore whether he had had  adequate  time
    in which to pursue his application and to obtain the necessary CAS.

13.  In any event the Tribunal erred by considering the  issue  of  fairness
    absent any other Article 8 factors such as length of time  in  the  UK,
    public interest factors and accumulation of private life.  In  addition
    there was no balancing or proportionality  exercise  conducted  by  the
    Tribunal. Following Patel & others V SSHD 72  [2013], the prospect of a
    student now succeeding under Article 8 where he or she cannot meet  the
    Immigration Rules is remote.  Paragraphs 56 and  57  of  that  judgment
    states:

         "56. Although the context of the  rules  may  be  relevant  to  the
             consideration of proportionality, I agree with Burnton LJ that
             this cannot  be  equated  with  a  formalised  'near-miss'  or
             'sliding scale' principle, as argued for by  Mr Malik.   That
             approach is unsupported  by  Strasbourg  authority,  or  by  a
             proper reading of Lord Bingham's words.  Mrs Huang's case  for
             favourable treatment outside the rules did  not  turn  on  how
             close she had come to compliance with rule  317,  but  on  the
             application of the family values which underlie that rule  and
             are at the heart also of article 8.  Conversely,  a  near-miss
             under the rules cannot provide substance  to  a  human  rights
             case which is otherwise lacking in merit.

         57.  It is important to remember that article 8 is  not  a  general
             dispensing  power.   It  is  to  be  distinguished  from   the
             Secretary of State's  discretion  to  allow  leave  to  remain
             outside the rules, which may be  unrelated  to  any  protected
             human right.  The merits of a decision not to depart from  the
             rules are not reviewable on appeal: section  86(6).   One  may
             sympathise with Sedley LJ's call in Pankina for 'common sense'
             in the application of the rules to  graduates  who  have  been
             studying in the  UK  for  some  years  (see  para  47  above).
             However, such considerations  do  not  by  themselves  provide
             grounds of appeal under article 8,  which  is  concerned  with
             private  or  family  life,  not  education   as   such.    The
             opportunity for a promising student to complete his course  in
             this country, however desirable in general terms,  is  not  in
             itself a right protected under article 8."


14.   At  the  end  of  the  hearing  I  announced  my  decision  that   the
    determination disclosed a material error  of  law.   I  set  aside  the
    determination in part. I now give my reasons for my decision.

Discussion and Decision

15.  This matter can be dealt with quite shortly. In  summary  the  claimant
    submitted an application for further leave to remain on 4 May 2013 even
    though he was unable to produce a valid CAS  in  support.   He  claimed
    that the Secretary of State had acted unfairly by granting him a period
    of only seventeen days' leave which was insufficient for him to  obtain
    a CAS.  It appears that the Secretary of State granted leave to  enable
    the claimant to complete his proposed course of studies which was  less
    than six months which he had completed.  The period of leave  amounting
    to seventeen days in fact gave  him  an  additional  ten  days  to  the
    standard period of seven days.  Nevertheless the claimant  argued  that
    the short period of leave and a postponement of the programme  for  his
    studies resulted in him being unable to produce the CAS.

16.  I am  satisfied  that  there  was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    assessment of Article 8 private life by the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Tribunal failed to give reasons why the unfair decision was capable  of
    engaging Article 8. The Tribunal made no findings and did not carry out
    any assessment of relevant factors to private life.  The decision  made
    focused on the issue of  unfairness  to  the  appellant  following  the
    Secretary of State's decision to grant seventeen days' leave.   In  the
    circumstances it cannot be said on the  facts  that  the  Secretary  of
    State acted through any procedural unfairness (Marghia).  The  Tribunal
    wrongly used Article 8  as  a  vehicle  to  remedy  the  decision  made
    perceived to be unfair by the  claimant.    In  addition  the  Tribunal
    failed to carry out the step by step approach  in  Razgar  and/or  when
    considering proportionality failed to take into  account  all  relevant
    factors in particular the public interest and the failure to  meet  the
    Immigration Rules.  This amounts to a  clear  error  of  law  that  was
    material to the outcome.



17.  The appellant has studied in  the  UK  since  2003,  any  private  life
    established has been temporary by definition as he is  a  student.   He
    failed to meet the requirements of the Rules  under  paragraph  245  in
    light of the fact that he has studied in excess of the five year period
    for degree level courses and would not be entitled to a  further  grant
    of leave. He did not submit a valid CAS and did not do so  having  been
    given further opportunity to do so by the Secretary of State. Following
    Patel (cited above) there is no basis on which the appeal  can  succeed
    on human rights grounds. I dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds

Decision

18.  There was a material error of law in the determination.

19.  The decision is set aside to the extent that the appeal was allowed  on
    human rights grounds.

20.    The decision  dismissing  the  appeal  under  the  immigration  rules
    stands.


Signed                                  Date 11.9.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

No anonymity order made.

NO FEE AWARD





Signed                                  Date 11.9.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
