
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32771/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 9th June 2015                    |On: 11th November 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mahmud Rahat Khan
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hossain, Counsel instructed by Hossain Associates


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Bangladesh date of birth 30th  November
    1982.  On the 12th December  2014  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  S
    Iqbal) allowed his appeal against a decision  to  refuse  to  vary  his
    leave and to remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant to s47 of  the
    Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The  Secretary  of  State
    now has permission[1] to appeal against that decision.

 2. The Respondent was in the UK with valid leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant when he applied to vary that leave so  as  to
    extend it.  The Secretary of State refused further leave.  In a  notice
    of decision dated 29th  July  2014  it  is  alleged  that  a  NCC  bank
    statement submitted in support of the application (account ending 3395)
    "has been proven to be false".  The Secretary  of  State  relied  on  a
    Document Verification Report dated 25th  February  2014.   This  stated
    that on that date  an  officer  based  in  the  UK  had  contacted  the
    Anderkilla Branch of the NCC bank.  She used a number obtained from her
    office directory.  The officer has recorded that the account  name  and
    number provided do not exist.  She concludes:

         "The  bank  representative  confirmed   that   the   bank   records
         demonstrate  that  this  account  does  not  exist.   So  the  bank
         certificate and bank statement are not issued by the  said  branch.
         Both are forged.

         The information held by the bank differs from what is  detailed  in
         the information/documents that were  provided  in  support  of  the
         application..."

    The application was  therefore  refused  with  reference  to  paragraph
    322(1A) of the Rules.

 3. An appeal was brought to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  Respondent  was
    not legally represented.  He  attended  in  person  and  gave  evidence
    before Judge Iqbal.  He averred that the letter and statement from  the
    bank were genuine and that they related  to  an  account  held  by  his
    father.  He had obtained two further letters from the  bank  since  the
    DVR had been obtained.  The  bank  had  informed  his  father  that  no
    enquiry had ever been received.  He was a genuine student  who  had  no
    adverse immigration history since his arrival in 2006, and  he  had  no
    cause to try and  deceive  the  Secretary  of  State.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal considered that evidence, examined the  impugned  bank  letter
    and statement, the two further letters purportedly from the  bank,  and
    the DVR.  Having reminded herself that the burden of proof lay  on  the
    Secretary of State she made the following findings:

         i)   The DVR is not fully detailed;

         ii)  The number that the officer called has been redacted,  as  has
             the name of the official who supplied the information.  It has
             not therefore  been  possible  for  the  Respondent  to  check
             whether the enquiry was actually made, or whether it was  made
             to the right branch;

         iii) The further letters confirm all of the  details  contained  in
             the original statement/letter

    It is also noted that the DVR names the account holder as 'Abdul'  when
    in fact his name is 'Abul'.  The  Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Secretary of State had discharged the burden of proof  upon  her.   The
    alleged forgery being the only matter in issue, she allowed the appeal.

 4. The Secretary of State now  has  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the grounds that the reasons advanced in the  determination
    do not actually explain why the weight to be attached to the DVR should
    be diminished.  The rebuttal letters produced 'by the  bank'  were,  by
    the Judge's own  assessment  "generalised"  and  contained  grammatical
    errors.  There are sound public policy reasons why names are  redacted.
    The Judge has applied too high a standard of proof to the  question  of
    forgery: "it is entirely unclear why the Judge considers a DVR  stating
    that a bank official has confirmed the bank account does not  exist  is
    inadequate to meet the standard, especially  given  the  weak  rebuttal
    evidence".  In her submissions Ms Isherwood amplified these grounds  by
    inviting me to  find  that  the  reasoning  in  the  determination  was
    perverse: an accusation of fraud could not rationally  be  rebutted  by
    further fraudulent letters from the same source.

 5. In response Mr Hossein agreed that the standard of proof was the  civil
    standard  of  'balance  of  probabilities',  but  relied  on  the  same
    authority[2] that he had before the First-tier Tribunal, to submit that
    an accusation of deception must be  proven  with  reference  to  cogent
    evidence.  It was therefore right that the  determination  subject  the
    DVR to scrutiny, and having found it lacking, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had been entitled to reject it.

    My Findings

 6. Although the grounds are couched in terms of a general complaint  about
    the First-tier Tribunal's findings, Ms Isherwood managed to distil from
    this three alleged errors of law.

 7. The first is that the First-tier Tribunal applied too high  a  standard
    of proof to the allegation of forgery.  I can  find  no  evidence  that
    this  was  the  case.   The  reasoning  indicates  that  the   Tribunal
    considered the evidence before it and reached a decision,  on  balance.
    If any criticism can be levelled at the determination in  this  respect
    it is that  paragraphs  10  and  13  make  no  mention  of  where  this
    particular burden leis, simply noting that it is for the  appellant  to
    prove that he meets the requirements of the rules.  Paragraph  19  does
    however make clear that  the  Judge  understood  that  it  is  for  the
    Secretary of  State  to  prove  that  a  document  is  false,  and  the
    appropriate standard to be  applied:  "the  Respondent  has  failed  to
    demonstrate that a false document has been submitted and therefore  the
    Appellant is able to claim the required points".  This  ground  is  not
    made out.

 8. The second ground is a reasons  challenge:  "the  Judge  has  given  no
    explanation as to why these issues reduce the weight to be attached  to
    the DVR".  This is not then, a submission that no reasons are given: it
    is plain from the face of the determination that reasons are  advanced.
    Rather it is that the reasons are not logically capable of  leading  to
    the conclusion reached by the Judge.  This is then Ms Isherwood's third
    error of law: perversity.  She accepts that this is  a  high  test:  is
    this decision so unreasonable that no reasonable authority  could  ever
    have come to it[3]?  At paragraph 16 the determination sets out a  long
    list of criticisms made of the  DVR.   At  paragraph  19  the  Tribunal
    acknowledges that "a few of these do hold weight" and focusses on those
    points that the Judge considered to be particularly compelling.   Chief
    amongst these is the fact that the name and  telephone  number  of  the
    branch are redacted, and that "this leaves room for error".  The  point
    was that it is not possible to tell whether  the  officer  in  question
    contacted the right branch.  Whilst this is  not  a  reason  that  many
    Judges might adopt, it cannot be said that it was irrational  for  this
    Judge to do so.  That is particularly so where it was one of  a  number
    of factors that the Judge took into account.  This is not the  decision
    that many Tribunals would have reached, but that does not mean that  it
    was one that no reasonable decision-maker could have made.

    Decisions

 9. The determination contains no error of law and it is upheld.

10. I was not asked to make an order for anonymity and on the facts  I  see
    no reason to do so.


                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              12th June 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal JM Holmes on the 27th January
2015.
[2] Re B [2008] UKHL 35
[3] Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation
[1948] 1 KB 223, HL

