
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32192/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10th August 2017                      |On 20th September 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                olwafemi [s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Akindele (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Callow, promulgated on 12th  December  2016,  following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 18th November 2016.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Nigeria,  and  was  born  on  8th
    March 1982.  He appealed against a decision  of  the  Respondent  dated
    16th September 2015, refusing his application for leave  to  remain  in
    the UK under Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant, who arrived in the UK on 13th November 2004, on a  visit
    visa, had subsequently overstayed, following which in December 2007, he
    applied for a residence card as an  extended  family  member  of  a  Mr
    Longe, which was refused.  He did not leave  the  UK.   On  20th  April
    2011, he made a human rights application which was also refused on  3rd
    June 2011.  Subsequently he married his wife, [TA],  on  19th  February
    2014 and a son was born to them on [ ] 2015, enabling  him  to  make  a
    human rights application for leave  to  remain,  although  he  did  not
    include his son as his dependant in the application.   The  Appellant's
    wife in the meantime, succeeded in getting indefinite leave  to  remain
    on the basis of ten years' lawful residence under paragraph 276B of the
    Immigration Rules.  She had been in the UK as a student since 2004.   A
    feature of this appeal before the judge below was that the  Appellant's
    son had been diagnosed as suffering from sickle cell anaemia.

The Judge's Findings

 4. At the hearing before Judge Callow, the Appellant  submitted  that,  in
    relation to his son, whilst treatment  may  be  available  in  Nigeria,
    reports showed that sickle cell anaemia was more  fatal  than  HIV  and
    Aids in Nigeria and that only about 5% of  children  with  sickle  cell
    anaemia lived up to the age of 10 (see paragraph 6).

 5. The judge had regard to the background information, as well as the fact
    that the Appellant's visit visa expired in 2005,  which  was  now  over
    eleven years ago, and that the Appellant had been in the  UK  appearing
    all this time as an overstayer.  The judge  also  considered  the  fact
    that the Appellant's son, who was now 2 years  of  age,  suffered  from
    sickle cell anaemia and had speech and hearing difficulties  (paragraph
    10).  Furthermore, consideration was given to the  fact  that  although
    the Appellant did  not  cite  his  son  as  his  dependant,  the  judge
    addressed the son's situation "as  a  matter  of  possibly  unwarranted
    concern" (paragraph 13).

 6. This was in addition to the matter having been addressed by a  previous
    judge, namely, by IJ Raymond, and bearing in mind that the  "Devaseelan
    principles" applied  (see  paragraph  13).   The  judge  addressed  the
    question as to whether it was reasonable to  expect  the  child  to  be
    removed with his parents to Nigeria or whether their best interests are
    in favour of remaining in the UK (paragraph 18).

 7. The contention by the judge was that, "no evidence of any weight beyond
    disruption to the treatment of the son has been given that it would  be
    unduly harsh to return to Nigeria or that  there  are  any  exceptional
    circumstances" (paragraph 31).

 8. The appeal was dismissed.

 9. On 3rd July 2017, permission to appeal was granted by the  Tribunal  on
    the basis that there was little or  no  consideration  of  the  medical
    reports in the appeal bundle, or of the background evidence  concerning
    the treatment of sickle cell anaemia in Nigeria, in the  reasonableness
    assessment of the judge.

The Hearing

10. At the hearing before me on 10th August 2017, Mr Akindele appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant submitted that the judge had  to  consider  the
    "best interests of the child", and in doing so, had to give  regard  to
    the medical evidence that had been provided, and this  showed  at  page
    38, that 100,000 children die in Nigeria  on  account  of  sickle  cell
    anaemia.  There was accordingly, a risk to the Appellant's child,  such
    that if the Appellant was removed, the child could not be  expected  to
    go with him, and this would lead to the family being separated, and the
    right to family life being impaired.

11. For his part, Mr Kotas submitted that this was a case where  permission
    should not have been granted.  The reason is that the child was  not  a
    "qualifying child".  The son was only 2 years of age.  The  Appellant's
    position was considered in 2014 by a previous judge, by IJ Raymond (see
    paragraph 13).  The "Devaseelan" principles applied and that being  so,
    unless there was compelling evidence to the contrary, that decision had
    to be the starting point, and the judge followed that  particular  line
    of argument.   Second,  the  appeal  fails  quite  simply  because  the
    evidence that  has  been  relied  upon,  and  on  the  basis  of  which
    permission to appeal has been granted, is very generic evidence.   This
    consists of a letter from Vivian-Queentz Fumbon, the specialist  health
    visitor, which is dated 6th May 2016, but  which  is  written  only  in
    general terms, as if it applied to any patient  suffering  from  sickle
    cell anaemia.  It is not particularised with respect to the Appellant's
    child.  For example, there is a statement that, "we tend to advise  all
    times that they should maintain their temperatures  and  avoid  a  cold
    environment.  He also encouraged them to avoid  stressful  environments
    ...".  At page 23, the same expert provides another letter  of  support
    dated 12th June 2015 where she  states  in  the  first  paragraphs  the
    position in very general terms once again.  The third paragraph  is  in
    terms that, "we advise them to carry their pain  medication  and  water
    with them at all times".  There is nothing specific to the  Appellant's
    child as such.

12. In reply, Mr Akindele submitted that it was not necessary to  attribute
    a particular risk to the Appellant's child.  At paragraph 16 the  judge
    had relied upon the case of EV (Philippines), but the judge did not set
    out what the "best interests" of the child in this case would entail.

No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

14. First, this is a case where there  was  a  prior  determination  by  IJ
    Raymond in 2015 and the "Devaseelan principles" applied.  The judge was
    careful to proceed  on  this  basis  (see  paragraph  13).   The  judge
    observed with respect to the Appellant that, "his situation and  status
    has already been addressed  and  there  are  no  new  facts  warranting
    reconsideration".  This was in a situation where the Appellant did  not
    cite his son as his dependant.  Nevertheless,  the  judge  did  observe
    that, "I nonetheless address the son's situation again as a  matter  of
    possibly unwarranted concern" (paragraph 13).

15. Second, the judge applied the correct test  by  considering  the  son's
    best interests", and in doing so stated that, "I have borne in mind the
    evidence  of  potential  diminished  medical  treatment   in   Nigeria"
    (paragraph 18).

16. Third, and most importantly, there is the evidence of the expert, which
    it is alleged the judge did not properly take into account.   There  is
    nothing to suggest that the judge actually ignored the evidence of  the
    expert.  This is because what the judge states is that, "no evidence of
    any weight beyond disruption to the treatment of the son has been given
    that it would be unduly harsh to return to Nigeria or  that  there  are
    any exceptional circumstances" (paragraph 31).

17. If one now looks at the letters written by the  expert,  Vivian-Queentz
    Fumbon, the specialist health visitor, dated 6th May 2016 and 12th June
    2015, it is blamed that they are written in a very general  sense,  and
    certainly do not show any basis for the judge concluding that there are
    "exceptional circumstances" in relation to this Appellant.  It  is  not
    the case that treatment from sickle cell anaemia is  not  available  in
    Nigeria.  If, as the judge pointed out, the position in Nigeria is that
    of "potential diminished medical treatment" (paragraph 18), it  is  for
    the Appellant to demonstrate, on the basis of clear  medical  evidence,
    what the "exceptional circumstances" are in relation to the Appellant's
    son, that would  point  to  it  being  "unduly  harsh"  to  expect  the
    Appellant to return.

18. The Appellant has a poor immigration history.  He has overstayed in the
    United Kingdom by eleven years.  The child is only 2 years of  age  and
    is not a "qualifying child", and in these  circumstances  it  has  been
    well-established since Zoumbas [2013]  UKSC  74,  that  ordinarily  the
    "best interests" of a young child are served by keeping the family unit
    in tact, and if the principal Appellant is to be removed then it is not
    unreasonable to expect the child to return with the removed parent.

19. Accordingly, there is nothing in the suggestion  that  the  Appellant's
    application fell to succeed on account of his 2 year old  son's  sickle
    cell anaemia condition.  I come to this conclusion  notwithstanding  Mr
    Akindele's commendable efforts to persuade me otherwise.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 19th September 2017



