
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32740/2013

                                                         IA/32754/2013
     IA/32764/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th July 2014                               |On 8th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                         Mr khurram mahmood chaudhry
                           Mrs noor ulain Khurran
                             Miss Aleeza Mahmood

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     S Ahmad (Khans Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Respondent with regard to a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Holmes) promulgated on 14th May 2014.

 2. The Appellants had sought leave to  remain  in  the  UK  as  a  Tier  1
    (General) Migrant and his dependents.  The application was refused  and
    the Appellants appealed.

 3. The matter came before Judge Holmes on the papers on 12th May.  In  his
    determination he noted that the Respondent had failed  to  provide  her
    bundle of documents despite directions to do so.

 4. The Judge, referring to Cvetkovs (visa - no file produced - directions)
    Latvia  [2011]  UKUT  00212  (IAC),  allowed  the  appeal  without  any
    consideration of the substantive issues.

 5. Cvetkovs provides, as set out in the head note thereto:-


    " Where a visit visa application is refused because the Visa Officer is
    not satisfied of the appellant's intentions as a result of only limited
    documents being produced and translated; and  the  respondent  breaches
    Procedure Rules by failing  to  send  documentation  to  the  Tribunal,
    directions can be given indicating that unless the respondent  complies
    with the rules it may be that the Tribunal will assume that the  appeal
    is unopposed".


 6. This case was not a visit appeal and also there had been  no  direction
    to the effect that if the Secretary of State did not produce  a  bundle
    it would be assumed she did not defend the appeal.

 7. Both representatives before  me  agreed  that  the  Judge  had  made  a
    material error of  law  and  should  have  determined  the  substantive
    appeal.

 8. As it cannot be said that this case was  properly  dealt  with  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal it was agreed that the  appropriate  course  is  to
    remit it for rehearing before that Tribunal.

10.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed and the appeal remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh at an  oral  hearing  before
    any Judge other than Judges Fisher or Holmes.


Signed                              Date 18th July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
