
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32867/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1st December 2015                 |On 29th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                           SHAHID MAHMOOD TABBASUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L J Doyle, Solicitor of M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. On 18th September 2015 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Page  gave
    permission to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Bell  who  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision taken on 1st  August  2014  to  refuse  leave  to
    remain as a partner in accordance with the provisions  of  Appendix  FM
    and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 2. Permission was granted because it was said to be arguable that, as  the
    appellant was unrepresented at the First-tier hearing,  the  judge  was
    wrong to refuse an application to adjourn.  The appellant was therefore
    deprived of a fair hearing.

 3. The grounds of application explained that the appellant had  previously
    been represented by Buckingham Legal Associates and that firm had  been
    due to represent him at the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal  on  9th
    June 2015.   However,  on  the  preceding  Friday,  the  appellant  had
    received a telephone call to indicate that Buckingham Legal  Associates
    would not represent him and he was  then  unable  to  find  alternative
    representation in the time available.  The grounds  also  comment  that
    there is no record in the  decision  of  the  judge  dealing  with  the
    application or the reasons for the refusal.  It was  claimed  that  the
    refusal was unfair and unreasonable having regard to  the  decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal in Nwaigwe (Adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418
    (IAC).  It was also argued that the error was material to  the  outcome
    of the appeal as the appellant's representatives had  been  responsible
    for omissions in his application to  the  respondent  which,  I  infer,
    would have been rectified if the representatives had  been  present  at
    the hearing.

 4.  At  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  before  me  I  indicated   to
    representatives that I had read the judge's Record of  Proceedings  and
    noted that it contained an indication that the judge had dealt with  an
    adjournment application although, as the grounds alleged, any reference
    to the application had been omitted from the decision.

 5.  Mr  Doyle  emphasised  that  the  appellant  had  needed  professional
    representation to put his claims for human  rights  protection  outside
    the Rules and, particularly, in relation to  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Rules relating to the  existence  or  otherwise  of  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's return to Pakistan.  He confirmed that  the  appellant  had
    lodged a complaint against his past representatives.  In that respect I
    was shown a copy of a letter dated 10th August 2015 to  the  Office  of
    the Immigration Services Commissioner and an e-mail  acknowledgment  of
    that complaint on 24th November 2015.  Mr  Doyle  also  indicated  that
    evidence of compelling circumstances could have  been  put  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal if there  had  been  proper  representation.   This
    would have included information about the appellant's partner's serious
    illness and arrangements for the care of her children.

 6. Mr McVeety argued that the grounds did not show procedural  unfairness.
    He emphasised that, in relation to the deception which had been alleged
    in the refusal decision, the appellant  had  taken  responsibility  for
    that.  He also questioned what  would  be  relevant  for  consideration
    outside the Rules.  In that respect he pointed out that the  judge  had
    given consideration to the appellant's partner's medical condition  and
    (paragraphs 43 and 44) the relationship with  the  partner's  children.
    He contended that there was nothing unfair about the  decision  despite
    the refusal to adjourn.

 7. Mr Doyle completed his submissions by emphasising  that  the  appellant
    had the right to representation on the day.  As to the  alleged  deceit
    he thought that the decision had  not  clearly  shown  that  the  judge
    adopted the right approach taking into account  the  evidential  burden
    upon the respondent.

Conclusions

 8. The decision by the experienced judge  is  comprehensive  and  cogently
    argued.  However, no reference is made to the  adjournment  application
    or the reasons for it.  Whilst the Record of Proceedings of  the  judge
    shows that there was such an application it was incumbent upon  her  to
    refer to this and give adequate reasons for refusing  the  application.
    This was not a case where the circumstances  of  the  application  were
    such that the refusal of an adjournment was inevitable.  The  appellant
    had been informed only two working days before  the  hearing  that  his
    representatives would no longer assist him in  circumstances  where  he
    wanted them to put comprehensive information  before  the  court  about
    Article 8 issues affecting his family life with  his  partner  and  her
    children.  There is nothing before me to suggest  that  representatives
    had given early warning to the appellant of any reasons for ceasing  to
    act.  Thus the appellant appears to have been left with no  choice  but
    to make an adjournment application.

 9. In Nwaigwe the President of the Tribunal indicated that  a  refusal  to
    accede to an adjournment request could, in principle, be  erroneous  in
    law in several respects including a failure to take  into  account  all
    material considerations and denying the party concerned a fair hearing.
     The test to be applied was that of fairness on the  basis  that  there
    may have been a deprivation of the affected parties' right  to  a  fair
    hearing.   Applying  that  guidance  to  the   circumstances   of   the
    adjournment in this case it is clear that the judge erred in law in two
    respects.  First, in not setting out the  details  of  the  adjournment
    application that was made and reasons  for  refusing  it  and,  second,
    that, in all the circumstances, it was in the interests of justice  for
    an adjournment to have been granted.

10. As the errors were fundamental to the fair hearing of the appeal it  is
    necessary for the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    hearing afresh.  My conclusion in that  respect  follows  the  specific
    proviso set out in paragraph 7.2(c) of the Practice Statement  for  the
    Tribunal issued by the Senior President of Tribunals  on  25  September
    2012.

Anonymity

Anonymity was not requested in the Upper Tribunal nor had a  direction  been
given in the First-tier Tribunal.  I, therefore, make  no  direction  as  to
anonymity.

DIRECTIONS

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows a  material  error  on  a
    point of law.  The matter is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    hearing afresh.

12. The appeal will be re-heard at the Stoke Hearing Centre on a date to be
    specified by the Resident Judge.

13. An Urdu interpreter will be required for the hearing which is estimated
    to last two hours.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
