

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/32338/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 April 2017                       |  On 3 May 2017                      |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                               abiMbola sonde
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr Moksud as agent for International
Immigration Advisory Services Ltd
For the Respondent:        Mr G Harrison, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant was born on  28th  August,  1983  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Nigeria.   She  claims  to  have  been  the  former  wife  of  Mr   Jan
    Maciejewskie, a Polish citizen exercising  EEA  treaty  rights  in  the
    United Kingdom ("the sponsor").

2.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom and applied  for  a  residence
    card on 3rd March, 2009.  This was issued by  the  respondent  on  26th
    September, 2009.  A further application for a permanent residence  card
    made by the appellant was refused on 23rd December 2014.   She  applied
    once more on 31st March 2015 and this was  refused  on  27th  September
    2015,  following  which  the  appellant  appealed  to  the   First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appellant's appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Herwald in Manchester on 22nd July ,2016.

3.   In his determination promulgated on 8th August, 2015, the  judge  found
    himself satisfied on the  evidence  before  him  that  the  appellant's
    marriage with the sponsor was one of convenience.  As a result, he  did
    not go on to consider whether or not the sponsor was a qualified person
    at the time of divorce, but he did point out that the evidence  adduced
    to him had failed to persuade him that the sponsor was, at the relevant
    time, a qualified person and a  letter  produced  on  the  day  of  the
    hearing, but dated 16th March, 2015, addressed to the sponsor  did  not
    assist, noting as  it  does  that  the  sponsor  appears  not  to  have
    submitted a full self-assessment tax return for the years shown in  the
    letter.

4.   Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan granted permission to  appeal.   The  first
    challenge referred to the evidential burden on the respondent where the
    respondent alleges that the marriage is a marriage of  convenience  and
    criticises the fact that the appellant did not know the names  of  both
    witnesses and the name of the officiating priest at her  wedding  as  a
    result the judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  the  ground  of
    credibility.  It refers to paragraph 16 of the determination and claims
    that the majority of  the  above  "inconsistencies"  were  not  serious
    enough to damage the appellant's credibility completely.

5.   At the hearing before me Mr Moksud reminded  me  that  the  judge  made
    findings at paragraph 16, as a result of which he  was  persuaded  that
    the marriage was one of convenience.  However, says Mr Moksud 40 to  50
    people attended the wedding and they would  hardly  have  attended  the
    wedding if it had been a marriage of convenience.  The marriage  itself
    lasted for over three years.  The fact that  the  appellant  could  not
    name either of her witnesses or the name of the priest  who  officiated
    at the wedding should not have been held against her.   Nor  should  it
    have been held against her that she could not name the place  that  the
    sponsor originated from, Olawa.  She referred to it as being Otawa.

6.   He reminded me that the appellant had been granted a  residence  permit
    before and suggested that if the Secretary of State believed  that  the
    marriage was one of convenience, she should  have  raised  this  before
    giving the appellant permission to marry and before the  issue  of  the
    first residence card.

7.   Responding briefly Mr Harrison suggested that there  was  no  error  of
    law identified in the grounds at all.  At best, it amounted to a series
    of disagreements with the findings or an attempt simply to reargue  the
    case.  It was the parties' intent at the time of the marriage that  was
    relevant.  On the evidence before the judge  (who  heard  and  saw  the
    appellant give evidence) he was entitled to find that the marriage  was
    one of convenience.

8.   Responding briefly the appellant's representative told me  that  simply
    because the marriage had broken down did not mean that it  was  one  of
    convenience.  The appellant obtained permission to marry  and  she  had
    been granted a residence card earlier.  If the Secretary of  State  was
    going to challenge the marriage  on  the  basis  that  it  was  one  of
    convenience then she should have done so earlier.

9.   I reserve my determination.

10.  The judge properly directed himself on the law at paragraphs 8,  9,  10
    and 11 and it has not been alleged that in doing  so  he  erred..   The
    judge reminded himself that  there  is  an  evidential  burden  on  the
    respondent as identified in IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008]
    UKIAT 00031 and Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of  convenience)
    [2012] UKUT 0038.  He pointed out that the burden  of  proving  that  a
    marriage is not a marriage of  convenience  for  the  purposes  of  the
    Regulations rested with the appellant but that the  appellant  was  not
    required to discharge it in the absence  of  any  evidence  of  matters
    supporting a suspicion that the marriage is indeed one of convenience.

11.  The judge heard and saw the appellant give evidence.  He  made  a  note
    of that evidence in paragraph 12 of the determination.

12.  Having considered all the documents placed before him  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal Judge made a series of findings in paragraph 16 which led  him
    to a conclusion that the appellant's marriage with the sponsor was  one
    of convenience.  He noted  that  the  respondent  had  carried  out  an
    interview with the appellant on notice and that during  the  course  of
    her interview she said that the sponsor came from a town  called  Otawa
    in Poland.  However, in giving evidence to the judge she told him  that
    the sponsor came from a town called Olawa.   With  very  great  respect
    that is not an insignificant discrepancy.  One might expect someone who
    has formed a genuine relationship and committed themselves  to  a  life
    long marriage to know the name of the town  where  their  spouse  comes
    from.

13.  The judge noted that the circumstances of the appellant's  meeting  the
    sponsor were somewhat unusual.  She sat down in the city centre and  as
    the sponsor was walking past, she said, "I walk up to him and ask if he
    can give me some money to get a burger".

14.  During the course of her  interview,  the  appellant  was  recorded  as
    saying that she was married at St Richard's Church in  Wythenshawe  and
    that that church had been married because it was close  to  where  they
    lived and the nearest place to them.  On oath however she claimed  that
    she had been attending a Nigerian church in Manchester but  was  unable
    to marry in that church because it is a family Nigerian church and  not
    a registered charity.  She was told that she must marry in a Church  of
    England church.  The judge noted that there were further  discrepancies
    between what the appellant said at interview and her  answers  in  oral
    examination.

15.  The judge recorded that the appellant could  not  name  the  vicar  who
    married her.  That on its own may not have given the  judge  any  cause
    for real concern, but he also noted that the appellant claimed that her
    witness at  the  wedding  was  "Aunty  Folake".   Later  the  appellant
    explained that everyone calls this woman "Mommy  Cynthia".   The  judge
    noted that the name had not been mentioned at interview and that during
    her interview she was unable to give  the  full  name  of  the  witness
    Folake.  He did not believe that  it  was  credible  that  despite  the
    passing of time the appellant would be unable to remember the  name  of
    someone who was so central to her wedding ceremony if the ceremony  had
    been one of meaning and not a marriage of convenience.

16.  The judge noted that the appellant was asked to name a  second  witness
    and simply said that "the second person that witnessed for Jan was  his
    friend at work".  She did not know his full name and still did not know
    his full name in giving evidence.  In interview she  did  not  seek  to
    explain any further, but before the judge she refined her evidence  and
    now claimed that originally the  witness  was  due  to  have  been  her
    husband's brother from Poland, but he was prevented from  attending  at
    the last minute.  The judge believed that if there  was  any  truth  in
    this then she would have told the interviewer that in September 2015.

17.  The appellant told the judge that there had been no  wedding  rehearsal
    and when asked whether there had been any printed  wedding  invitations
    the appellant replied, "not printed just something simple  to  give  to
    church members.  I printed it myself to give to church  members".   The
    judge did not believe that there were any such invitations.

18.  The appellant had given evidence to the judge that between  40  and  50
    people attended the wedding, but none of whom were members of  her  own
    family.  She had explained that the only guests, apart from two members
    of the groom's family, were church members and neighbours.   She  could
    produce no photographs from the wedding, no wedding gift list and while
    their absence was not .determinative in themselves, taken in the  round
    they were worrying to  the  judge.   The  judge  also  noted  that  the
    appellant had made application for permanent  residence  in  2014,  but
    said at interview and confirmed on oath that she  had  never  seen  the
    sponsor since 2014 and was, by  then  in  effect  living  with  another
    Nigerian male before making the permanent residence  application.   The
    appellant appeared to be anxious before the judge to suggest  that  the
    relationship with the other Nigerian male was "on  and  off".   However
    the judge recorded that it transpired that  this  gentleman  was  in  a
    relationship with the appellant, but did not always stay  over  at  her
    home.  The judge recorded that  submissions  had  been  made  that  the
    appellant had been issued with a residence card in the past.

19.  The judge concluded that the marriage was one of  convenience.   Having
    reviewed the judge's findings  and  his  reasons  for  making  them,  I
    believe that when looked at in the round they are sustainable.  He  saw
    and heard the witness give evidence.  I believe that he was entitled on
    the evidence to find as he did.

20.  Finally criticism was made that the judge had not gone on  to  consider
    whether at the relevant time the sponsor remained a qualified person as
    claimed.  However, at paragraph 16(j) he  did  actually  say  that  the
    evidence adduced to him did not go far enough to persuade him that  the
    sponsor was at the relevant time a qualified person.  So, even  if  the
    judge's finding that the marriage was one of convenience was defective,
    it could not be a material defect because the judge had made a  finding
    on the evidence before him that the sponsor was  not  at  the  relevant
    time a qualified person as claimed.

21.  For all these reasons I find that the making of  the  determination  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Herwald did not  involve  the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law.  I uphold his determination.  The  appellant's
    appeal is dismissed.


Richard Chalkley
A          Judge          of          the           Upper           Tribunal
                     Date 30 April 2017




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal

