
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32320/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th July 2014                               |On 25th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           OMONIYI OLabode afelumo

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Turnock made following a hearing at Bradford on 23rd December 2013.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Nigeria . He was granted  leave  to  enter
    the UK on 12th October 2008 as a student until 31st March 2010 when  he
    was granted leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study) Migrant until 27th
    March 2012.

 3. On 30th May 2012 he was granted discretionary leave to remain in the UK
    on human rights grounds under Article 8 of the  ECHR  until  22nd  June
    2013.  On that day he made a combined application for leave  to  remain
    in the UK as the dependent partner of a points-based system migrant and
    for a biometric residence permit, but his application could not succeed
    under the Rules because he had not  last  been  granted  leave  as  the
    spouse of person with leave under another category of  the  Immigration
    Rules who has been granted leave to remain  as  a  points-based  system
    migrant.

 4. The judge allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

 5. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had not applied the case of Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules  -
    correct approach) 2013 UKUT  00640  which  states  that  an  Article  8
    assessment should  only  be  carried  out  when  there  are  compelling
    circumstances not recognised by the Rules.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Reid on 16th April 2014.

 7. Mr Diwnycz relied on his grounds.

Findings and Conclusions

 8. This challenge amounts to a mere disagreement  with  the  decision  and
    nothing more.  The judge recorded that the claimant's  spouse  suffered
    from diabetes  and  required  support  from  him.   There  was  medical
    evidence to show that  her  illness  proved  a  challenge  for  her  in
    managing both her children and her university course.  She is  studying
    on a PhD research  programme  in  materials  engineering  at  Sheffield
    Hallam  University.

 9. The judge recorded that there was no suggestion that the  claimant  and
    his wife were not in a position to support themselves.  He works  as  a
    volunteer for a charity.  Moreover he was previously granted  leave  to
    remain on a discretionary basis in order to enable him to  remain  with
    his wife and children until the end of her studies.  Her  current  visa
    is valid until 22nd August 2014.

10. The judge said that if the claimant were to leave the UK it would  have
    a significant impact upon his wife's ability to  successfully  complete
    her course. There would also be disruption to the children's education,
    one in secondary education, both settled in their schools and  who  are
    cared jointly by the claimant and his wife.  Taking  into  account  the
    comparatively short period involved, he found that the removal would be
    disproportionate.

11. That was a decision for  him  to  make.   The  facts  of  Gulshan  were
    entirely different.  In Gulshan there  were  significant  arguments  in
    favour of removal, not  least  a  cost  to  the  public  purse  by  the
    Appellant in that case remaining, and no significant factors to support
    a claim that removal would be disproportionate.

12. There is no error of law in the judge's decision.

Decision

13. The judge's decision shall stand.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


