
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/32056/2014
                                                               IA/32067/2014
                                                               IA/32069/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 1st October 2015                  |On 7th October 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                          Mr KENNEDY AMPOMAH DONKOR
                           Mr KWAKU AMPOMAH DONKOR
                          Mr STEPHEN AMPOMAH DONKOR
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Officer
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Opoku- Boateng (solicitor) of JF Law,
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid, promulgated on 31st March  2015
which allowed the Appellant's appeal.

Background

3.    The First  Appellant  was  born  on  29  September  1987.  The  second
appellant was born on 22nd of December 1989 the third appellant was born  at
30 March 1991. All three appellants are Ghanaian nationals.

4.    On 8 March  2012  the  respondent  refused  each  of  the  appellants'
applications for a residence card.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Majid  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeals  against   the
Respondent's decision.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 15 June 2015 Judge Cruthers  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "The judges determinative paragraphs  (paragraphs  10  to  11)  do  not
    include any findings of the issue which had been agreed at the  hearing
    on 27 March 2015 to be the central issue -i.e. the question of  whether
    or not the appellants are dependent on the German  national  mother  as
    claimed (as per paragraph 2 of the respondent's grounds)

    "And arguable that the judge has not addressed his  mind  to  the  main
    principles that are relevant in this sort of appeal (see,  for  example
    Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - reg 8(2)) [2012 UKUT 79 (IAC)

    "And arguable that the judge has not explained why he  considered  that
    the appeal succeeded by reference to the ECHR or the regulations...."

The Hearing

7.    (a) Ms  Brocklesby-Weller,  for  the  respondent,  told  me  that  the
decision is tainted by material errors of law. She told me  that  there  are
two material points for consideration this appeal. The first was whether  or
not the EEA national is a qualified person. The second is that because  each
of the appellant's is over 21 years of age the question of  dependency  must
be determined because of  the  operation  of  regulation  71B  of  the  2006
regulations.

    (b) Ms Brocklesby-Weller conceded that at [10] and [11] the judge makes
reference to a "qualified person", but argued that it was incumbent  on  the
judge to consider the question of dependency,  and  told  me  that  decision
does not contain any reference to either regulation 7(1) or  to  dependency;
and that the decision is devoid of findings  in  fact  in  relation  to  the
degree of any dependency three adult appellants  might  have  on  their  EEA
national mother.

    (c) Ms Brocklesby-Weller told me that, insofar as the judge  considered
whether or not article 8 ECHR is engaged, an inadequate  balancing  exercise
has been carried out. The only reference to ECHR  is  contained  within  the
one sentence which forms [13] of the decision. In any  event,  the  case  of
Amirteymour  &  others  (EEA  appeals;  Human  Rights)  [2015]  UKUT   00466
indicates that the judge should not have considered article 8 ECHR.

8.    Mr P Opoku-Boateng, for the appellants,  told  me  that  the  decision
does not contain any material errors of law and should be allowed to  stand.
He argued that the question of dependency was  entirely  irrelevant  because
the evidence indicated that, four years ago,  each  of  the  appellants  had
been granted a  family  permit.  He  told  me  that  the  decision  contains
sufficient detail to support the conclusions reached by the judge  and  that
the conclusions reached by the judge were conclusions which  was  reasonably
open to him. He urged me to dismiss the appeal, but that if I were  to  find
a material error of law to  remit  the  case  to  the  first-tier  with  the
direction that the question of dependency should not be considered.

The Law

9.    Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
authority or to distinguish it  with  adequate  reasons,  ignoring  material
considerations by taking into account  immaterial  considerations,  reaching
irrational conclusions on facts or evaluation or giving  legally  inadequate
reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,  constitute  errors  of
law.

10.   In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

Analysis

11.   All three applications were  made  on  the  basis  that  each  of  the
appellants was the  adult  family  member  of  their  EEA  national  mother.
Regulation 7 sets out the definition of a "Family member":

    "(1) Subject to paragraph (2), for the purposes  of  these  Regulations
    the following persons shall be treated as the family members of another
    person - (a) his spouse or his civil partner; (b) direct descendants of
    his, his spouse or his civil partner who are - (i) under  21;  or  (ii)
    dependants of his, his spouse  or  his  civil  partner;  (c)  dependent
    direct relatives in his ascending line or that of  his  spouse  or  his
    civil partner; (d) a person who is to be treated as the  family  member
    of that other person under paragraph (3)."

12.   It is beyond dispute that each of the  appellant's  is  aged  over  21
years. The question of dependency is therefore  central  to  these  appeals.
The judge's determination is entirely silent on the question of  dependency;
the judge's determination makes no reference to regulation  7  of  the  2006
regulations; the judges determination  is  practically  devoid  of  relevant
findings in fact.

13.   At [13] the judge appears to take a cursory glance at  the  article  8
ECHR rights of the appellants. There are no findings of fact in relation  to
whether family or private life exist. Quite correctly, the  judge  comes  to
no conclusion in relation to article 8 ECHR,  nor  does  the  judge  make  a
decision in relation to article 8 ECHR.

14.   In Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals;  human  rights)  [2015]  UKUT
00466  it was held that where no notice under section 120 of the  2002  Act
has been served and where no EEA decision  to  remove  has  been  made,  an
appellant cannot bring a Human Rights challenge to  removal  in  an  appeal
under the EEA Regulations. Neither the factual matrix nor the reasoning  in
JM (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 has any application to  appeals  of  this
nature.

Finding on Material Error

15.   I therefore find that the decision promulgated on 31st of  March  2015
is tainted by material errors of law. The inadequate  consideration  of  the
Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 together with the inadequacy of  findings
in fact, constitutes a material error of law. I consider those errors to  be
material because had the tribunal conducted a proper fact  finding  exercise
and then considering the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006,  the  outcome
could have been difference. That, in my view, is the correct test to apply.

16.    Material  errors  of  law  have  been  established  and  the  Judge's
determination cannot stand and must  be  set  aside  in  its  entirety.  All
matters must be determined afresh.

REMITTAL TO FtT

17.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

18.   In this case none of the findings of fact are to stand and the  matter
requires a complete re hearing.

19.   I consequently remit  the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
sitting at Taylor House, before any First-tier Immigration judge other  than
Judge Majid.



Decision

20.   The decision of the First-tier tribunal is tainted by material  errors
of law.

21.   I set aside the decision. The appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed      Date 6th October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
