
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32793/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Determination Promulgated            |
|8 February 2016                      |19 February 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   Balogun
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. In order to avoid the parties  in  the  unnecessary  incurrence  of
         costs, I have decided to make a decision in accordance with Rule 34
         of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  without  a
         hearing.

      2. The Secretary of State seeks an order that the First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge (i) made an error of law and  (ii)  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge should have 'remitted' the matter back to  the  Secretary  of
         State for her to make a fresh decision.  (In fact the form of order
         is  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  unlawful  and
         accordingly the appellant's application remains outstanding for the
         Secretary  of  State  to  make  a  fresh  and  lawful  decision  in
         accordance with Abdi principles.)

      3. By letter received  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  8  February  2016
         enclosing a Rule 24 response dated 2 February  2016,  Mr  Balogun's
         counsel concedes that the First-tier Tribunal Judge Coutts made  an
         error on a point of law requiring the Secretary of State to make  a
         fresh and lawful decision.

      4. The effect of the grounds and the Rule  24  response  is  that  the
         parties are ad idem and that no further issue remains between  them
         requiring the determination of the Upper  Tribunal  at  a  hearing.
         There is no difference between this situation and a  consent  order
         made pursuant to Rule 39(1).

      5. If either party objects to my use of Rule 34 in the  absence  of  a
         consent order signed by the parties, they are at liberty  to  apply
         to me to set aside my decision under  Rule  43  on  notice  and  on
         showing cause why the procedure I have adopted is irregular.

DECISION

 1. The Judge made an error on a point of law and I re-make the decision to
    the limited extent of allowing the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  and
    setting aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  substituting
    a decision in the following terms:

         Mr Balogun's application remains outstanding for the  Secretary  of
         State to make a fresh and lawful decision.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

