
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32937/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 July 2015                      |On 31 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MR EMMANUEL OMOBUDE ADAGBON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Mr M Rashid, Counsel instructed by David A Grand
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   For  the  sake  of
    convenience I shall refer to the parties as the  "Secretary  of  State"
    who is the appellant and to Mr Adagbon as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant whose date of birth is 13 November 1980 is  a  citizen  of
    Nigeria.  He is aged 35 years and is  single.   He  relied  on  medical
    grounds as he suffers from severe epilepsy and is highly  dependent  on
    his family.

3.   In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 28th January  2015  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Griffith) (FtT) allowed  the  Claimant's  appeal  under
    Article 8 ECHR outside of the Rules.

FtT Determination

4.   The FtT found that the Claimant did not meet the Immigration Rules  and
    that Article 3 ECHR was not engaged as the  medical  circumstances  did
    not meet the  high  threshold  [30-31].   The  Claimant  did  not  give
    evidence at the hearing.

5.   The FtT took into account that the medical treatment was  available  in
    Nigeria and that the Claimant had close  family  there  [34],  although
    there was no evidence to show that his sister in Nigeria could  provide
    the required level of care.  The FtT found that there was  family  life
    above and beyond the normal family ties based  on  the  high  level  of
    dependency by the Claimant on members of  the  family  [36].   The  FtT
    followed the Razgar stages and referred to Article 8 health cases  [35-
    38].  In assessing proportionality the FtT found  contributory  factors
    of an eight year delay by the Secretary of State  in  failing  to  deal
    with the Claimant's asylum claim and that the Claimant was a vulnerable
    person [37].  The medical evidence before the FtT consisted of a letter
    from the GP and a 2013 report from a Consultant  neurologist  in  which
    reference was made to the continuing risk of further seizures  together
    with complications which include  SUDEP  (sudden  unexpected  death  in
    epilepsy) [39].  The FtT found  that  the  Claimant  suffered  from  an
    unpredictable and distressing condition, there was a risk of  SUDEP,  a
    need for prompting managing and monitoring of his medication, a risk of
    seizures despite  compliance  with  medication  and  a  high  level  of
    dependency on his parents and siblings.

6.   The FtT expressed the view that the  assessment  under  Article  8  was
    "finely balanced" and  that  more  medical  evidence  would  have  been
    helpful.  There was no evidence to show that  "Keppra"  which  was  not
    available in Nigeria, was the only drug suitable for the  Claimant  and
    further there was no independent medical assessment of  the  Claimant's
    mental/psychological state of health. The FtT heard oral evidence  from
    the Claimant's father that  the  Claimant  was  mentally  impaired  and
    forgetful [34].

Grounds of application

7.   The Secretary of State contended that the FtT failed to  give  adequate
    reasons for finding that this was one of those "very rare cases"  under
    Article 8 given that there was  limited  medical  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal.

8.   Further, the Secretary of State submitted  that  there  was  comparable
    medical treatment available in Nigeria and the Tribunal had  failed  to
    make clear findings as to whether  the  claimant's  sister  in  Nigeria
    could help.

Permission to appeal

9.    Permission  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Astle   who
    commented:

         "Given that the judge himself lamented the lack of detailed medical
         evidence, it is arguable that there was  insufficient  evidence  to
         support  his  conclusion  that   there   was   a   disproportionate
         interference with the appellant's physical and moral integrity.  At
         paragraph 40 he commented that the  medical  evidence  'could  have
         been better'.  In paragraph  10  of  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  Lord
         Bingham foresaw that Article 8 could be relied on when removal  did
         not violate Article 3 'if the facts relied on by the appellant  are
         sufficiently strong'.  It is  arguable  that  the  judge  erred  in
         failing to give adequate reasons for his conclusion that  this  was
         one of those 'very rare cases'.  Permission is therefore granted."

Error of law hearing

10.  I heard submission from both representatives.   Mr  Whitwell  indicated
    that the grounds of application were predicated on the  fact  that  the
    Claimant's parents could return to Nigeria on  a  temporary  basis.   I
    took the view that this was not specifically raised in the grounds  and
    in any event it overlooked the findings made in support of the decision
    that the Claimant needed a high level of supervision and care that  was
    provided by his family members. It is inferred that that it  could  not
    be satisfied by short term measures in Nigeria.

11.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  decision  was  carefully  considered  and
    reasoned, and which took into account cumulative factors under  Article
    8.  The FtT found that taken as a whole there  was  a  disproportionate
    interference with Article 8. The FtT found that there was strong family
    life (over and above the normal level of  dependency)  as  between  the
    adult Claimant and his British Citizen family members by reason of  his
    serious medical condition, and in assessing private life the  potential
    risks brought about by  seizures,  and  the  necessary  high  level  of
    dependency.  It also took into account other factors, that the Claimant
    was regarded as a vulnerable person and the excessive delay of 8  years
    by the Secretary of State.  The reasoning given by the FtT is clear and
    adequate and the approach is consistent with Laws LJ Razgar at  23  and
    GS India [23].  The FtT  considered  the  medical  evidence  and  other
    factors which themselves engaged Article 8 in reaching its  conclusion.
    This was not a case where it was found  that  there  was  no  available
    treatment/ care in Nigeria.  The FtT  expressed  the  unqualified  view
    that further medical evidence would have been helpful, but did not find
    the medical evidence to be  insufficient.   I  am  satisfied  that  the
    medical evidence before the FtT was certainly capable of supporting the
    decision made. Further there was no challenge to  the  findings  as  to
    treatment and level of care.  This  was  a  case  where  the  level  of
    dependence on parents and siblings was high and necessary in order  for
    the  Claimant  to  be  kept  well  and  safe.   The  Claimant  required
    supervision and monitoring together with management of  his  medication
    and further assistance was required  to  deal  with  the  physical  and
    emotional aftermath post-seizure.  The Claimant was resident in the  UK
    for a considerable period of time, albeit as an over stayer since  2004
    although the 8 years  delay  in  also  a  significant  factor  and  the
    majority of his family members were British citizens settled in the UK.
     This "finely balanced" decision was carefully and fully considered  by
    the FtT and there is nothing that discloses any material error of law.



Notice of Decision

12.  I find no material error of law in the decision which shall stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 30.7.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.



Signed   Date 30.7.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

