
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32800/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th October  2015                |On 3rd November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                         MR Mensah Aborampah Afrane
                          (ANONYMITY NOT RETAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Adophy
For the Respondent:    Miss Fijiwala


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 5th February 1966 is a  citizen  of  Ghana.   The
    Appellant had made application for a reconsideration of his case to  be
    allowed to remain in the United  Kingdom  outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Respondent had refused the  Appellant's  application.   The
    Appellant had appealed that decision and his appeal was heard by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Monaghan sitting at Richmond on  26th  March  2015.
    The  judge  had  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  both   the
    Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. The Appellant had  made  application  for  permission  to  appeal  that
    decision and permission was granted by Designated Judge Zucker  on  1st
    July  2015.   It  was  said  that  it  was  arguable  the   judge   had
    misunderstood the chronology of the case  and  had  given  insufficient
    consideration to the issue of delay and  that  arguably  weight  should
    have been given to the application  said  to  have  been  made  by  the
    Appellant's child for British citizenship.

 3. Directions were issued directing the Upper Tribunal firstly  to  decide
    whether or not an error of law had been made by the First-tier Tribunal
    and the matter comes before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 4. Mr Adophy relied  on  and  adopted  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   It  was
    submitted that there had been a delay on the part of the Respondent  in
    this case such that the Appellant had been denied the  benefit  of  the
    old  Rule  under  paragraph  395C.   It  was  further  said  that   the
    proportionality exercise under Article 8  of  the  ECHR  had  not  been
    properly considered including a failure to properly consider the  issue
    of delay and weight to the fact that the Appellant's child may  shortly
    have been granted British citizenship.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 5. I was reminded that permission to appeal had not been  granted  because
    of the alleged grounds under the case of Singh.  It was said  that  the
    judge had properly considered all matters in  this  case  and  that  in
    respect of any issue regarding delay the Appellant's status in  the  UK
    had at all times been precarious and consideration needed to  be  taken
    therefore of Section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act.

 6. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision to consider
    the documents and submissions made in this case.  I  now  provide  that
    decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 7. Permission in this case was granted on the basis that it  was  arguable
    that a misunderstanding of the chronology by the judge may  have  given
    insufficient consideration to the issue of delay and further he  should
    have  considered  the  application  said  to  have  been  made  by  the
    Appellant's child for British citizenship.

 8. The judge had noted  at  paragraph  16  that  "Appellant  accepted  the
    immigration history as deduced within the  Respondent's  bundle  and  I
    therefore incorporate the history in these  findings  of  fact".   That
    would seem to mitigate against the concept the judge misunderstood  the
    chronology in this case.

 9. The Appellant arrived in the UK as a student in 2000.  He remained as a
    student until May 2006.  Prior to that expiry he applied in March  2006
    for a residence card having married a Dutch national.   That  card  was
    revoked on 7th May 2009.  The  Appellant  appealed  unsuccessfully  and
    became appeal rights exhausted on  11th  December  2009.   Rather  than
    returning  to  Ghana  the  Appellant  remained  unlawfully.   He   made
    application on 21st January 2010 for leave to remain under Article 8 of
    the ECHR.  There were no dependents  on  that  application.   That  was
    refused with no right of appeal on  16th  September  2010.   Again  the
    Appellant failed to leave and remained unlawfully.

10. An application for reconsideration was made on 27th June 2011.  However
    rather than waiting for the Home Office to  consider  that  application
    the Appellant put in a further application,  essentially  on  the  same
    basis  on  25th  June  2011  (rejected  as  no  fee  paid),  a  further
    application on 15th July 2013 (rejected 24th July  2013)  and  a  third
    application on  25th  September  2013  (rejected  10th  October  2013).
    Leaving aside the fact the Appellant was unlawfully in the UK when  the
    application process was made the first significant  delay  was  one  of
    eighteen months between the refusal of the Appellant's application  and
    the solicitor  requesting  reconsideration.   Whilst  there  was  delay
    between the receipt of that reconsideration requested on 27th June 2011
    and the final refusal in July  2014  in  that  three  year  period  the
    Appellant had made three further  applications  all  essentially  based
    upon the same facts and request.  It should be further noted  that  the
    application for reconsideration was made on 18th June 2014.

11. I find no evidence to suggest the judge misunderstood the chronology as
    asserted nor do I find delay  in  this  case  as  stark  or  simple  as
    suggested.  I further reject any submissions that an  earlier  decision
    may have resulted in  the  Appellant  receiving  a  greater  chance  of
    success.  As noted above he did make earlier applications of a  similar
    or identical nature all of which have been rejected.   In  reality  the
    message has been plain to this Appellant for a  substantial  period  of
    time that he has no basis for remaining in the UK.  Further  EB  Kosovo
    [2008] UKHL 41 paragraph 13 makes clear  that  that  argument  that  an
    earlier decision may have given him better prospects  even  if  it  had
    merit, which it does not, is an argument that has no value.  EB  Kosovo
    at paragraph 14 also however makes clear that delay may strengthen  any
    Article 8 claim and therefore the ultimate question of proportionality.



12. The judge in this case  had  looked  at  the  case  firstly  under  the
    Immigration Rules in accordance with both Appendix FM  and  EX.1.   The
    judge gave cogent reasons why, even having regard to Section 55 of  the
    Borders Act 2009 it would be reasonable for the children to  leave  the
    UK with  the  Appellant  and  found  the  Appellant  failed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.   Separately  the  judge  had  considered  the  same
    factual matrix under Article 8 of the ECHR and concluded  that  removal
    was proportionate.

13. Whilst it is said in the Grounds of Appeal that the  eldest  child  had
    applied for UK citizenship, the decision does not necessarily  disclose
    that that was communicated to the Tribunal.  However it is clearly  the
    case that the child had not at the date  of  hearing  been  granted  UK
    citizenship.  Furthermore the judge had considered all the factors when
    looking at Appendix FM which includes at FM-(cc) "is a British  citizen
    or has lived in the UK continuously for at least the seven years  prior
    to date of application."  As indicated above the  date  of  application
    for reconsideration was 18th June 2014.  The judge was  aware  of  how
    long the children had lived in the UK  (paragraph  20).   It  is  clear
    therefore that the factors considered by the judge and  his  assessment
    under both the Immigration Rules and Article 8 would have been entirely
    the same and operating within the same  legal  framework  even  if  the
    eldest son had been granted UK citizenship.   Accordingly  there  could
    have been no different outcome even if  at  the  date  of  hearing  the
    eldest child was a UK citizen which plainly he was not.

14. The decision reached by the judge was in accordance with the law, well-
    reasoned and a conclusion open to him on  the  evidence.   The  grounds
    essentially are no more than a disagreement and no  error  of  law  was
    made.

Notice of Decision

15. There was no material error of law made in this case and I  uphold  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

16. Anonymity not retained.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
