
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32412/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 27 July 2015                               | On 3 August 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                              EMMYLOU AMARILLE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Hasan, Counsel, instructed by Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant whose date of birth is 25 December 1984 is a  citizen  of
    Philippines.  She made an application for leave to remain as a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant under  the  points-based  system  and  for  a
    biometric residence permit.

2.   This matter comes before me as an error of law hearing. In  a  decision
    promulgated on 25 January 2015 by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Perry)
    (FTT) the appellant's appeal on immigration grounds was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

3.   In grounds the appellant contended that the  FTT  materially  erred  in
    raising concerns about the appellant's credibility, namely that it  was
    her responsibility to check the validity of the college, and failed  to
    given adequate reasons for reaching that conclusion whilst pointing out
    the related issues in the case (MK  (Duty  to  give  reasons)  Pakistan
    [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC)).

4.   The second ground argued was that the FTT materially erred  by  failing
    to determine the Article 8 issue which was a live issue and  needed  to
    be considered by the Tribunal.  It is argued that the appellant had  in
    incomplete/unfair hearing which ought to be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a hearing de novo in respect of Article 8.

Permission to Appeal

5.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew granted permission  to  appeal  on  12
    March 2015. As to the first ground Judge Andrew was satisfied that  the
    Tribunal was entitled to come to the conclusion it did on the  evidence
    before it and that it applied sufficient reasoning to the findings.  As
    to the second ground, in relation to Article 8, this  was  an  arguable
    error of law.

Rule 24 Response

6.   In a letter dated 20 March 2015 the respondent opposed the  appellant's
    appeal submitting that  the  FTT  directed  itself  appropriately.   It
    submitted that the decision and reasons of the FTT did not disclose any
    evidence relied on or submissions made in respect of Article 8  and  in
    the absence of that evidence there was no material error of  law.   The
    FTT could not have come to any other decision on  the  evidence  before
    it.

Error of Law Hearing

Submissions

7.   Mr Hasan relied on the grounds on  which  permission  was  granted.  He
    submitted that it was a clear error of law by the failure  to  consider
    the live issue of Article 8 ECHR.

8.   Mr Whitwell submitted that whilst accepting that Article 8  was  raised
    in the grounds of appeal (from paragraphs 15 to 23), this consisted  of
    reference to the legal issues only.  There was no reference to facts or
    evidence in support of the appellant's claim.  Further, it was apparent
    from the decision that there was no oral evidence given  on  Article  8
    issues or other evidence raised at all. It was therefore  open  to  the
    FTT to find effectively that the Article 8 ground  was  abandoned.   In
    the event that there was no evidence before the FTT, then it could  not
    be criticised for not considering it.

9.   Mr Whitwell alternatively submitted that if there were an error of  law
    found the matter should be remade on the facts  that  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  As such there was no disproportionate  breach  of
    Article 8 in light of the fact that this was a student case (Patel  and
    Others [2013] UKSC 72).

10.  Mr Hasan responded that the FTT needed to show that it  had  considered
    Article 8. It was an entirely different issue as to whether or not  the
    appellant would be successful in her Article 8 claim.

11.  At the end of the hearing I gave my decision that I found  no  material
    error of law in the decision which shall stand.  I now give my reasons.

Discussion and decision

12.  The appellant has argued that the FTT failure to  consider  her  appeal
    under Article 8 ECHR amounts to an error in law.   I am satisfied  that
    Article 8 was raised in the grounds of appeal  and  that  the  FTT  was
    aware of that as set out in the decision at [7].  The main focus of the
    decision was on the issues under the Immigration Rules and  no  further
    reference was made to Article 8 ECHR.

13.  On behalf of the Secretary of State reliance is placed on the Court  of
    Appeal decision in Sarkar v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  195,  in  particular
    paragraph 13.  In considering the issue of whether or not an  appellant
    abandons grounds of appeal that he or she does not wish to pursue,  the
    Court of Appeal stated as follows:

         "The Article 8 claim was handled in the same way.  No  evidence  or
         argument was placed before the First-tier Tribunal in support of it
         and in my view the Tribunal was entitled to treat  as  having  been
         abandoned, although it did not formally do so.  Even if  that  were
         not the case, however, there was no evidential basis on  which  the
         First-tier Tribunal could have found that that  grounds  of  appeal
         had been made out.  It follows that if there were an error  of  law
         in failing formally to dispose of it, it was not material  and  the
         Upper Tribunal was right to refuse permission to appeal in  respect
         of it."

14.  As was pointed out by Mr Whitwell, the grounds of appeal relied  on  by
    the appellant at the First-tier  Tribunal  did  raise  Article  8  from
    paragraphs  15-23.    However,  I  am  satisfied  that  those   grounds
    consisted largely of reference to relevant case law.  At  paragraph  18
    the grounds state "The appellant has established a private life in  the
    UK and is settled here.   In  the  time  she  has  been  here  she  has
    established a strong connection."  I have read  the  witness  statement
    dated 13 August 2014 produced and relied on by the appellant at the FTT
    hearing.  This statement sets out the appellant's  position  under  the
    Immigration Rules and no reference  is  made  to  any  details  or  her
    private life or connections with the UK.  It is not submitted on behalf
    of the appellant that there was additional evidence or submissions made
    to the FTT on this issue that had not been taken into  account  by  the
    FTT.  Accordingly, I am satisfied that the FTT properly approached  the
    matter by in  effect  treating  the  Article  8  ground  of  appeal  as
    abandoned. It would have been preferable for the FTT to  have  formally
    stated this in the decision but this does  not  amount  to  a  material
    error in law. Taking into account the paucity of evidence available  to
    the FTT any error of law in this regard is not material.  Furthermore I
    am satisfied that there was no evidential basis on which the FTT  could
    have found that Article 8 was  breached,  following  Patel  and  Others
    [2013] UKSC 72.

         "It is important to remember  that  Article  8  is  not  a  general
         dispensing power.  It is to be distinguished from the Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave to remain outside of  the  Rules,
         which may be unrelated to any protected human right.  The merits of
         the decision not to depart from the Rules  are  not  reviewable  on
         appeal - Section 86(6).  One may sympathise with Sedley  LJ's  call
         in Pankina  'commonsense'  in  the  application  of  the  Rules  to
         graduates who have been studying in the  UK  for  some  years  (see
         paragraph  47  above).  However  such  considerations  do  not   by
         themselves provide grounds of appeal  under  Article  8,  which  is
         concerned with private and family life, not education as such.  The
         opportunity for a promising student to complete a  course  in  this
         country, however desirable in general terms, is  not  in  itself  a
         right protected under Article 8."

Decision

15.  I find no material error of law.  The decision shall stand.




No anonymity direction is made.
No fee award made.





Signed                                  Date 30.7.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


