
  [pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/32779/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 March 2016                          |On 6 April 2016                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                        mukaila olatunbosun mustapha
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. B. Ayanrinde, Babs and Co. Legal Practitioners
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  James,  promulgated  on  12  June  2015,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  a
    Tier 1 (General) Migrant.
 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "The judge at paragraph 27 accepted that some of the dates  within  the
    refusal letter, noted by the Respondent, were  not  accurate,  but  had
    received no direct submissions in  relation  to  this  issue  from  the
    Respondent, save for  a  general  reliance  upon  the  refusal  letter.
    Whilst he accepted he was granted entry clearance back in 2008 and  was
    satisfied that Section 19 of the UK Borders Act  2007  applied  to  the
    Appeal,  he  did  not  introduce  into  evidence  any  documents  which
    supported  the  application  other  than  those  referred  to  in   the
    application, but he did not refer to the 3C leave that  this  Appellant
    had until 2 January 2011.  This was central to his chronology  and  may
    have impacted negatively  on  the  documentary  evidence  and  in  that
    respect the judge may have fallen into error."


 3. At the outset of the hearing Mr. Jarvis  accepted  that  there  was  an
    error of law in the decision relating to the calculation of  time.   He
    accepted therefore that the Appellant had not been an overstayer for  a
    period in excess of 28 days.  I was referred to the  guidance  document
    entitled "Applications from overstayers (non family routes)" valid from
    20 October 2014, which states that where an application  for  leave  to
    remain is rejected as invalid the period of overstaying for  a  further
    application for leave to remain must be calculated from  the  date  the
    migrant  is  deemed  to  have  received  the  notice   of   invalidity.
    Therefore, in relation to a 28 day period, the clock would start on the
    third day after the  notice  which  stated  that  the  application  was
    invalid.  Two applications made by the Appellant had been  rejected  as
    being invalid and on the third application he had been granted leave to
    remain.  As a consequence of the application of the guidance, there was
    therefore no break during the application process from December 2010 to
    January 2011.  For the purposes of paragraph 245CD(d)(ii) the five year
    period had been met.


 4. Mr. Jarvis submitted that the judge had been wrong in finding that  the
    Appellant had overstayed for a period in excess of  28  days.   He  had
    been wrong to conclude that the  Appellant  had  not  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom for five years continuously.  On  consideration  of  the
    immigration rules and the guidance, I found that this  calculation  was
    correct and that the decision involved an error of law in this respect.


 5. There remained only the second ground of  appeal  in  relation  to  the
    documents which had been considered by the judge.  He  had  found  that
    section 19 had applied to the evidence in the appeal and that therefore
    he had not been able to take into account the documents provided by the
    Appellant, as  he  found  that  they  had  not  been  provided  to  the
    Respondent with the application.


Submissions


 6. Mr. Ayanrinde  submitted  that  the  Respondent  had  not  applied  the
    evidential flexibility policy because she had found that the  Appellant
    did not meet the five  year  requirement.   The  application  had  been
    refused in relation to two issues.  First,  the  requirement  for  five
    years' residence was not met, and secondly two pieces of  evidence  had
    not been provided under Appendix A in  relation  to  earnings  and  the
    English language requirements.  He submitted that when  the  Respondent
    had found that the Appellant had failed on the five year point, she had
    then failed to apply her own evidential flexibility  policy  which  she
    had been mandated by law  to  do.   He  therefore  submitted  that  the
    evidential policy applied.  He said that the refusal notice pointed  to
    the fact that documents had been provided with the application.


 7. I was referred to page 4 of the notice of decision where  it  is  noted
    that the Appellant had provided bank statements from Natwest  Bank  for
    February 2013 to February 2014.   However,  there  was  only  one  bank
    statement in the bundle provided by the Respondent.  He submitted  that
    this was not right, but that twelve statements had been provided to the
    Respondent with  the  application.   He  submitted  that  even  if  the
    Respondent  had  refused  the  application,  the  documents  had   been
    submitted.  He submitted that the reasons for refusal letter  confirmed
    that twelve months' bank statements had  been  provided.   Additionally
    evidence had been put before the judge of  the  weight  of  the  parcel
    which the Appellant had sent with his application.  It had weighed  one
    kilogram  and  it  was  submitted  that  it  therefore  contained  more
    documents than the Respondent had reproduced in her bundle.


 8. It was  submitted  that  the  Appellant  had  submitted  the  documents
    required under Appendix A.  Documents which had not been referred to in
    the reasons for refusal letter had  nevertheless  been  submitted.   He
    submitted that the  Respondent  could  have  required  the  outstanding
    documents to be provided but, as she had thought that  the  application
    failed by another route, she did not ask the Appellant to provide them.




 9. He submitted that the judge had made an error of law in failing to find
    that the evidence had been before  the  Respondent  but  had  not  been
    considered, and had erred in failing to remit it to the Respondent  for
    reconsideration.


10. Mr. Jarvis submitted that, if the judge had found  that  the  Appellant
    had provided the documents with the application, the judge  could  have
    taken those into account by virtue of section 19.  If he had found that
    all  of  the  evidence  required  under  Appendix  FM  was  before  the
    Respondent, he could have allowed the appeal outright.   He  would  not
    have needed to remit it to the Respondent for reconsideration.


11. He submitted that the judge had rejected the argument made to him  that
    the documents  had  all  been  provided  to  the  Respondent  with  the
    application (paragraph [29]).  He  submitted  that  there  was  nothing
    unlawful about paragraph [29], and there was  nothing  wrong  with  the
    findings  in  this  paragraph.   The  Appellant's  representative   had
    accepted that that was the argument he had put forward, but  the  judge
    had  found  that  the  evidence  in  the  Appellant's  bundle  was  not
    admissible.  He submitted that, if the Appellant was as organised as he
    claimed to be, it was odd that he was relying on the  evidence  of  the
    weight of the parcel that he claimed to have sent to the Respondent.


12. He submitted that the Appellant had not filled in the application  form
    with care.  He provided me with a copy of Appendix A  as  had  been  in
    force at the relevant date.  I was  referred  to  paragraphs  [20]  and
    [21].  This states: "Applicants should indicate in the application form
    for which twelve month period their earnings should be  assessed".   It
    was submitted that the Appellant had not done  that.   Neither  had  he
    indicated whether he was self-employed or salaried, indicating that  he
    had not filled the form in correctly.  It was already evident from  the
    form itself that  the  Appellant  had  not  applied  due  care  to  his
    application.  He submitted that there was no good or  lawful  challenge
    to the decision.


13. It was not right that the Respondent should have  used  her  policy  of
    evidential flexibility.  In any event, there was no  evidence  that  it
    had  been  argued  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that   the
    evidential  flexibility  policy  should  have  been  applied   by   the
    Respondent.  There could be no material error of law if the  judge  had
    failed to consider something  which  had  not  been  put  to  him.   He
    referred me to paragraph [23] of the decision  which  showed  that  the
    Appellant's case had not been put as one where the Respondent  had  not
    used her policy of evidential flexibility.


14. The case of Mandalia [2015] UKSC 59, which had been relied  on  by  the
    Appellant, was not relevant.  This referred  to  a  policy  instruction
    document, not to paragraph 245AA which was the applicable  law  at  the
    time.  He submitted that paragraph 245AA was more restrictive than  the
    policy which had been in force prior to that.  The Appellant could  not
    argue that the documents which were  missing  would  have  obliged  the
    Respondent to make enquiries under 245AA.  A whole section of documents
    had been missing  and  paragraph  245AA  was  not  applicable  in  this
    situation.  Even if evidential flexibility had been  argued,  it  could
    not have been argued with reference to  the  immigration  rule  as  the
    Appellant was relying on Mandalia.


15. In response Mr. Ayanrinde submitted  that  the  case  of  Mandalia  did
    apply.  I was referred to paragraph [36].  The policy  under  paragraph
    245AA obliged the Respondent to invite  the  Appellant  to  repair  any
    deficits in the evidence provided.  Paragraph 245AA would have  applied
    to the  Appellant.   The  reason  that  it  did  not  was  because  the
    Respondent had employed  paragraph  245AA(c)  which  applies  when  the
    application fails for other reasons and the Respondent does not have to
    use her evidential flexibility policy.  He submitted that the Appellant
    had not provided supplementary evidence to corroborate his earnings.


Error of Law


16. I have found above that the decision involves the making of an error of
    law in the calculation of the five year period.  However, it will  only
    be material if the appeal would have succeeded otherwise.


17. Paragraph [29] of the decision states as follows:


    "I am satisfied that section 19 of the UK Borders Act 2007  applies  to
    this appeal and that there is a restriction on the presentation of  new
    evidence in this appeal.  The Appellant has not submitted that  section
    19 does not apply but has asserted that  all  the  documents  that  the
    Appellant seeks to rely upon in the  appeal  were  submitted  with  his
    application.  The Appellant argues that because it was accepted by  the
    Respondent that he had presented bank statements  in  relation  to  one
    bank account but that the application refers to one bank statement only
    it is clear that further documents were presented with the application.
     I disagree.  The relevant page of  the  application  refers  to  "bank
    statements" and the Appellant has indicated 1  in  the  relevant  check
    box.  I am satisfied that this shows  that  bank  statements  from  one
    account have been submitted.  I  have  noted  that  the  Appellant  has
    stated before the  Tribunal  that  he  considers  himself  to  be  very
    organised and experienced in preparing  such  applications.   In  those
    circumstances  I  do  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  submitted  any
    documentation other than that indicated in the application."


18. I find that the judge has correctly considered that section 19  applies
    to the appeal.  He correctly sets out the position  at  law,  which  is
    that there is a restriction on the presentation of new evidence in this
    appeal.  Therefore the judge needed  to  decide  whether  the  evidence
    which was relied on by the Appellant was submitted  to  the  Respondent
    with the application in order that he could then  consider  it  in  the
    appeal.


19. The judge sets out his reasons in  paragraph  [29]  for  rejecting  the
    Appellant's submission that he had provided all of the  documents  with
    the application.  The Appellant submitted  that  he  had  provided  the
    documents by reliance on the fact that the reasons for  refusal  letter
    indicates that he had provided bank statements covering a period  of  a
    year, but there was only one bank statement in the Respondent's bundle.
     However, in the application form he had put "1" in the relevant  check
    box.  The judge gives reasons for finding that this indicated that  the
    Appellant had provided bank statements  from  one  account.   There  is
    nothing  irrational  about  this  finding.   He  also  notes  that  the
    Appellant told the Tribunal that  he  considered  himself  to  be  very
    organised, in which case it would be expected  that  he  had  sent  the
    documents with the application.  However he rejects this  argument  and
    finds that the only documents provided with the application were  those
    indicated in the application form.


20. The judge noted that the  Appellant  said  he  was  organised  and  was
    experienced  in  preparing  applications.   I   have   considered   the
    application form.  As submitted by Mr. Jarvis, the  Appellant  did  not
    state the relevant period for calculating the documents provided.  This
    is noted by the Respondent in the reasons for  refusal  letter  at  the
    bottom of page 3:


    "you have failed to give the start and end date of the period for which
    you are claiming previous earnings, you have  failed  to  complete  the
    table giving details of previous earnings being claimed  and  you  have
    failed to provide your total earnings claimed".


21. I find that the judge was entitled to find in this situation  that  the
    Appellant submitted the documentation that  he  had  indicated  in  the
    application and no more.  Indeed, it was not submitted by Mr. Ayanrinde
    that there was any error of law in paragraph [29] but instead he sought
    to re-argue the Appellant's case.  I find that there is no error of law
    in the judge's findings in  paragraph  [29]  that  the  only  documents
    provided with the application were those indicated in  the  application
    form.  Had the judge found that the documents had  been  provided  with
    the application he could have considered them and, it would  have  been
    open to him to allow the appeal outright had he found that they met the
    requirements of Appendix A, but he did not find that they had  been  so
    provided.


22. In relation to evidential flexibility, there is no indication that this
    argument was ever put to the judge.  Therefore I find that there cannot
    be any material error of law in his failure to deal with this issue.


23. In any event, it was the evidential flexibility policy as  set  out  in
    paragraph 245AA of the immigration rules which was relevant rather than
    the policy which preceded it.  As submitted by Mr. Jarvis,  the  policy
    was wider than the  immigration  rule  which  restricted  the  kind  of
    documents which could be provided and the circumstances in which  those
    documents could be provided.  There  were  many  documents  which  were
    missing in the Appellant's case, and I find that the Respondent was not
    obliged to ask for them under paragraph 245AA.  It  was  not  just  one
    document from a sequence which was missing, nor was a document  in  the
    wrong format or a copy, nor was there a document which did not  contain
    all the specified  information,  as  set  out  in  paragraph  245AA(b).
    Therefore it is irrelevant that the Respondent  did  not  request  them
    with reference to paragraph 245AA(c), as the documents that are missing
    do not fit into the categories set out in paragraph 245AA.

24. I have found that this argument was not placed before the judge,  so  I
    find that there is no material error of law in his failure to  consider
    it.  In any event, I find that paragraph 245AA would not  have  applied
    to the Appellant's case given the extent of the  documents  which  were
    missing.


25. I find that there is no error of law in the judge's  rejection  of  the
    Appellant's claim that he had submitted all of the necessary  documents
    with the application, paragraph  [29].   The  judge  gave  reasons  for
    rejecting this claim,  and  there  is  nothing  irrational  about  this
    reasoning.  I find that there is no material error of law.


26. Having found therefore that the judge would have dismissed  the  appeal
    in any event because the Appellant had failed to provide the  necessary
    documents under Appendix A, I find that the error of  law  involved  in
    the calculation of the time period is not material.


Notice of Decision


27. The appeal involves the making of  an  error  of  law  but  it  is  not
    material to the outcome of the appeal.


28. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal under the immigration rules stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 29 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
