
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/32556/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Columbus House, Newport    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 December 2015                  |On 1 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MAHMUDA KHANUM DOLY
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Grubb, Counsel instructed by Qualified Legal
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Clemes in which he allowed the appeal  of  Ms
    Doly, a  citizen  of  Bangladesh,  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse to grant leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.  We
    shall refer to Ms Doly as the Claimant, although she was the  Appellant
    in the proceedings below.

 2. The application for  leave  to  remain  was  refused  by  reference  to
    paragraphs D-LTRP 1.3, R-LTRP1.1(d), 276CE and 276ADE(1) (iii) to  (vi)
    of the Immigration Rules  (HC395)  on  16  April  2014.   The  Claimant
    exercised her right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  This is  the
    appeal which came before Judge  Clemes  on  23  January  2015  and  was
    allowed.  The Secretary of State applied for permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  The application was granted by  Designated  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Zucker on 22 July 2015 in the following terms

         "1.      First-tier Tribunal Judge Clemes allowed  the  Appellant's
             appeal, brought in reliance upon paragraph 276ADE, against the
             decision of the Respondent to refuse her leave  to  remain  in
             the United Kingdom.

          2. The grounds submit that the Judge focused on "no ties"  rather
             than the clarification to the rule  introduced  from  28  July
             2014 which requires focus on the possibility of reintegration.



          3. Given that the Respondent  states  in  the  grounds  that  the
             amendment to  the  rule  was  to  provide  clarity  the  Upper
             Tribunal may wish to consider the extent to which the guidance
             in Bossadi (paragraph 276ADE; suitability; ties)  [2015]  UKUT
             00042 (IAC) assists in appeals before the Tribunal on or after
             28 July 2014. However the grounds are arguable.

 3. At the hearing before us the Secretary of State was represented  by  Mr
    Richards and Ms Grubb appeared for the Claimant. Mr  Richards  accepted
    that the first three paragraphs of the grounds of appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal were not sustainable, the application and the  decision  under
    appeal having been made prior to the changes to the  Immigration  Rules
    which came into effect on 28 July 2014. The reference to Article 8 ECHR
    in the grounds was not appropriate as the appeal was allowed under  the
    Immigration Rules. He confirmed that the only paragraph of the  grounds
    upon which he sought to rely was paragraph 4:

         "4.      It is respectfully submitted that the Tribunal's  findings
         at paragraph 11 that there is no evidence to suggest that appellant
         has retained ties to Bangladesh is wholly inadequate. The appellant
         has limited  English  language  skills  despite  claiming  to  have
         resided here since 1995 and states at paragraph  6  that  her  main
         language is Bengali. This does not in anyway suggest she has either
         lost all ties to Bangladesh, or that she has integrated into the UK
         way of life. Given the appellant's main  language  is  Bengali  she
         would have  no  difficulties  in  integrating  back  into  life  in
         Bangladesh. Whilst the appellant may claim she had no family there,
         given her blatant disregard for  immigration  laws  she  is  not  a
         credible witness and her evidence cannot be  relied  upon  in  this
         regard. Even if she has no family there, she is an  adult  who  has
         spent all her youth, formative years and  education  in  Bangladesh
         and is fully capable of living an independent life  there.  If  she
         requires support, her family here can provide her with some as they
         have been doing since her arrival. There is no evidence  whatsoever
         that the appellant has integrated into the UK way of life and given
         that she has now married a Bangladeshi citizen it suggests she  has
         been associating with the Bangladeshi community in  the  UK,  which
         shows she still retains close ties  to  its  culture  and  customs.
         Therefore there would be  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
         integration."

 4. In this respect Mr Richards submitted that the Judge allowed the appeal
    on the basis that the Claimant had no ties to Bangladesh  as  shown  in
    his conclusion at paragraph 11 of the  decision.  This  focuses  almost
    exclusively on the Claimant's lack of family or friends in  Bangladesh.
    So far as cultural ties are concerned  the  Judge  comments  only  that
    these will have been dissipated by the passage of time. This is not  an
    appropriate or necessary conclusion. The Judge  found  previously  that
    the Claimant has limited English and that her main language is Bengali.
    She is married to a Bangladeshi husband. The Claimant has lived in  the
    United Kingdom without leave for almost 20 years and the  evidence  was
    that her links were with the Bangladeshi community in this country.

 5. For the Claimant Ms Grubb relied on her skeleton argument. There is  no
    error of law made  by  the  Judge.  He  correctly  directs  himself  to
    Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules (Nigeria) [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC). Ties
    must be more than remote  and  abstract  links.  In  the  case  of  the
    Claimant all her ties are to this country. Her siblings  are  here  and
    they are all British; her husband is here and her friends are here.  It
    would be wrong to look simply at her nationality and hold that this  is
    a tie to Bangladesh. She has not had contact with anyone in  Bangladesh
    for more than 10 years. She has no family remaining in Bangladesh.  The
    Judge has looked at the evidence and  made  a  rounded  assessment.  Ms
    Grubb added that the Claimant would now quality  for  leave  to  remain
    under the long residence provision of paragraph 276ADE.

 6. Mr Richards responded to say  that  language  cannot  be  equated  with
    nationality.  There  is  no  loss  of  language   of   origin   through
    integration. It is not simply a question of looking at  nationality  as
    Ms Grubb asserts.

 7. We reserved our decision

Background

 8. The Claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh who came to the United  Kingdom
    in October 1994 for the purpose of marriage. This marriage  broke  down
    in 1995 and the Claimant's leave to remain expired on 8  October  1996.
    The Claimant remained in the United Kingdom without leave  and  without
    bringing herself to the attention of  the  authorities  until  February
    2009 when she made an application for leave to remain under the 14 year
    long residence rule then in being. This application was refused with no
    right of appeal and the Claimant's representations against the  refusal
    were not upheld. The Claimant remained in the  United  Kingdom  without
    leave and on 5 September 2012  married  Mohibur  Rahman  a  Bangladeshi
    national who had also come to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  spouse  and
    remained without leave following the breakdown  of  his  marriage.  The
    couple had a son who died in August 2012 when he was three months  old.
    The Claimant's  husband  was  granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain
    expiring in 2017 following a successful appeal against the Respondent's
    decision to refuse leave to remain on the basis of long residence.

 9. The Claimant's application for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
    was made on the basis of her family and private life.  The  application
    was rejected by the  Secretary  of  State  on  two  substantive  bases.
    Firstl, the application did not meet the  eligibility  requirements  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. Secondly the application did  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) because  the  Claimant
    had not lost ties to her home country. At the appeal hearing before the
    First-tier Tribunal the Claimant's  representative  conceded  that  the
    Claimant could not meet the eligibility requirements of Appendix FM but
    maintained  that  she  did   meet   the   requirements   of   paragraph
    276ADE91)(vi) because she had lost ties to her home country. The First-
    tier Tribunal accepted this submission and allowed the appeal.

Discussion

10. The  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  assert  a  material
    misdirection in law and  give,  in  essence,  three  reasons  for  this
    assertion. The first, that the  Tribunal  applied  the  wrong  test  by
    considering the Claimant's ties to Bangladesh rather than the obstacles
    to her re-integration, was conceded by Mr Richards as having no  merit.
    This was a proper concession. Both the application and the Secretary of
    State's decision were made prior to the change in the Immigration Rules
    that came into effect on 28 July 2014. The second,  that  the  Tribunal
    misdirected itself in relation to Article 8 ECHR, was also conceded  as
    being without merit. Again this is a proper concession  as  the  appeal
    was allowed by virtue of the Immigration Rules.

11. It is the third reason (paragraph 4 of the grounds) that  has  apparent
    substance. The Secretary of State asserts that the Tribunal's  findings
    at paragraph 11 of the decision and reasons, that there is no  evidence
    to suggest that the Claimant has retained ties to Bangladesh, is wholly
    inadequate. The grounds point out that the Claimant has limited English
    language skills, her main language in Bengali, she spent her youth  and
    formative years in Bangladesh and she was educated there.  Further  she
    is married  to  a  Bangladeshi  citizen  and  this  suggests  that  she
    associates with the Bangladeshi community in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    retains close ties to the culture and customs of Bangladesh.

12. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal in this respect at paragraph 11
    are as follows:-

         "Based on the facts and applying Ogundimu (Article 8 -  new  rules)
         Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC), I am satisfied  the  Appellant  in
         reality has no ties whether social  cultural  or  family  with  the
         country to which he (sic) would have to go if required to leave.  I
         acknowledge that she has limited English  but  note  that  she  has
         taken steps to address  that  issue  (documents  from  her  English
         language course in the Appellant's bundle). She has no family  ties
         left in Bangladesh and her family now - to all intents and purposes
         -is her husband and her siblings who are in the UK ... there is  in
         fact  no  contradictory  evidence  to  suggest   (persuasively   or
         otherwise) that the Appellant  has  retained  ties  to  Bangladesh.
         Considering the  factors  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  suggested  in
         Ogundimu I am driven to conclude that the Appellant  has  lost  any
         ties that she had to Bangladesh through lack of family and  friends
         there, the time that she has been away from  the  country  and  the
         relatively strong ties that she has developed in the UK.  The  only
         ties that she has might be cultural ones but even those  will  have
         been dissipated by the passage of time.  There  are  no  meaningful
         ties for  the  Appellant  to  Bangladesh  and  -  after  a  rounded
         assessment as required by Ogundimu - my judgement is that  all  her
         ties are to the UK. "

13. In our judgement this finding although referring to Ogundimu amounts to
    a misunderstanding of the rationale of Ogundimu and as such amounts  to
    a  material  misdirection  in  law.  In  Ogundimu  the  Upper  Tribunal
    concluded

         "122.    The natural  and  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word  'ties'
             imports, we think, a concept  involving  something  more  than
             merely remote and abstract links to the  country  of  proposed
             deportation or removal. It involves there  being  a  continued
             connection to life in that  country;  something  that  ties  a
             claimant to his or her country of origin. If this were not the
             case then it would appear that a person's nationality  of  the
             country of proposed deportation could  of  itself  lead  to  a
             failure to meet the  requirements  of  the  rule.  This  would
             render the application of the rule, given the  context  within
             which it operates, entirely meaningless.

        123. We recognise that the text under the rules is an exacting one.
             Consideration of whether  a  person  has  'no  ties'  to  such
             country must involve a rounded assessment of all the  relevant
             circumstances and is not to be limited  to  'social,  cultural
             and family' circumstances. Nevertheless, we are satisfied that
             the appellant has no ties with Nigeria. He is  a  stranger  to
             the country, the people, and the way of life. His  father  may
             have ties but they are not ties of the appellant or  any  ties
             that could result in support to the appellant in the event  of
             his return there. Unsurprisingly,  given  the  length  of  the
             appellant's residence here, all  of  his  ties  are  with  the
             United Kingdom.  Consequently  the  appellant  has  so  little
             connection with Nigeria so as to mean  that  the  consequences
             for him in establishing private life there at the age  of  28,
             after 22 years residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  would  be
             'unjustifiably harsh'.

        124. Whilst  each  case  turns  on  its  own  facts,  circumstances
             relevant to the assessment of whether a person has ties to the
             country to which they would have to go if they  were  required
             to leave the United Kingdom must include, but are not  limited
             to: the length of time a person has spent in  the  country  to
             which he would have to go if he were  required  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom, the age that the person left that country, the
             exposure that person has had to the  cultural  norms  of  that
             country, whether  that  person  speaks  the  language  of  the
             country, the extent of the  family and friends that person has
             in the country to which he is being deported  or  removed  and
             the quality of the relationships that person  has  with  those
             friends and family members.

14. The clear evidence presented to the First-tier Tribunal was that having
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 1994  the  Claimant  had  continuously
    resided within and associated with the  Bangladeshi  community  in  the
    United Kingdom. She came to the United Kingdom as the spouse of someone
    from that community and lived with him until the marriage  broke  down.
    Thereafter she went to live with her sister and her family and remained
    within this Bangladeshi/British family unit for the next 16 years.  The
    Claimant explains in her statement  that  she  was  introduced  to  her
    future husband in May 2011 having previously seen him at  a  number  of
    family gatherings. She describes how  their  marriage  took  place  two
    months later in accordance with Bangladeshi custom and  tradition.  The
    Claimant's husband is Bangladeshi. His statement accords with  that  of
    the Claimant as to how the marriage came about. There was  no  evidence
    put forward to the First-tier Tribunal to suggest that the Claimant had
    developed any ties outside the Bangladeshi community.

15. Applying these facts to Ogundimu the Claimant spent the first 19  years
    of her life in Bangladesh. Since her arrival in the United Kingdom  she
    has lived within the  Bangladeshi  community.  There  was  no  evidence
    presented to the First-tier Tribunal and, despite  our  invitation,  no
    evidence highlighted to us that her involvement  with  the  Bangladeshi
    community was anything other than exclusive.  The  Claimant  cannot  be
    said to be a stranger to Bangladesh, its people or  its  way  of  life.
    There was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  to  suggest  that
    the  Claimant  has  become  distanced  from  the  cultural   norms   of
    Bangladesh. There was,  contrary  to  the  finding  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, nothing to suggest that the Claimant's cultural ties to
    Bangladesh had dissipated by the passage of time. Indeed there  was  no
    evidence presented to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  suggest  that  the
    Claimant ties to the United Kingdom had replaced her ties to Bangladesh
    in any meaningful way. The evidence was firmly and  squarely  that  the
    Claimant had lived and continued to live as a Bangladeshi in the United
    Kingdom.

16. It follows from the above that we must set aside the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and remake the decision dismissing the  appeal.  In
    doing  so  we  remind  ourselves  that  the  Claimant's  representative
    considers that the Claimant now meets the long  residence  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules and that upon application she will be entitled
    to remain.

CONCLUSION

17. The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law. We set aside that decision.

18. We remake the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  by  dismissing  the
    Claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  to  refuse
    leave to remain.


Signed:     Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
