
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/32765/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                   |                                   |
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision Promulgated               |
|On 6 May 2015                      |              On 22 May 2015       |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                                NABEEL AKHBAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms L Mair counsel instructed by Malik Legal Solicitors
Ltd
For the Respondent: Ms C Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Holt promulgated on 8 December 2014  which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against an application of  a  Residence  card  on  the
   basis that the Appellant's marriage was a marriage of convenience for the
   purpose of the EEA Regulations.
Background
3. The Appellant was  born  on  20  November  1988  and  is  a  national  of
   Pakistan.
4. On 21 January 2014 the Appellant  applied  for  a  residence  card  as  a
   conformation as his right to reside in the United Kingdom as  the  spouse
   of Ivona Dickanec an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the  United
   Kingdom.
5. On  4  August  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:
6. There were a number of inconsistencies between the answers given  by  the
   Appellant and Ms Dickanec in the marriage interview which took  place  on
   29 July 2014.
7. The company that  the  Sponsor  worked  for  could  not  be  verified  or
   contacted by phone and therefore the Respondent was not satisfied that it
   was a genuine business.
8. There were discrepancies in the wage slips produced.
9. The Respondent's records suggested that the EEA sponsor  was  married  at
   the time of her marriage to the Appellant to an  Egyptian  male  and  not
   single.


The Judge's Decision
10. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Holt ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
   decision. The Judge found :
   a) The Respondent conceded that the sponsor  was  working  and  therefore
      exercising treaty rights.
   b) The Judge could not be satisfied by the evidence produced  whether  or
      not the sponsor was married  at  the  time  of  her  marriage  to  the
      Appellant to an Egyptian male.
   c) The Appellant was not the biological father of the Sponsor's child.
   d) The Appellant put his name on the  baby's  birth  certificate  as  the
      child's father and claimed to be ignorant as to the need to  give  the
      correct biological father's name on the birth certificate and  claimed
      it was a mistake. The Judge found the explanations as to why they  put
      the Appellant's name as the father on  the  birth  certificate  wholly
      unsatisfactory and did not accept that it was an innocent mistake.
   e)  The  Judge  found  the  circumstances  of  the  commencement  of  the
      relationship were unusual: they were different religions; the  sponsor
      was pregnant when they met and they met and married  in  less  than  a
      year.
   f) The Judge found  it  unhelpful  that  she  was  not  provided  with  a
      transcript of the interview but rather an interview summary sheet.
   g) Ms Mair suggested that the document could be inaccurate as it may only
      highlight areas of inconsistency but not areas of consistency.
   h) The Judge found that there were some areas  of  consistency  but  also
      many areas of inconsistency and listed them.
   i) The Judge found that they Appellant and sponsor  were  sharing  living
      accommodation.
   j) The Sponsors child was apparently very familiar with the Appellant  as
      the Judge saw him handling her.
   k) The evidence of the discrepancies in the marriage interview raised the
      suspicion that this was a marriage of convenience  and  therefore  the
      burden then shifted to the Appellant to establish that it  was  not  a
      marriage of convenience.
   l) The Judge found that the  predominant  or  principle  purpose  of  the
      marriage was to secure residence rights for the Appellant  because the
      Appellant was prepared to give dishonest information to the  Registrar
      in relation to  being  the  child's  father;  there  were  significant
      discrepancies  between  the  Appellant  and  the  sponsor  about   the
      circumstances of their relationship at  a  time  when  they  had  been
      married for 8 months; the unusual circumstances of their  relationship
      although these alone may  not  have  persuaded  the  Judge  but  taken
      cumulatively with the other evidence they did.
11. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that :
   a) I finding that the Appellant's predominant purpose was securing treaty
      rights the Judge applied the  wrong  test  is  assessing  whether  the
      marriage was one of convenience in that  in  the  European  Commission
      Handbook the definition is that it is 'an artificial contract  entered
      into  solely  with  the  purpose  of  obtaining  the  right  of   free
      movement.'(my bold)
   b) It was procedurally unfair to  rely  on  an  interview  summary  sheet
      rather than a transcript of the  interview  and  therefore  the  Judge
      should have placed limited or no weight on the  interview  summary  or
      alternatively considered the evidence in the round.
   c) The Judge placed undue weight on the fact that the Appellant  had  put
      his name on the child's birth certificate as his father.
   d) The Judge gave undue weight to  what  she  described  as  the  unusual
      commencement to the relationship
12.  On 2 February 2015 Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald  gave
   permission to appeal on all grounds.

13. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Ms  Mair  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that:

   a) The overarching issue in the case was whether this was a marriage  of
      convenience.

   b) The findings that the Judge made in relation to the parties  domestic
      life did not support her conclusion  that  this  was  not  a  genuine
      marriage.

   c) The Judge applied the wrong test which is whether the sole purpose of
      the marriage was to secure treaty rights.

   d) The Judge should have placed little or no  weight  on  the  interview
      summary given that the failure to produce it  breached  the  Tribunal
      Procedure Rules which require any party to produce  the  document  on
      which they intend to rely.

   e) The Judge should have factored  in  that  the  parties  answers  were
      consistent at the date of hearing.

   f) She relied on the case  of  Miah(interviewers  comments:  disclosure:
      fairness)[2014] UKUT 00515(IAC)

   g) The Judge placed undue weight on what she described  as  the  unusual
      features in relation to how their relationship started. This involved
      her in making value judgements not founded in the evidence  or  legal
      principles.

14. On behalf of the Respondent  Ms Johnstone submitted that :

   a) In relation to the weight to be given to the various  aspects  of  the
      evidence this was a matter for the Judge.

   b) The Appellant and the sponsor  had  the  opportunity  to  address  the
      alleged discrepancies in the interview and did not deny what they  are
      alleged to have said but rather stated that they were  pressured  into
      saying it .

   c) The case of Miah was not placed before the Judge.

   d) The Judge took into  account  all  of  the  relevant  factors  reached
      conclusions that were open to her.

15. In reply Ms Mair on behalf of the Appellant submitted:

   a) Neither of the words used by the Judge, 'predominant'  or  'principal'
      are the same as 'sole.' The test is a high one. The words  predominant
      or principal allow for other less weighty reasons  for  entering  into
      the marriage.

   b) In relation to the case of Miah that  was  post  hearing  and  it  was
      possible that an error of law was based  on  a  change  in  the  legal
      authority after the date of hearing. The issue of procedural  fairness
      was raised at the hearing.

   c) The Appellant and sponsor did respond to issues raised in the summary.



Finding on Material Error

16. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

17. This was an application for a residence card where  the  only  issue  in
   the case at the appeal hearing was whether the Appellant's marriage to an
   EU citizen was a marriage of convenience.

18. Ms  Mair  advanced  the  argument  that  the  Judge  in  describing  the
   'predominant' purpose of  the  marriage  (paragraph  39)  or  'principal'
   purpose (paragraph 40) as securing treaty rights had  applied  the  wrong
   test and that she should have assessed whether it was the sole purpose of
   the marriage ie one that admitted no other purpose.

19. There is no definition of  marriage  of  convenience  or  sham  marriage
   within the Rules and therefore the Judge was  directed  to  the  case  of
   Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage  of  convenience)  Greece  [2012]  UKUT
   00038(IAC) by Ms Mair.

20.  In setting out the law the case refers to the  Citizens  Directive  (EP
   and Council Directive 2004/38/EC) which  sets  out  the  basic  rules  of
   European Union law regulating the admission of spouses of EU citizens who
   are not such citizens themselves (third country nationals).
21. Preamble 28 is as follows:
   "To guard  against  abuse  of  rights  or  fraud,  notably  marriages  of
   convenience or any other form of relationships contracted  for  the  sole
   purpose of enjoying the right of  free  movement  and  residence,  Member
   States should have the possibility to adopt the necessary measures."

22. Article 35 which is headed 'Abuse of Rights' then provides:

   "Member States may adopt the necessary measures to refuse , terminate  or
   withdraw any right conferred by this Directive in the case  of  abuse  of
   rights or fraud, such as marriages of convenience."

23. In paragraph  5  of  her  grounds  Ms  Mair  quotes  from  the  European
   Commission Handbook which was written to assist national  authorities  in
   addressing this topic and is indeed referred  to  in  paragraphs  6-7  of
   Miah. The Handbook has a 'Definition' section  and  at  section  2.1  and
   there is a definition of 'sole purpose' which includes the  following  as
   highlighted in the document:

   "Therefore, the notion  of  'sole  purpose'  should  not  be  interpreted
   literally (as being the  unique  or  exclusive  purpose)  but  rather  as
   meaning that the objective to obtain the right  of  entry  and  residence
   must be the predominant purpose of the abusive conduct."

24. Thus in the case of Miah at  paragraph  5  when  the  President  of  the
   Tribunal summarised the ratio of  Papajorgii  and  stated  that  "However
   there is an  evidential  burden  on  the  Claimant  to  address  evidence
   justifying  reasonable  suspicion  that  the  marriage  in  question  was
   undertaken for the predominant purpose of securing residence  rights"  he
   was using a definition that was  entirely  consistent  with  the  Council
   Directive and the definition provided in the guidance in relation to  the
   issue of marriages of convenience which Ms Mair relies on. The  Judge  in
   this case therefore  in  using  the  term  'predominant'  or  'principle'
   purpose was using the correct test in accordance both with United Kingdom
   caselaw and European law and guidance.

25. The second ground advanced by Ms  Mair  was  that  it  was  procedurally
   unfair for the Judge to place weight on the interview summary rather than
   an interview transcript and she relied on the case of Miah. In that  case
   however the ratio was that the Appellant was entitled to a copy  of  what
   is referred to as 'the interviewers comments' which in paragraph (iv)  of
   the headnotes is  referred  to  as  Form  ICV.4605.  This  is  clearly  a
   typographical error as in paragraph 3 in the body of the decision  it  is
   referred to as ICD4605.  Although the Judge in this case does  not  refer
   to the document number at  paragraph  31  she  refers  to  'an  interview
   summary sheet.' The document is in the file and it bears the form  number
   ICD.4605. Miah states that an Appellant is entitled to be 'alerted to the
   essential elements of the case against him' and is therefore entitled  to
   have a copy of  form  ICD.4605  which  summarises  the  contents  of  the
   interview. It does not state that he is entitled to a transcript  of  the
   interview.

26. I am satisfied that at paragraph 31-32 the Judge fairly  considered  the
   submissions of Ms Mair  about  the  limitations  of  proceeding  with  an
   interview summary rather than a transcript and taking  account  of  those
   issues concluded that while  there  were  areas  of  consistency  in  the
   interview  she   identified   seven   questions   which   were   answered
   inconsistently and concluded at paragraph 36 that  these  inconsistencies
   were capable of pointing to a conclusion that  this  was  a  marriage  of
   convenience and therefore the evidential burden shifted to the  Appellant
   to show that this was not a marriage of convenience.

27. Against this background the Judge then found at paragraph  39  that  the
   marriage was  entered  into  for  the  predominant  purpose  of  securing
   residence rights and sets out three reasons for that conclusion. She gave
   as her first reason (paragraph 39 (i)) the fact that  the  Appellant  and
   the sponsor had both lied to the registrar in naming the Appellant as the
   father of the sponsor's child in the birth certificate. Her assessment of
   this evidence is challenged but I am  satisfied  that  having  heard  the
   Appellant and the sponsor give evidence she was entitled  to  reject  the
   explanations they gave for this behaviour and her reasons are set out  in
   detail and cogently reasoned at paragraphs 24-29. The next  reason  given
   by the Judge (39 (ii) ) are the discrepancies in the  marriage  interview
   which took place as she sets out when they had already been married for 8
   months. She was entitled to conclude as she  clearly  did  that  accurate
   answers were to be expected about issues that ought to have been fresh in
   the minds of the Appellant and sponsor so soon after they were married. I
   see no reason why she should attach more weight to responses given before
   her when by the time of the hearing the Appellant and sponsor were  alive
   to the challenges made.

28. The final reason she  gives  at  paragraph  39  (iii)  are  the  unusual
   circumstances of their relationship: that they met when the  sponsor  was
   pregnant with another man's  child,  they  had  different  religious  and
   cultural backgrounds including  linguistic  differences  with  no  common
   language and they met and married within a relatively short period  of  a
   year. This finding is challenged as being value judgements not founded on
   the evidence. I am satisfied that the Judge was entitled to conclude that
   these were unusual features of the case but she makes  clear  that  alone
   they may not have tipped the balance towards this  being  a  marriage  of
   convenience  but  she  stated  that  she  had  looked  at  the   evidence
   cumulatively with the other findings she made.

29. I am satisfied that these conclusions were not contrary to the  findings
   that the Judge had made about their domestic  life  and  the  Appellant's
   familiarity with the Sponsor's  child.  The  Judge  did  make  clear  she
   accepted that they lived in the same  household  but  the  mere  fact  of
   cohabitation is not determinative of whether a marriage is genuine  or  a
   sham and I am satisfied that when read as a whole that is the  thrust  of
   the Judge's conclusion.

30. I remind myself of what was said in   Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:
   set aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1) :  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the judge."

31. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent  reasoning.  I  find  that  the  reasons  given  were
   adequate and the Appellant cannot be in any doubt about  why  the  appeal
   was dismissed: having heard evidence from  both  the  Appellant  and  the
   sponsor the Judge believed that the predominant purpose of  the  marriage
   was to secure treaty rights for the Appellant .

CONCLUSION

32. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

33. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
17.5.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell







