
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32065/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 February 2015                            |On 9 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

                          Mr Ramathan Ali Ramathan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr F Oboro, Gromyko Amedu Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Kenya and his date of birth  is  16  June
    1978.  He entered the UK on 28  August  2001  with  valid  leave  as  a
    student.  He was granted subsequent  periods  of  leave.   He  made  an
    application on 7 April 2009 to vary his leave  to  that  of  a  Tier  1
    Highly Skilled Post-Study Migrant and this application was  refused  on
    27 May 2009.  His appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on 24
    July 2009.    The appellant made an application for a High Court review
    which was refused on 5 February 2010 when according to  the  respondent
    the appellant became appeal rights exhausted.  On 15 February 2010  the
    appellant made another application to vary his leave to a Tier 1 Highly
    Skilled Post-Study Migrant.   This  application  was  rejected  by  the
    Secretary of State on 11 March  2010  because  the  appellant  had  not
    completed a part of the application form.

2.   The appellant made an application on 1 April 2010 for leave as  a  Tier
    1 Highly Skilled Post-Study Migrant and this application was granted by
    the Secretary of State in a decision  of  6  August  2010.   His  leave
    expired on 28 August 2012.  On 3 August  2012  the  appellant  made  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain pursuant to  paragraph  276B
    of the  Immigration  Rules  on  the  basis  of  lawful  and  continuous
    residence.  This application was refused by the Secretary of State in a
    decision  of  10  July  2013.   The  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    application on the basis that the appellant was unable to  satisfy  the
    requirement in 276 B (i) which requires ten years' continual and lawful
    residence.  According to the Secretary of State he  was  without  leave
    between 6  February  2010  and  5  August  2010  (when  his  leave  was
    subsequently varied).   In  this  case  the  appellant  has  a  gap  in
    continuous  and  lawful  residence  of  179  days.   According  to  the
    Secretary of State the appellant's application (on 1  April  2010)  was
    submitted 53 days out of time and paragraph 276B(v) does not  apply  to
    him. (This states  that  overstaying  for  28  days  or  less  will  be
    disregarded for the purposes of 276B). The application was also refused
    under Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  relating  to  the  appellant's
    private life.

3.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and his appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  A  A
    Wilson in a determination that was promulgated on  16  September  2014,
    after a hearing on 4 September 2014.  Before Judge Wilson there was the
    appellant's witness statement and other  evidence  in  support  of  his
    appeal.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Baird in a decision of 28 October 2014.  Thus the matter  came
    before me, initially on 10  December  2014,  but  on  this  occasion  I
    adjourned the matter as a result of lack of court time until 4 February
    2015.

The Decision of the FtT

5.   The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made findings which can  be  found
    at paragraphs 13 - 18 of his determination:

         "13. The starting position in respect of leave is of course that it
             takes effect from the date it is granted AQ (Pakistan) v  SSHD
             [2011]  EWCA  Civ  833.   Commonly  of  course  persons  lodge
             applications whilst they have leave and having regard  to  the
             Immigration Act 1971 Section 3C there is a statutory extension
             of their leave and during an appeal.


         14.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  became  appeal  rights
             exhausted in February 2010 and there was  a  substantial  gap,
             therefore of 179 days.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Appellant
             therefore has a gap in excess of 28  days  and  therefore  his
             application for indefinite leave to remain based on ten years'
             continuous lawful residence in the  United  Kingdom  therefore
             fails.


         15.  Although it was argued that the Secretary of State should have
             used her discretion differently it is clear that there was  no
             request for the exercise of the Secretary  of  State  nor  any
             facts put before the Secretary of State that  could  have  led
             her or a responsible official to conclude  that  such  matters
             did in fact arise.  Indeed nothing has come  out  in  evidence
             before me even very much later to that effect.  I am therefore
             satisfied there is no reason why it can  be  argued  that  the
             discretion should have been exercised differently.


         16.  Turning to the question of  the  appeal  against  the  removal
             directions I am satisfied having regard  to  Appendix  FM  and
             paragraph 276ADE that the Appellant has not lived  in  the  UK
             for more than twenty years.  I accept that he has lived in the
             UK now for thirteen years.  I am not  satisfied  that  he  has
             lost all family and social cultural ties with his home country
             Kenya.


         17.  I am satisfied that at all times the Appellant  has  only  had
             periods of temporary leave or indeed no leave  whilst  he  has
             been in the United Kingdom, that he is fit and he is well,  he
             has been successfully academic, there  is  no  reason  on  the
             papers before me that he cannot conclude his PhD by  research.
             I accept that his involvement  in  the  Faculty  of  the  City
             University would  be  adversely  affected  by  his  not  being
             physically present.  I accept also that he may well be able to
             mitigate that, but it would only be mitigation, to some extent
             through internet and Skype conferences etc.


         18.  I am satisfied therefore that his appeal against removal under
             the terms of the Immigration Rules therefore fails.  There are
             no exceptional  circumstances  that  have  been  drawn  to  my
             attention in evidence that could lead me to conclude that  the
             Appellant's  case   needs   to   be   considered   fully   and
             independently outside the Immigration Rules.  Nevertheless for
             the  sake  of  completeness  I  formally  confirm  that  I  am
             satisfied the Appellant has been in  the  United  Kingdom  for
             thirteen years, that he has established a private life in  the
             UK and the decision of  the  Respondent  does  interfere  with
             that.  I  am  satisfied  it  is  a  lawful  decision  made  in
             pursuance of immigration control and that I have regard to the
             final step which is indeed  a  proportionate  decision  having
             regard to the nature of the Appellant's  stay  in  the  United
             Kingdom, the fact that it was  temporary,  the  need  together
             with the need to ensure that a fair and efficient  transparent
             system of immigration control that it is a proportionate  one.
             The  Appellant's  appeal  therefore  under  the  Human  Rights
             Convention therefore fails."

The Grounds Seeking Leave to Appeal and Oral Submissions

6.   The first ground of appeal argues that the appellant's  application  of
    15 February 2010 was made within ten days of him overstaying.   His  3C
    (section 3C of  the  2002  Act)  leave  expired  on  5  February  2010.
    According to the appellant the application  of  15  February  2010  was
    resubmitted by the appellant on 1 April 2010 and they were one and  the
    same application  pursuant  to  Regulations  16(1)  and  17(1)  of  the
    Immigration  (Leave  to  Remain)  (Prescribed  Forms  and   Procedures)
    Regulations 2007.  The appellant's case was that the application of  15
    February 2010 was not invalid and therefore  he  was  entitled  to  the
    benefit of paragraph 276B (v). The Judge  erred  in  finding  that  the
    appellant could not satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276B  of  the
    Rules. There was no break in continuous and lawful residence.

7.   The second and third grounds  of  appeal  relate  to  Article  8.   The
    second ground of appeal argues that  the  Judge  failed  to  take  into
    account a material  matter  and  reference  is  made  to  [16]  of  his
    determination.  The Judge did not take into account that the  appellant
    has lived in the UK for thirteen years and  that  he  was  a  full-time
    student  with  City  University  in  the  UK  where  he  has  part-time
    employment and he is studying a PhD.   It  is  argued  that  the  Judge
    failed to apply the Maslov criteria (Maslov v  Austria  1638/03  [2008]
    ECHR 546). Ground 3 is in similar terms to ground 2 and  again  asserts
    that the Judge failed to take into account material matters.

8.   Both parties made  submissions.   Mr  Oboro  made  submissions  in  the
    context of the grounds of appeal and Mr Duffy made submissions  in  the
    context of his skeleton argument.

The  Immigration  (Leave  to  Remain)  (Prescribed  Forms  and   Procedures)
Regulations 2007

9.   The appellant relies on paragraphs 16 and 17 of the 2007 Regulations:

         "Prescribed procedures


         16. -    (1)  The following procedures are prescribed  in  relation
                  to an application  for  which  a  form  is  prescribed  by
                  regulations 3 to 14:


                  (a)  the form shall be signed and dated by the  applicant,
                      save that where the applicant is  under  the  age  of
                      eighteen, the form may be signed  and  dated  by  the
                      parent or legal guardian of the applicant  on  behalf
                      of the applicant;


                  (b)   the  application  shall  be  accompanied   by   such
                      documents and photographs as specified in  the  form;
                      and


                  (c)  each part of the form shall be completed as specified
                      in the form.


              (2) The following procedures are  prescribed  in  relation  to
                  delivery of an application for which a form is prescribed:




                  (a)  in relation to an application for  which  a  form  is
                      prescribed by regulation 3, the application shall  be
                      sent by prepaid post or by courier to the Border  and
                      Immigration Agency of the Home Office; it may not  be
                      submitted in person at a public enquiry office,


                  (b)  in relation to an application for  which  a  form  is
                      prescribed by regulation 4, the application shall be:


                      (i)  sent by prepaid  post  or  by  courier  to  Work
                           Permits (UK) at the Border and Immigration Agency
                           of the Home Office, or


                      (ii)  submitted  in  person  at  the  Croydon  public
                           enquiry  office  (but  no  other  public  enquiry
                           office),


                  (c)  in relation to an application for  which  a  form  is
                      prescribed by regulation 5, the application shall  be
                      sent by prepaid post or by courier  to  Work  Permits
                      (UK) at the Border and Immigration Agency of the Home
                      Office, and may not  be  submitted  in  person  at  a
                      public enquiry office,


                  (d)  in relation to an application for  which  a  form  is
                      prescribed by regulations 6 to 12 and regulation  14,
                      the application shall be:


                      (i)   sent  by  prepaid  post  to  the   Border   and
                           Immigration Agency of the Home Office, or


                      (ii) submitted in person at a public enquiry office,


                  (e)  in relation to an application for  which  a  form  is
                      prescribed by regulation 13, the application shall be
                      sent by prepaid post to the  Border  and  Immigration
                      Agency of the Home Office; it may not be submitted in
                      person at a public enquiry office.
         17. -    (1)  A failure to comply with any of the  requirements  of
                  regulation 16(1) to any extent  will  only  invalidate  an
                  application if:


                  (a)  the applicant  does  not  provide,  when  making  the
                      application, an explanation for the failure which the
                      Secretary of State considers to be satisfactory,


                  (b)  the Secretary of State notifies the applicant, or the
                      person who appears  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to
                      represent the applicant, of  the  failure  within  28
                      days of the date on which the  application  is  made,
                      and


                  (c)  the applicant does not comply with  the  requirements
                      within a reasonable time, and in any event within  28
                      days, of being notified by the Secretary of State  of
                      the failure.


              (2) For the purposes of this regulation, the date on which the
                  application is made is:


                  (a)  in the case of an application sent by post, the  date
                      of posting,


                  (b)  in the case of an application  submitted  in  person,
                      the date on which the application  is  delivered  to,
                      and accepted by, a public enquiry office, and


                  (c)  in the case of an application sent  by  courier,  the
                      date on which the application is  delivered  to  Work
                      Permits (UK) at the Border and Immigration Agency  of
                      the Home Office."

The Immigration Rules


10.  Mr Duffy in his skeleton argument and oral submissions relied  on  Rule
    34 of the Immigration Rules, specifically 34A and 34C:

         "34A.    Where an application form is specified, the application or
                claim must also comply with the following requirements:


                (i)    Subject to paragraph A34  the  application  or  claim
                    must be made using the specified form,


                (ii)   any specified fee in connection with the  application
                    or claim must be paid  in  accordance  with  the  method
                    specified in the application form, separate payment form
                    and/or related guidance notes, as applicable,


                (iii)  any section  of  the  form  which  is  designated  as
                    mandatory  in  the  application  form   and/or   related
                    guidance notes must be completed as specified,


                (iv)   if the application form and/or related guidance notes
                    require the applicant to provide biometric  information,
                    such information must be provided as specified,


                (v)     an  appointment   for   the   purposes   stated   in
                    subparagraph (iv) must be made and must  take  place  by
                    the dates specified in any  subsequent  notification  by
                    the  Secretary  of  State  following  receipt   of   the
                    application, or as agreed by the Secretary of State,


                (vi)   where the application or claim is  made  by  post  or
                    courier, or submitted in person:


                    (a)    the application or claim must be  accompanied  by
                        the  photographs   and   documents   specified   as
                        mandatory in the application  form  and/or  related
                        guidance notes,


                    (ab)   those photographs must  be  in  the  same  format
                        specified as  mandatory  in  the  application  form
                        and/or related guidance notes, and


                    (b)    the form must be signed  by  the  applicant,  and
                        where applicable,  the  applicant's  spouse,  civil
                        partner, same-sex  partner  or  unmarried  partner,
                        save that where the applicant is under the  age  of
                        eighteen, the form may be signed by the  parent  or
                        legal guardian of the applicant on his behalf,


         ...


         34C. Where an application or claim in connection  with  immigration
                for which an application form is specified does  not  comply
                with  the  requirements  in  paragraph  34A,  or  where   an
                application for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  is
                made by completing the relevant online application  process,
                and does not  comply  with  the  requirements  of  paragraph
                A34(iii), the following provisions apply:


                (a)    Subject to sub-paragraph (b), the application will be
                    invalid  if  it  does  not  comply  with  the   relevant
                    requirements of A34(iii) or 34A, as applicable, and will
                    not be considered.  Notice of invalidity will  be  given
                    in writing and deemed to be received on the date  it  is
                    given, except where it is sent by post, in which case it
                    will be deemed to be received on the second day after it
                    was posted excluding any day which  is  not  a  business
                    day, unless the contrary is proved.


                (b)    The decision maker may contact the applicant or their
                    representative in  writing  and  give  the  applicant  a
                    single opportunity to  correct  any  omission  or  error
                    which renders  the  application  invalid.   The  amended
                    application  and/or  any  requested  documents  must  be
                    received at the address specified in the request  within
                    10 business days of the date on which  the  request  was
                    sent."



Conclusions

11.  This was an application under the points-based system and it  does  not
    appear to me that the 2007 Regulations apply in these circumstances.  I
    refer to the Statement of Changes in Immigration  Rules  HC  321  which
    contains the relevant Rules and in my view Rule  34  A  (iii)  and  34C
    apply.  It follows  that  the  application  of  15  February  2010  was
    invalid. There is  a  significant  gap  in  the  appellant's  leave  as
    identified by the respondent and found by the Judge.

12.  The grounds  of  appeal  for  permission  relating  to  Article  8  are
    misconceived.  There  is  no  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE  in  the
    permission application but Article 8 generally is raised.  The evidence
    before the Judge relating to the appellant having no  ties  with  Kenya
    was skeletal.  There is a bare assertion made in his witness statement.
    The appellant accepted in evidence  before  the  FtT  that  his  mother
    resides in Kenya. Mr Oboro referred to the case of  Bossadi  (paragraph
    276ADE; suitability; ties) [2015] UKUT 00042 (IAC), but in my  view  it
    was of no assistance to the appellant.   It was open to  the  Judge  to
    conclude that the appellant could not meet the requirement of paragraph
    276 ADE (vi).  The fact that the appellant has been here  for  thirteen
    years alone is obviously not enough to meet the requirement.  It was up
    to the appellant to submit evidence relating  to  this  aspect  of  his
    appeal.

13.  The Judge found that  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances  that
    would necessitate a consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules.   The
    issue is whether or  not  he  considered  all  aspects  relevant  to  a
    proportionality assessment and I find that he  did.   The  grounds  are
    misconceived in relying on the case of Maslov.  The facts in that  case
    are not analogous and relate to a decision to deport an  appellant  who
    had been in the UK since childhood.

14.  The appellant has done very well  here  in  the  UK.   He  has  studied
    successfully and achieved educationally.  He has made the most  of  his
    time here but there is no reason to suggest that the Judge did not take
    this into account. There was no evidence  before  the  Judge  that  the
    appellant could  not  complete  his  research  in  Kenya  and  I  refer
    specifically to [17] and [18]. The Judge was mindful of the  fact  that
    the appellant had been here lawfully and for a significant period.  The
    decision is consistent with the judgment of the Supreme Court in  Patel
    & Ors v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 and I make specific reference  to  [57]  of
    Patel, which reads as follows:

         "It is important to remember  that  Article  8  is  not  a  general
         dispensing power.  It is to be distinguished from the Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  Rules,
         which may be unrelated to any protected human right.  The merits of
         a decision not to depart from  the  Rules  are  not  reviewable  on
         appeal: Section 86(6).  One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call in
         Pankina for 'commonsense'  in  the  application  of  the  Rules  to
         graduates who have been studying in the UK for some years (see para
         47 above).  However,  such  considerations  do  not  by  themselves
         provide grounds of appeal under Article 8, which is concerned  with
         private or family life, not education as such.  The opportunity for
         a promising student to complete his course in this country, however
         desirable in general terms, is not  in  itself  a  right  protected
         under Article 8."

15.  In considering whether there is an error of law I have  had  regard  to
    Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT  00025  (IAC)  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal's consideration of Article  8  in  the  context  of  work  and
    studies and one's private life, the  effect  of  not  having  committed
    offences, legitimate expectation and the scope  of  CDS  (Brazil)  (PBS
    "available" Article 8) Brazil [2010] UKUT 305 (IAC).

16.  The decision of the Judge is  consistent  with  relevant  jurisprudence
    and the grounds fail to establish a material error of law. The decision
    to dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules and Article 8 stands.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed







Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 9 February 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam



