
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/32482/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4th September 2015                |On 14th September 2014               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                        Mr PATRICK CHARLES PATTERSON
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Naumann (solicitor) of McGarth LLP.
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Hands ("the Judge"), promulgated on 14 November  2014,  which
dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.    The appellant is a citizen of the USA who was born on 31 August  1955.
The appellant entered the UK on 15 December 2011 as the spouse of  a  person
present and settled in the UK  in  possession  of  a  visa  valid  until  24
February 2014.

4.    On 20 February  2014,  the  appellant  submitted  an  application  for
indefinite leave to remain as the spouse of a person present and settled  in
the UK. On 25 February 2014, the appellant's  wife  served  a  petition  for
divorce on the appellant. On 15 July 2014, the  appellant's  wife  wrote  to
the respondent, declaring that  her  relationship  with  the  appellant  "no
longer subsists". On 28 April 2014, decree nisi was granted  by  the  family
court at North Shields and the appellant's marriage was dissolved by  decree
absolute on 17 June 2014.

5.    The respondent refused the appellant's appeal on  29  July  2014.  The
appellant appealed against that decision  and,  in  a  Section  120  notice,
varied the grounds of his appeal  to  an  appeal  for  indefinite  leave  to
remain in the UK as a victim of domestic  violence  in  terms  of  Paragraph
289A of the Immigration Rules.

The Judge's Decision

6.    The cases pled before the judge related entirely to an  argument  that
the appellant should be granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK as  the
victim of domestic violence. The focus in the  case  before  the  judge  was
Regulation 289A  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  In  addition,  the  appellant
claimed that his rights in terms of Article 8 ECHR would be breached by  the
respondent's decision. The judge found that  the  appellant's  marriage  had
broken down irretrievably but did  not  find  that  the  appellant  was  the
victim of domestic violence. The judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on
all grounds.

7.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 4 May 2015, Upper Tribunal  Judge
Chalkley granted permission to appeal, stating:

    "I believe that the  judge  may  have  erred  by  making  contradictory
    findings as asserted in ground 1 of the application to the First  Tier.
    I do not seek to limit the extent of the challenges."

The Hearing

8.    Mr Naumann, solicitor for the appellant, argued  that  the  judge  had
made an error in law in her approach to her assessment of the date that  the
appellant's relationship broke down. He argued that  the  judge  placed  too
much  reliance  on  the  appellant's  desire  for  reconciliation  when  the
evidence pointed to  the  appellant's  ex-wife's  single-minded  pursuit  of
dissolution of marriage. He argued that  there  is  sufficient  evidence  to
demonstrate that the appellant was a  victim  of  domestic  violence  on  23
February 2014, that that date pre-dated  the  date  of  service  of  divorce
petition and that the only conclusion that could be drawn from the  evidence
is that the appellant's marriage broke down irretrievably because he is  the
victim of  domestic  violence.  He  argued  that  inadequate  assessment  of
proportionality had been carried out in the Article  8  balancing  exercise;
he argued that the judge had failed  to  take  account  of  evidence  placed
before her and had made findings  which  were  unclear  and  unreasoned.  He
urged me to find that the decision is tainted by material errors of law  and
to remake the decision allowing the appeal.

9.    Mr Tarlow, for the respondent, relied on the Rule 24  notice  dated  1
June 2015 and told me that the judge's decision does not contain  errors  of
law, but sets out clear  findings  in  fact  and  well-reasoned  conclusions
drawn from those findings in fact. He told me that the judge  had  correctly
considered Article 8 ECHR and that there  were  no  flaws  in  the  approach
taken to the question of proportionality  by  the  judge.  He  urged  me  to
dismiss the appeal and allow the decision promulgated on  14  November  2014
to stand.

Analysis

10.   Although the grounds of appeal are  framed  so  that  there  are  four
specific grounds of appeal, in reality, grounds one, two and three  turn  on
the appellant's assertion that he is a victim of domestic violence and  that
it was domestic violence which brought his marriage to an end; his  argument
is directed at the manner in which the judge dealt with  that  evidence.  It
is argued that the judge's conclusion about the date  that  the  appellant's
marriage  broke  down  and  the  assertion  that  the   marriage   has   not
irretrievably broken down if one party is  still  willing  to  work  on  the
marriage cannot be sustained.

11.   At [14], the judge correctly sets out that what she has  to  determine
is "...did the appellant's marriage break  down  due  to  domestic  violence
prior to the expiry of his visa?" At [14], the judge correctly  sets  out  a
chronology of the key events surrounding  the  appellant's  application  for
indefinite leave to remain,  which  were  an  incident  involving  both  the
appellant and his ex-wife on 23 February 2014 and the service of a  petition
of divorce on 24/25 February 2014.

12.   At [15] the judge analyses that evidence and comes to  the  conclusion
"...I do not find that the appellant  has  provided  evidence  to  establish
that his relationship was caused permanently to break down before  his  visa
expired as a result of domestic violence".

13.   The final sentence of [15] is a  conclusion  which  was  open  to  the
judge on the evidence available. In his  witness  statement,  the  appellant
speaks of the dissatisfaction creeping  into  his  marriage  and  unpleasant
treatment that he received from his ex-wife.  He  specifically  states  that
the first incidents of violence was in spring 2013. It  is  clear  that  the
focus of the evidence before the judge related  to  the  incident  to  which
police were called on 23 February 2014.

14.   Clearly, the appellant's case is that he is  the  victim  of  domestic
violence. It is beyond dispute that  the  appellant's  marriage  broke  down
irretrievably and has now  been  dissolved  by  decree  from  North  Shields
Family Court, but in order  to  succeed  under  Paragraph  289A,  those  two
factors must be linked. The appellant would have to establish not just  that
he is the victim of domestic violence but also  that  it  was  the  domestic
violence which caused his marriage to break down.

15.   The pursuer in the  divorce  action  was  the  appellant's  wife.  The
divorce cannot therefore have proceeded on the basis that the appellant  was
the  victim  of  domestic  violence.  The  appellant's  own   evidence   has
consistently been that although he was a victim  of  domestic  violence,  in
his eyes, the marriage had not broken down irretrievably. His  evidence  was
that receiving a petition for divorce the day after his visa expired  was  a
shock (or at least, a surprise). That is clear evidence  that  there  is  no
causal link between the appellant's suffering at the hands  of  his  ex-wife
and the breakdown of the marriage. Because there is no causal  link  between
the appellant's suffering and the breakdown of the marriage,  the  appellant
cannot fulfil the requirements of Paragraph 289A.

16.   The remaining ground of appeal drives  at  the  Article  8  assessment
which can been found between [20] and [29] of the  decision.  At  [24],  the
judge finds that private life is established.  The  judge  gives  a  correct
self-direction at [25] and  [26].  At  [22],  the  judge  takes  account  of
Section 117A and 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.
Between [27] and [28], the judge clearly sets out the  factors  which  weigh
in  the  appellant's  favour  and  the  factors  which  weigh  against   the
appellant. In doing so, the judge is manifestly  carrying  out  a  balancing
exercise to assess the  proportionality  of  the  respondent's  decision  to
remove. At [29],  the  judge,  having  correctly  carried  out  a  balancing
exercise, draws a  conclusion  that  the  respondent's  decision  is  not  a
disproportionate interference. There is neither error nor inadequacy in  the
balancing exercise carried out by the judge.

17.   I am satisfied that the Judge's determination when  read  as  a  whole
set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently detailed  and  based
on cogent reasoning.

DECISION

18.   The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
