
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32927/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21st April 2016                       |On 14th June 2016                |
|                                         |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [S M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Lane (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kainth, promulgated on 18th November 2014, following a hearing at
    Richmond on 10th  November  2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, whereby  the  Appellant  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Kenya, who was born on [ ]  1948.
    He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  18th  July
    2013, to refuse his application for leave to remain in the  UK  on  the
    basis of his medical condition which includes, diabetes, HIV, dementia,
    hypertension and kidney problems.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he is unsteady on  his  feet,  unable  to
    talk for himself, has difficulty in understanding  people,  has  severe
    medical problems, and has not lived in Kenya for over twenty years  and
    was unaware with regards to what medical treatment would  be  available
    for him if he were to be forced to return there.  He is married to [RM]
    and she has indefinite leave to remain in the UK.

The Judge's Findings

 4. At the hearing before Judge Kainth, the Appellant  did  not  attend  to
    give evidence.  His wife and Sponsor, [RM]  did  attend  and  she  gave
    evidence-in-chief and  was  cross-examined.   She  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant had come to the UK on a visitors visa valid from 14th  August
    2012 to 14th February 2013, and that it had never been his intention to
    overstay but he was admitted in January 2013 for  five  months  at  the
    Queen Elizabeth hospital with kidney problems.  In Kenya he  had  three
    sisters, a cousin and prior to come to the UK was living with his adult
    son aged 25.  He now attends the hospital  three  times  per  week  for
    dialysis and there is no private health care in place for  him  to  use
    and he is reliant upon the National Health Service entirely.

 5. The judge held that the Appellant had come to  the  UK  in  2012  as  a
    visitor.  He was aware of his pre-existing medical conditions.  He  had
    the benefit of services provided by the National Health Service.  There
    could be violation of his right to private life.  No evidence had  been
    presented in respect to such a violation.  Other than the testimony  of
    his wife and Sponsor, there was no direct evidence  from  anyone  else.
    It was accepted that he had regular contact with his wife, daughter and
    grandchild.  Yet, there is no witness statement from his adult daughter
    in support.  For the vast majority of his life he had lived  in  Kenya.
    The judge then held that,

         "He has been making regular visits to the UK and when he  does  not
         come his wife goes to him.  There is no reason why this status  quo
         cannot continue.  The Appellant keeps in regular contact  with  his
         Sponsor by telephone and other  methods  of  modern  communication.
         This can continue and there would be no violation of or  breach  of
         Article 8 rights" (see paragraph 35).

 6. Finally, the  judge  applied  the  public  interest  requirement  under
    Section 117 of the 2014 Act and held that it was entirely proportionate
    for the Respondent to refuse the Appellant's application for  leave  to
    remain in the UK.

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in that whilst he
    considered the  Appellant's  claim  on  medical  health  grounds  under
    Article 3 of the ECHR, he failed to consider it under  Article  8  with
    reference to Akhalu (Nigeria) [2013] UKUT 400.  It was also argued that
    the judge's reference to the status  quo  continuing  was  misconceived
    because, although the Appellant's wife had been living in the UK for at
    least twenty years, and she and the Appellant had remained  in  contact
    by way of visits and telephone in previous years, the current  position
    was that he was now in the UK and they were living  together,  and  the
    status quo was other than what the judge suggested it was.   The  judge
    had considered the case not on the situation at the date of the  appeal
    but on the basis of  facts  as  they  had  been  more  than  two  years
    previously.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on 6th May  2015
    for two specific reasons.  First, there was no finding by the judge  as
    to whether the Appellant and his wife have a family life  relationship.
    It was clear from the statement of the sponsoring wife  that  they  had
    been living together for a considerable period of time at the  date  of
    the appeal.  She also saw him and regarded him as  her  husband.   Yet,
    there was no examination of the reasonableness of expecting any  family
    life relationship to  take  place  in  Kenya  in  the  context  of  the
    Sponsor's evidence on this point.  Second, the judge failed to consider
    the health of the Appellant in the context of Akhalu  (Nigeria)  [2013]
    UKUT 400 and it was arguable  that  the  judge  did  not  consider  the
    Appellant's health conditions cumulatively with his private/family life
    relationship with his wife in the UK in accordance with the case law.

10. On 15th May 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered to the effect that  it
    was clear that apart from annual visits the Appellant and his wife  had
    lived apart for twenty years prior to his arrival in the  UK  in  2013.
    It was also clear that this visit was not intended to be the basis  for
    settlement.  The Appellant and his wife clearly had family  life  at  a
    distance and there was no evidence to support the assertion that  their
    family life was much changed although they lived under the same roof.

Submissions

11. At the hearing  before  me  on  21st  April  2016,  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Mr Lane of Counsel and the Respondent was represented by
    Mr Mills, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.  In his  submissions
    before me, Mr Lane stated that the Appellant is a citizen of Kenya  and
    it is true that he had lived there all his life.  However,  he  entered
    the UK when he was granted leave following 14th February 2013, but upon
    entry he then fell  ill  and  was  subsequently  diagnosed  with  renal
    failure, hypertension and dementia.  He made an application  for  leave
    to remain on the basis of his family life and his health.  The  judge's
    conclusions  with  respect  to  the   Appellant's   family   life   are
    misconceived.  The judge takes the view that  there  is  no  reason  to
    upset the "status quo" so that the Appellant could easily  return  back
    to Kenya where he had lived all his life, but this overlooks  the  fact
    that this status quo was actually for the Appellant to  be  allowed  to
    remain with his wife in the UK who  has  indefinite  leave  to  remain.
    Given that the judge had failed to look  at  the  up-to-date  situation
    this was an error of law.  The parties had been living together for  at
    least two and a half years.  To suggest that the status quo  represents
    a situation where the parties are living separately is to misunderstand
    the status quo.

12. Second, given the Appellant's renal failure it will not be possible for
    him to return back to Kenya.  Reliance was placed by Mr  Lane  upon  GS
    (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40 and upon Akhalu (Nigeria) [2013] UKUT 400 to
    emphasise that a "holistic" approach should  be  taken  to  matters  of
    medical ill-health in the context of Article 8.  However, the judge  at
    paragraph 34 had simply looked at  the  availability  or  otherwise  of
    medical evidence in Kenya, separately from the Appellant's family  life
    enjoyed in the UK with his wife.  Thirdly, the judge's  conclusions  in
    relation to the public interest requirement in Section 117B of the 2014
    Act were in error because the  public  interest  did  not  lie  in  the
    Appellant being returned to Kenya in his current condition.

13. For his part, Mr  Mills  submitted  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the parties could return to a  situation  that  they  had
    been living in for twenty years, given that there was  no  evidence  of
    any  change  of  feelings  towards  each  other,  and   no   settlement
    application had been made previously for the Appellant in Kenya to come
    and live with his British settled wife.  The parties had not  cohabited
    for twenty years.  The Appellant's British settled wife also had  never
    contemplated returning back to  live  with  the  Appellant  husband  in
    Kenya.  It was never clear  whether  there  was  a  family  life  being
    enjoyed between the parties.  The  judge  does  cite  the  case  of  MM
    (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA 279 at paragraph 19 of the determination, but it
    is accepted that the judge does not refer to  Akhalu  (Nigeria)  [2013]
    UKUT 400.  But Akhalu emphasised that when  health  care  issues  arise
    they will invariably be construed against the Appellant  and  will  not
    lead to a settlement or leave application succeeding.

14. Moreover, GS (India) [2015] EWCA  Civ  40  confirmed  that  only  in  a
    "exceptional case" would a health care case succeed.   As  far  as  the
    public interest issues were concerned, AM (Malawi) [2015] UKUT 0260 had
    emphasised that an Appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant of
    leave to remain from either Section 117B(2) or (3), whatever the degree
    of his fluency in English or the strength of his financial resources.

15. Furthermore, Forman  [2015]  UKUT  00412  emphasised  that  the  public
    interest  in  firm  immigration  control  is   not   diluted   by   the
    consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8  ECHR  has
    at no time been a financial burden on the state or  is  self-sufficient
    or is likely to remain so  indefinitely.   The  significance  of  these
    factors is that where they are  not  present  the  public  interest  is
    fortified.

16. In reply, Mr Lane submitted that the judge did expressly use the  words
    that "there is no reason why this  status  quo  cannot  continue"  (see
    paragraph 35) but the status quo is the parties living  together  under
    one roof as husband and wife  for  two  and  a  half  years  now.   The
    Appellant's private and family life has been strengthened in that  time
    in the UK.  Second, the medical situation is not looked at on the basis
    of a "holistic"  approach.   Third,  it  was  wrong  to  say  that  the
    Appellant was not entitled to use NHS resources when he wants and there
    is no assessment as to what the Appellant's needs were with respect  to
    the NHS at the time of the decision.

Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007)  notwithstanding   the   judge's   comprehensive   and   detailed
    determination.


18. First, the judge made a finding of fact that, "it is accepted that  the
    Appellant has regular contact with his wife, daughter  and  grandchild"
    (paragraph 35).   Although  the  Appellant  had  "lived  for  the  vast
    majority of his life in Kenya", the judge accepted that even then,  "he
    has been making regular visits to the UK and when he does not come  his
    wife goes to him" (paragraph 35).  However, it was  the  situation  now
    which had been misunderstood.  That situation was  that  the  Appellant
    had entered  lawfully  as  a  visitor,  as  he  had  done  on  previous
    occasions, and  then  upon  discovery  of  his  illness,  had  made  an
    application prior to the expiry of his leave.  There  is  no  evidence,
    contrary to the suggestion otherwise, that the Appellant was  aware  of
    his kidney failure prior to coming to the UK.   There  is  no  evidence
    that there was any preplanning involved, as is implied at paragraph  34
    of the determination, but there is evidence that at  the  time  of  the
    decision the Appellant and his wife had been living  together  for  two
    years and three months.  It is this which is the "status quo" a  period
    of living together for over two years is not  insignificant  especially
    amongst a couple who had  been  married  for  twenty  years  and  whose
    relationship was not formed at a time when one of the  parties'  status
    was "precarious", to use the language of immigration law, because  this
    relationship existed for a long time prior to  the  Appellant's  entry,
    and it had produced children and grandchildren.  The position therefore
    had to be evaluated in this context.  In LD (Zimbabwe) [2010] UKUT  278
    it was made clear that normal families lived  together  and  that  this
    applies to spouses as well as to parent and child  relationships.   The
    starting point should have been this for the judge.

19. Second, as far as the medical condition was concerned,  notwithstanding
    the the fact that the judge has dealt meticulously with the  applicable
    case law that applies in cases of this kind, and as a general rule that
    position is entirely correct, the proper approach in this  case,  where
    Article 8 was concerned,  was  to  start  with  the  premise  that  the
    Appellant came to the UK legally and was then diagnosed whilst lawfully
    in the UK, without prior knowledge of his condition,  with  his  kidney
    problems.  It was then necessary to make findings of fact  in  relation
    to whether the Appellant was entitled to emergency NHS treatment (which
    he would normally be entitled to), at  paragraph  39.   Equally,  there
    should have been findings  as  to  the  Appellant's  current  state  of
    health, and whether or not that is critical, at paragraph 28, and an up-
    to-date account of what the Appellant's current  state  of  health  is,
    before an assessment of that health can be undertaken in the context of
    Article 8 ECHR, as should have been done at paragraphs 34 and 35.

20. Third, it is after this, that regard should have properly been  had  to
    the public interest consideration set out in Section 117B of  the  NIAA
    2002.  The only factors that were considered were those  that  were  in
    favour of the Respondent, such as effective  immigration  control,  and
    the use of the NHS.  Whilst it is  true  that  other  factors  such  as
    financial  independence  and  the  capability  to  speak  the   English
    language, are otherwise  neutral,  they  do  nevertheless  have  to  be
    factored into the equation.  There  was  evidence  in  the  Appellant's
    bundle of financial support being available from the Appellant's  wife,
    and the fact that the Appellant himself  receives  a  pension,  but  no
    reference was made to this whatsoever  in  the  overall  assessment  of
    Article 8.

21. I accordingly find that there is an error of law and that the judge has
    reached irrational conclusions as to fact.

Remaking the Decision

22. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions I have heard today.
     I am allowing this appeal to the extent that it is  remitted  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal under Practice  Statement  7.2(b)  because  the
    nature or extent of any fact-finding which is necessary  in  order  for
    the decision in the appeal to be remade is such that, having regard  to
    the overriding objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  I direct that the appeal  be  heard  by  a
    judge other than Judge Kainth.

23. This will be an  opportunity  for  the  Appellant  to  produce  updated
    evidence with respect to his  Article  8  claim,  as  well  as  updated
    evidence with respect the medical situation,  and  the  impact  of  the
    withdrawal of treatment that he is presently receiving,  together  with
    updated evidence about the availability of treatment in Kenya.

24. There should also be updated evidence from the  Appellant's  sponsoring
    wife and relatives.  It will do the Appellant  no  harm  whatsoever  to
    attend the hearing and give evidence, provided that he is  able  to  do
    so, and I am sure his lawyers will advise him to that effect.

25. All evidence that is to be  relied  upon  is  to  be  served  upon  the
    Respondent Secretary of State at least seven days before  the  hearing.
    The normal direction with respect to  skeleton  arguments  and  witness
    statements applies.  The Appellant's representatives will be aware that
    a failure to serve evidence as required by these  directions  may  lead
    the Tribunal to refuse to admit such evidence.





Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is  remitted
back to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
Kainth at  the  first  available  opportunity  after  1st  June  2006.   All
positive findings made in the Appellant's favour are to remain.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th June 2016
