
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32032/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25 May 2017                        |On 9 June 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Mrs Maria Ines Pena De Gonzales
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Jafar, Counsel, instructed by Thoree & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For the purposes of our decision we shall refer to the parties as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal.  Therefore the Secretary of  State
    is once more the Respondent and Mrs De Gonzales is the Appellant.

 2. This is an appeal by the Respondent against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Majid (the judge), promulgated on 11  October  2016,  in
    which he allowed the Appellant's appeal.  That appeal had been  against
    a decision of the Respondent dated  17  September  2015,  refusing  her
    human rights claim.  That claim had in  essence  been  based  upon  the
    assertion that the Appellant was providing essential care both for  her
    own  daughter  and,   perhaps   more   importantly,   for   her   three
    grandchildren.

The judge's decision

 3. The appeal came before the judge on 5 October 2016.  He  sets  out  the
    nature of the claim and makes some reference to various aspects of  the
    evidence before him.  His findings and conclusions begin  at  paragraph
    18 of his  decision.   There  is  a  conclusion  that  the  Appellant's
    daughter had not practised deception at any stage  and  that  the  best
    interests of the children (by this we infer that he  was  intending  to
    refer to the grandchildren) meant that the case should  be  decided  in
    their favour (see paragraph 21).  Then at paragraph  22,  reference  is
    made to the well-known decision in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4.

 4. At paragraph 26, the judge states:

         "I cannot ignore the "legal requirements" stipulated by immigration
         law.  It is incumbent upon me to advert to  the  new  Rules  giving
         respect to the intention of the House of Commons  dictated  by  the
         supremacy of  Parliament.   The  Appellant  can  benefit  from  the
         relevant Rules because she is fully committed to the best interests
         of her three grandchildren detailed in paragraph 13 above."

 5. Finally, at paragraph 27 the judge  concludes  that  in  his  view  the
    Appellant came within the relevant Immigration Rules.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The Respondent's grounds of appeal are succinct.  It is  asserted  that
    there is an absence of reasoned findings in the judge's decision,  that
    such findings as appear are confusing, and there is a failure  to  have
    any regard to the mandatory factors set out  in  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on
    20 April 2017.  In his view the findings  of  the  judge  were  "wholly
    inadequate".

The hearing before us

 8. Mr Jafar  sought  valiantly  to  defend  the  decision  of  the  judge.
    However, in our view there are clear and numerous fundamental  material
    errors of law in this decision.

 9. With all due respect to the judge, the decision is conspicuous  by  its
    absence of clear and reasoned findings on the specific evidence  before
    him.  Having looked at that evidence for ourselves, there  was  clearly
    an array of medical reports  and  associated  issues  relating  to  the
    Appellant's family members in  the  United  Kingdom,  particularly  her
    grandson.  None of this was grappled with to any adequate extent.  Mere
    reference to the fact that evidence existed is insufficient.

10. There is also a complete failure to deal  with  the  mandatory  grounds
    under section 117B of the 2002 Act.  The judge fails to deal  with  the
    nature and importance of the public interest, financial issues and  the
    precariousness of the Appellant's situation in this country.  There  is
    a failure to set out with any clarity or  indeed  at  all  as  to  what
    extent, if any, the Appellant could fit within  the  framework  of  the
    Article 8-related Immigration Rules.

11. There is a reference to the best  interests  of  the  grandchildren  as
    being "paramount", which in itself is a misdirection in law, and it  is
    clear to us that the judge appears to have regarded the best  interests
    (such as he found  them  to  be)  as  effectively  trumping  all  other
    possible considerations.

12. Stepping back to take an overview of the decision, it appears to us  as
    though the judge's efforts are somewhat less than  intelligible  either
    to ourselves or the parties.

13. In light of the above, the judge's decision must be set aside.

    Disposal

14. We canvassed the views of the representatives as  to  how  this  appeal
    should be disposed of. Mr Jafar suggested that  the  matter  should  be
    remitted, whilst Mr Whitwell remained neutral.

15. Having regard to the nature of the judge's decision,  the  evidence  in
    this case, and paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement, we have decided
    to remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  complete
    rehearing.  The  lack  of  fact-finding  and  the  failure  to  address
    virtually any of the relevant legal issues means that, in effect, there
    was no proper hearing before the First-tier Tribunal at all.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

We remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 5 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

    1. The appeal is remitted for a complete rehearing,  with  no  findings
       from the previous decision preserved.
