
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32417/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 January 2016                   |On 21 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        KEVIN KENRICK GARFIELD MILLAR
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms. A. Broklesby Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Unrepresented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a  citizen  of  Barbados
    born on 26 October 1989. He entered the UK in 2003  as  a  child  on  a
    visitor visa to visit his mother who had been granted indefinite  leave
    to remain in 2001. He overstayed and has remained in the UK ever since.
    In September 2010 he was granted discretionary leave to remain until 24
    November 2013. On 23 January 2014  he  applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain on the basis that his removal from the UK would be  contrary  to
    Article 8 ECHR.

 2. This appeal arises from the decision of the appellant (hereinafter "the
    Secretary of State"), dated 20 June  2014,  to  refuse  the  claimant's
    application made on 23 January 2014 and to remove him from the UK under
    Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 3. The Secretary of State refused the claimant's application on the  basis
    that he was  unable  to  satisfy  the  suitability  requirements  under
    Section S-LTR 1.5 and S-LTR 1.6  of  Appendix  FM  to  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The reason for so finding was that since arriving in the UK  in
    2003 the claimant has, on a number  of  occasions,  been  cautioned  or
    convicted in connection with a variety of offences, the most recent  of
    which was in March 2014 when  the  claimant  was  convicted  of  common
    assault following an incident in which he bit his partner in  the  face
    and spat at her son.  Previous convictions include theft (in  2008  and
    2009), possession of an offensive weapon (in 2008), breach of a  curfew
    order (in 2009), breach of a community order (in 2009), and  driving  a
    motor vehicle taken without consent and without  license  or  insurance
    (2010). In addition, he has also been reprimanded  by  the  police  and
    given warnings by the police on other occasions. The Secretary of State
    also described the claimant as having been part of a  street  gang  and
    having led a criminal lifestyle.

 4. The claimant has a partner who is a British national and  they  have  a
    son, born on 8 April 2013, who is also a British national. His  partner
    has another son, born on 17 July 2004, from  a  previous  relationship.
    The Secretary of State's refusal decision includes a discussion of what
    would be in the best interests of these children and concludes that the
    claimant's removal would not be disproportionate.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The claimant appealed and his appeal was heard by  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT") Judge Gillespie. In a decision promulgated on 25 June 2015, the
    FtT allowed the claimant's appeal. The FtT first considered whether the
    claimant met the requirements of Rule 276ADE and found that he did not.
    In respect of subparagraph 276ADE(1)(vi),  the  FtT  found  that  there
    would not  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  into
    Barbados given the presence in that country of his brothers  and  other
    relatives.

 6. The FtT then turned to Appendix FM. It found that the claimant met  the
    requirements under Appendix FM. The decision identified and  considered
    two  areas  of  contention:  first,  whether  the  claimant   satisfied
    paragraph EX.1; and second, whether  he  fell  for  refusal  under  the
    suitability requirements.

 7. In respect of paragraph EX.1, the FtT found that  the  claimant  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his British citizen child  and
    that it would not be reasonable to expect this child to leave  the  UK.
    Its reasoning was as follows:  the  claimant's  partner  is  a  British
    national who suffers  from  a  debilitating  illness  and  who  has  no
    connection to Barbados and whose mother and other family members are in
    the UK. Her eldest son is an 11 year old British citizen who has  lived
    in the UK his entire life. In  these  circumstances  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the claimant's partner or her 11 year old  son  to
    leave the UK.  The claimant's son's best interests lie in  living  with
    his mother and half brother. It would therefore not  be  reasonable  to
    expect him to leave the UK without them.

 8. In respect of suitability under paragraphs S-LTR1.5 and S-LTR1.6, after
    setting out in detail the evidence before it concerning the  claimant's
    criminal background,  the  FtT  concluded  that  the  presence  of  the
    claimant in the UK is not otherwise than conducive to the public good.

 9. The FtT then considered Article 8 in the alternative  and  found  that,
    having regard to Section 117B(6) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, the balancing exercise with respect to proportionality
    fell in favour of the claimant.

Grounds of Appeal and submissions

10. The Secretary of State submitted three grounds of appeal and permission
    was granted in respect of all three.

          a. The first  ground  relates  to  the  FtT's  finding  that  the
             claimant did  not  fall  for  refusal  under  the  suitability
             requirements under S-LTR 1.5 and 1.6. The grounds  argue  that
             the FtT failed to acknowledge the claimant has demonstrated  a
             propensity to reoffend and is not reformed, that he has  shown
             a complete disregard for the laws of the  UK,  has  failed  to
             take responsibility for his actions, has attempted to  deceive
             the immigration authorities and that his presence in the UK is
             not conducive to the public good.

          b. The second ground relates to the FtT's finding that  it  would
             be unreasonable to expect the claimant's child  to  leave  the
             UK. The grounds contend that  the  fact  of  the  child  being
             British does not prevent him relocating to another country and
             he would be able to adapt to life in  Barbados  and  that  the
             family could relocate.  It is argued that the claimant has not
             shown why it would be unreasonable for the child to leave  the
             UK, rather than merely contrary to the family's wishes.

          c. The third ground relates to the FtT's consideration of Article
             8 outwith the Rules. It  is  argued  that  the  FtT  erred  by
             relying on Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act  without  balancing
             this against the other factors under Section 117B.

11. Before me, Ms Broklesby Weller reiterated the  arguments  made  in  the
    grounds  of  appeal.  She  argued  that  claimant's  criminal   history
    demonstrated a disregard for the law and too  little  weight  had  been
    placed on the claimant's most recent conviction which suggests  a  risk
    of violence. Accordingly, in respect of suitability, the  FtT  has  not
    properly dealt with the evidence that was before it which  demonstrates
    the claimant does not meet the suitability requirements. With regard to
    paragraph EX.1, Ms Broklesby Weller repeated the  points  made  in  the
    grounds. She contended that nationality is not a trump card  preventing
    relocation. She argued that the FtT had recognised the  claimant  would
    be able to reintegrate into life in  Barbados  and  this  suggests  his
    partner and child could also do  so.   With  regard  to  the  partner's
    illness,  she  submitted  that  the  FtT  had  not  considered  whether
    treatment would be available in Barbados.

12. Mr Millar was unrepresented. His response was to make submission to the
    effect that he is a reformed character and has no ties to Barbados. His
    partner was present and asked to address the court, which I  permitted.
    She described her health difficulties and support she receives from the
    claimant.

Consideration

13. For the reasons set out below, I find that the FtT has not erred in law
    and that its decision shall stand.

Ground 1: Approach to S-LTR 1.5 and 1.6

14. S-LTR 1.5 and 1.6 provide as follows:

         S-LTR 1.5: The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive
         to the public good because, in the view of the Secretary of  State,
         their offending has caused serious harm or they  are  a  persistent
         offender who shows a particular disregard for the law.

         S-LTR 1.6: The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive
         to the public good because  their  conduct  (including  convictions
         which do not fall within paragraphs S-LTR 1.3 to  1.5),  character,
         associations, or other reasons, make it undesirable to  allow  them
         to remain in the United Kingdom.

15. It is evident from the decision that before reaching  a  conclusion  in
    respect of S-LTR 1.5 and 1.6 the  FtT  undertook  a  comprehensive  and
    detailed analysis of the claimant's criminal history. At paragraph  [4]
    of the decision the  FtT  set  out,  in  table  form,  a  list  of  the
    claimant's criminal history, including matters where no  police  action
    was taken, covering the period  from  2006  until  2014.  Ms  Broklesby
    Weller did not argue that any relevant criminal  activity  was  omitted
    from this table. At paragraph [23] the  FtT  stated  that  it  attached
    "weight of some substance" to the matters listed in this table.

16. The FtT also considered in some detail the evidence pertaining  to  the
    claimant's involvement in a criminal gang and that the position of  the
    police had shifted to now stating that there was no  evidence  of  gang
    involvement. The FtT stated that had the police  still  maintained  the
    claimant was involved - or had been involved  -  in  gangs  his  appeal
    would have had little prospect of succeeding. At paragraph [24] the FtT
    analysed the claimant's cautions and convictions and at paragraph  [25]
    his connections to family members with criminal records. The FtT  then,
    at paragraph [27], considered the nature of  the  convictions,  noting,
    inter alia, that save for the most recent they concerned activities  in
    the claimant's youth,  none  of  which  were  sufficiently  serious  to
    warrant  imprisonment.   The  FtT  at  paragraph  [27]  considered  the
    claimant's most recent offence, describing it  as  a  relatively  petty
    domestic  dispute  which  attracted  no   more   than   a   supervision
    requirement.

17. At paragraph [29] the FtT made the following findings: the claimant has
    not caused serious  harm  to  any  person  by  his  offending;  by  his
    cessation of offending in public he has shown he is  not  a  persistent
    offender; he has not shown a  particular  disregard  for  the  law  and
    settled down for  a  period  of  three  years  without  offending;  the
    domestic incident for which he was convicted in 2014  was  an  isolated
    and petty incident and there is no suggestion of ongoing  risk  to  his
    partner or the children; the suspicions of past serious criminality are
    not  proven;  and  the  allegations  of  gang  involvement  have   been
    abandoned.

18. The FtT's analysis of the claimant's criminal history and  involvement,
    at paragraphs [26] - [29] of the decision, is cogent and comprehensive.
    No material evidence has been ignored and it is clear that the FtT  has
    engaged with, and analysed, all the relevant evidence that  was  before
    it and drawn conclusions based on that evidence.

19. The grounds of appeal make a number of assertions  about  the  claimant
    which are contrary to the  FtT's  findings,  such  as  that  he  has  a
    propensity to re-offend, he is not reformed, and that he has no  regard
    for the law. However, these amount to no more than a disagreement  with
    the FtT as to what conclusions should be drawn from the evidence  about
    the claimant's criminal history.  I am satisfied that it  was  open  to
    the FtT, based on the evidence before it, to conclude, inter alia, that
    the claimant has not caused serious harm, is not a persistent  offender
    and is not involved in gangs; and that having made such findings it was
    open to the FtT to find that the claimant  did  not  fall  for  refusal
    under S-LTR 1.5 and 1.6. Another judge may have taken a different  view
    as to what the evidence shows in respect of the  claimant's  propensity
    to re-offend and his respect for  the  law,  given  in  particular  the
    extent of his criminal history and that his most recent offence was  in
    2014, but the FtT's findings were not inconsistent with, and were  open
    to it, based on the evidence, which I am satisfied has  been  carefully
    and properly considered, and therefore  I  find  that  this  ground  of
    appeal does not have any merit.

Ground 2: Paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM

20. The issue before the FtT was whether it would be reasonable  to  expect
    the claimant's son to leave the UK.  The Secretary  of  State  contends
    that the claimant's son's British nationality should not be treated  as
    a trump card preventing his relocation.

21. There are strong reasons, as set out by the FtT, as to why it would not
    be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK. The FtT  found  that
    the claimant's son's best interests are to remain with his  mother  and
    step brother and that it would not be reasonable to separate  him  from
    them. This has not been challenged  by  the  Secretary  of  State.  The
    question therefore arises as to whether the mother and step  son  could
    relocate to Barbados with  the  claimant's  son.  The  FtT  gave  clear
    reasons why it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  them  to  do  so.
    Firstly, they are not  from,  and  have  no  connection  to,  Barbados.
    Secondly, the claimant's step son, who is 11, has lived his whole  life
    in the UK. Thirdly, the claimant's  partner  has  an  illness  the  FtT
    describes as debilitating, a description the Secretary of State has not
    challenged.  Given these circumstances it was clearly open to  the  FtT
    to find that it would not be reasonable to expect the claimant's son to
    leave the UK and it is not the case the FtT  has  treated  the  child's
    nationality as a "trump card". Accordingly, there was no error  of  law
    in the FtT finding that it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    claimant's son to leave the UK.

Ground 3: Article 8 and Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002.

22. Having found that the FtT has not made  a  material  error  of  law  in
    respect of its decision under the Immigration Rules, it is  unnecessary
    for me to consider the Secretary of State's ground of appeal concerning
    the FtT's decision (given in the alternative) under Article  8  outside
    the Rules. However, for completeness, I note that the approach taken by
    the FtT to Section 117B(6) was consistent with  Treebhawon  and  others
    (section 117B(6) [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC).

Notice of Decision

      a. The appeal is dismissed.

      b. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of a material error of law and shall stand.

      c. No anonymity order is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 21 January 2016               |

