



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal Number: IA325862014




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On: 26th January 2016           |On: 8th June 2016                        |
|                                |                                         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Michael Olugbenga Akinola
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
                       Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr AO Ogundero, Counsel instructed by Supreme
                       Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Nigeria date of birth 11th  July  1962.
    On the 31st July  2015  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  I.  Malcolm)
    allowed his appeal against a decision to remove  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999.  The
    Secretary of State now has permission to appeal against the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision[1].




    Background and Matters in Issue


 2. It would appear that the  Respondent  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    sometime in 2006. His stay to date has all been unlawful.


 3. In May 2013 the Respondent made an application for leave to  remain  on
    the grounds that he had a family life in the UK.  At  that  stage  this
    consisted of his relationship with his wife, Mrs Beatrice  Akinola  and
    their children C1 born in December 2003 and C2 born in  February  2005.
    It is accepted that they entered the UK in 2006.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the application on the 18th  June  2013.
    As the applicants had no leave at the date of their  application,  this
    decision did not attract a right of appeal. Judicial review proceedings
    were launched which resulted in a consent order to the effect that  the
    matter would  be  reconsidered,  and  if  no  leave  was  granted,  the
    applicants would be granted an in-country right of appeal.   Some  time
    after this Mrs Akinola and  the  children  were  granted  discretionary
    leave to remain. This is due to expire in 2017.

 5. On the 5th August 2014 the Secretary of  State  refused  to  grant  the
    Respondent leave. Applying first the provisions in Appendix FM  it  was
    concluded that the application could not succeed  under  the  'partner'
    route since the Beatrice Akinola only held DL  and  was  not  therefore
    settled in the UK.  Nor could it succeed under the 'parent' route since
    he was not the sole carer for the children. The terms of EX.1 were  not
    therefore  relevant  since  there  was  no  route  applicable  to   the
    Respondent. Consideration was given to paragraph 276ADE. The Respondent
    had not lived in the UK 20 years,  nor  could  he  qualify  under  sub-
    paragraph (vi) since it could not be said that there were "no ties"  to
    him relocating to Nigeria.  In respect of Article 8  the  Secretary  of
    State directed herself that leave could only be given 'outside  of  the
    Rules' if the applicant could show that  the  consequences  of  refusal
    would be "unjustifiably harsh".   Applying that test it was  found  not
    to be  met  since  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  the  whole  family
    relocating to Nigeria together.




    The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. When the matter came before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Respondent
    relied on his family life with Beatrice and the children, who  had  now
    been joined by C3, born in November 2014.  He told  the  Tribunal  that
    although he did not live with his wife and children  this  was  because
    their accommodation was not big enough. He  lived  somewhere  else  and
    travelled to the family home each day to help look after the  children.
    He would occasionally sleep over when his wife was working  nightshift.
    They did not want to return to Nigeria because the children  had  lived
    here a long time and were used to life in  Britain.  The  adults  would
    find it difficult returning after such  a  long  time  and  would  face
    obstacles in securing accommodation and employment.

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Malcolm dismissed the appeal  with  reference
    to Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules.  Neither  the  Respondent's
    partner nor children had settled status in the UK and so the  questions
    raised by paragraph EX.1  did  not  arise:   as  paragraph  42  of  the
    determination notes, "EX.1 is not free  standing".   In  examining  the
    Respondent's   private   life   the   Tribunal   considered   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi). I note that the test applied in  the  determination  was
    whether the Respondent could  show  that  he  faced  "very  significant
    obstacles" to  his  reintegration  in  Nigeria,  rather  than  the  old
    Ogundimo[2] test of "no ties" applied in the  refusal  letter.  Nothing
    turns on it, for on the facts as found by the Tribunal, the  Respondent
    could not succeed under either.

 8. Turning to Article 8  the  determination  begins  by  setting  out  the
    framework recommended  in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27,  and  recites  the
    relevant sections of Part V of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  There is a finding that the Respondent does enjoy  a  family
    life in the UK and that the consequences of the decision  are  of  such
    gravity that the Article is engaged. The decision was one lawfully open
    to the Secretary of State and she took it in pursuit of the  legitimate
    aim of "maintenance of immigration control".    As  to  proportionality
    the Tribunal weighed the following matters in  the  balance:  that  the
    Respondent has never had any status and  his  status  was  "precarious"
    [54], that the children are not British but have lived the majority  of
    their life in the UK and have leave to remain until 2017 [55], and that
    the best interests of the children are a primary consideration [56]. It
    is accepted that the Respondent is closely involved  in  the  care  and
    upbringing of his children and that there is a genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship [38]. Having directed himself to  s117B  of  NIAA
    2002 Judge Malcolm notes the terms of s117B(6):

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a qualifying child, and


         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom.

 9. It is found that the children are "qualifying children"  in  that  they
    have lived in the UK for a continuous period of 7 years  or  more.   In
    respect of whether it is  "reasonable"  that  they  leave  the  UK  the
    determination says the following:

         "62. Given the ages of the two elder children  and  the  fact  that
         they have lived in  the  UK  since  2006  and  that  they  have  no
         experience or knowledge of life  in  Nigeria  and  also  given  the
         degree of the integration into life in the UK I considered that  it
         would not be reasonable to expect either or the children  to  leave
         the United Kingdom and accordingly in this case the public interest
         consideration  did  not   weigh   heavily   in   the   balance   of
         proportionality.


         63. As detailed the children  have  been  given  further  leave  to
         remain. Given the Appellant's relationship and close  contact  with
         the children I considered that the effects on the children  of  the
         requirements of the Appellant to leave the UK would not be  in  the
         best interests of the children.


         64. Given the background of the children  I  did  not  consider  it
         reasonable to expect that the children could not return to  Nigeria
         with the Appellant (and his wife).


         65. Accordingly for the reasons stated  and  in  particular  taking
         into account the best interests of the children I did not  identify
         a strong countervailing factor or  compelling  reason  which  would
         make the removal of the Appellant proportionate and reasonable"

10. It was on this basis that the appeal was allowed.

    The Secretary of State's Appeal

11. The Secretary of State now appeals on the following grounds:

       i)   There has been a material misdirection in law


      ii) There has been a failure to give adequate reasons


     iii) The determination does not adequately address the public interest
          as it is expressed in Part V of the Nationality, Immigration  and
          Asylum Act 2002

12. Although these were the heads of claim identified in the  grounds,  the
    particulars in fact boil down to the same point made under  each.  That
    is that the First-tier Tribunal has failed to  adequately  explain  why
    the substantial weight to  be  attached  to  the  public  interest  was
    outweighed by the rights of an individual who has never had any  lawful
    right to be in the United Kingdom. The  Secretary  of  State  does  not
    accept the view expressed by  the  President  in  Treebhowan   (section
    117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC) is correct. Nor does the Secretary  of
    State accept  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  taken  the  correct
    approach to whether it is 'reasonable' that the children in  this  case
    leave the UK. It is submitted that it would be open to  the  Respondent
    to go back to Nigeria and re-apply for entry  clearance.  Alternatively
    it would be reasonable for the whole family to go there together.    Ms
    Willocks-Briscoe submitted that the Tribunal had erred in assuming that
    it would be in the best interests of the children to remain in the  UK.
    There was not evidence before the Tribunal to justify that conclusion.


    The Response


13. Mr Ogundero opposed the appeal on all grounds. He  submitted  that  the
    determination contained clear findings that were open to the  Judge  on
    the evidence before him and in those circumstances there  could  be  no
    justification for interfering with the determination.


    The Hearing


14. At the conclusion of the hearing on the 26th January 2016  I  indicated
    to the parties that I would be prepared to  delay  promulgation  of  my
    decision until the parties had  had  an  opportunity  to  make  further
    submissions in writing. The reason for that was that I was  aware  that
    the Upper Tribunal was about to report a case on  the  approach  to  be
    taken to the question of "reasonableness" in the context  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules  and  section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The parties agreed that this would be
    helpful.  I further indicated that if in the interim the higher  courts
    made comment on the ratio of Treebhowan,  submissions  should  be  made
    about that too.


15. In the event the decision on reasonableness was not  promulgated  until
    the 18th March 2016: PD  and  Others  (Article  8  -  conjoined  family
    claims) [2016] UKUT 108 Directions were sent to the parties  requesting
    written submissions.  The Respondent sent in further submissions on the
    6th May  2016.  No  further  submissions  have  been  received  by  the
    Secretary of State, nor any application  for  any  further  adjournment
    pending resolution of the Treebhowan issue.


    My Findings

      Ground 1

16. Ground 1 is that there has been a material misdirection in law  because
    the First-tier Tribunal failed to consider whether the Respondent could
    return to Nigeria in order to make an application for entry  clearance.
    Reliance is placed on R (on the application of Chen) v  SSHD  (Appendix
    FM- Chikwamba- temporary separation-proportionality)  IJR  [2015]  UKUT
    00189 (IAC).


17. This ground is misconceived. It was never the case  of  the  Respondent
    that this was a Chikwamba situation since it has always  been  accepted
    that he failed by some measure to meet the requirements of  the  Rules,
    and could not hope to do so in an application for entry clearance.  The
    reasoning in the determination was in no way predicated on a  Chikwamba
    logic, since there were no prospects of success upon an application for
    entry clearance. The whole point was that if the Respondent were to  be
    returned to Nigeria, there would be an effective  severance  of  family
    life, unless Beatrice and the children travelled with him.


    Ground 2

18. This leads to the second ground, which formed  the  centrepiece  of  Ms
    Willocks- Briscoe's very well made submissions.  The Secretary of State
    contends that the determination is flawed for  a  failure  to  consider
    whether the entire family could be reasonably  expected  to  return  to
    Nigeria.


19. The parties agreed that in answering that  question  the  Tribunal  was
    obliged to focus on the position of the  Respondent's  children.  These
    were children who have lived in the UK since 2006. At the date of entry
    C1 was 2 years old and C2 was still a babe in arms, being  only  a  few
    months old. At the date of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal C1
    was 11 years old and C2 was 10. They had both been in the UK for over 9
    years. The question before me is whether the First-tier  Tribunal  gave
    adequate reasoning  for  its  finding  that  it  would  not,  in  these
    circumstances, be reasonable for these children to go to  Nigeria.  Two
    reasons are given. The first was  the  degree  of  integration  of  the
    children into life in the UK, and the second was  the  fact  that  they
    have "no experience or knowledge of life in Nigeria".

20. The genesis of what became known as  the  'seven  year  rule'  was  the
    Secretary of State's concession set out in a document known as  DP5/96.
    That  policy,  and  those  which  followed,  created  a  general,   but
    rebuttable,  presumption that enforcement action would  "not  normally"
    proceed in cases where a child was born here and had lived continuously
    to the age of 7 or over, or where, having come to the United Kingdom at
    an early age,  7  years  or  more  of  continuous  residence  had  been
    accumulated[3].   As the  policy  statement[4]  which  accompanied  the
    introduction of paragraph 276ADE  (1)(iv)  puts  it:  "a  period  of  7
    continuous years spent in the UK as a child will generally establish  a
    sufficient level of integration for family and private  life  to  exist
    such that removal would normally not be in the best  interests  of  the
    child" [my emphasis].  The current policy reaffirms that  this  is  the
    starting  point  for  consideration  of  the  rule.    The  Immigration
    Directorate Instruction 'Family Migration:  Appendix  FM  Section  1.0b
    Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year  Routes'
    ("the IDI") gives the following guidance:
         11.2.4. Would it be unreasonable to expect a non-British Citizen
         child to leave the UK?
         The requirement that a non-British Citizen child has lived in the
         UK for a continuous period of at least the 7 years immediately
         preceding the date of application, recognises that over time
         children start to put down roots and integrate into life in the UK,
         to the extent that being required to leave the UK may be
         unreasonable. The longer the child has resided in the UK, the more
         the balance will begin to swing in terms of it being unreasonable
         to expect the child to leave the UK, and strong reasons will be
         required in order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence of
         more than 7 years.
         The decision maker must consider whether, in the specific
         circumstances of the case, it would be reasonable to expect the
         child to live in another country.
         The decision maker must consider the facts relating to each child
         in the UK in the family individually, and also consider all the
         facts relating to the family as a whole. The decision maker should
         also engage with any specific issues explicitly raised by the
         family, by each child or on behalf of each child.
21. These policy statements recognise that after a period  of  seven  years
    residence a child will have forged strong links  with  the  UK  to  the
    extent that he or she will have an established private life outside  of
    the immediate embrace of his parents and siblings. It is  that  private
    life which is the starting point of consideration under this Rule.  The
    relationships and understanding of life that a  child  develops  as  he
    grows older are matters which in themselves attract  weight.  The  fact
    that the child might be able to adapt to life elsewhere is  a  relevant
    factor but it cannot be determinative, since exclusive  focus  on  that
    question would obscure the fact that for such  a  child,  his  "private
    life" in the UK is everything he knows.   There is therefore in my view
    no  error  in  the  Tribunal  in  the  present  case  having   attached
    significant  weight  to  the  fact  that  these  children  are   wholly
    integrated into life in the UK, with a corresponding lack of  knowledge
    about life in Nigeria.  As PD makes clear, "reasonableness" is  not  to
    be equated with "proportionality" as it is understood in the context of
    Article 8 outside of the Rules.  The  finding  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK was one open  to  the
    Tribunal for the reasons that it gives. That  the  Secretary  of  State
    appears, in another context, to share that conclusion  is  demonstrated
    by the fact that the children have been given leave to remain.




    Ground 3


22. The final ground concerns the weight  to  be  attached  to  the  public
    interest.  It  is  submitted  that  the  determination  has  not  given
    adequate or  substantive  consideration  to  the  factors  set  out  in
    s117B(1)-(5) of the 2002 Act. Reference is made to the  fact  that  the
    Respondent has never had any legitimate expectation of  being  able  to
    remain here and has placed a burden on public services by his presence,
    and will continue to do so. Those points are undeniably well made.  The
    fact remains however that Parliament has framed the legislation in such
    a way that one factor is capable of displacing  all  others  that  come
    before it in cases such as this. Section 117B(6)  plainly  states  that
    the public interest does not require the Respondent's removal where  a)
    he has a genuine parental relationship with b) a  child  who  has  been
    here for over seven years and c) it would not be reasonable  to  expect
    that child to leave the UK.   Since the First-tier Tribunal  found  all
    three of these requirements to have been met, it follows  that  it  did
    not err in finding  that  the  public  interest  did  not  require  the
    Respondent's removal: Treebhowan applied.



      Decisions

23. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               5th June 2016


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal JM Holmes on the 2nd December
2015
[2] Ogundimo v SSHD [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC)
[3] For a detailed history of the rule and its development see Dyson LH in
Munir v SSHD [2012] UKSC 32 paras 9-13
[4] The Grounds of Compatibility with Article 8 of the ECHR: Statement by
the Home Office (13 June 2012) at 27.

