

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/32743/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16th November, 2017                     |On 14th March, 2018              |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    D N K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State, however I shall  refer  to
    the parties as they appeared  in  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

2.   The appellant is a national of Kenya who was born on 2nd  August  1979,
    and who appealed to the First Tier Tribunal against a decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse to  grant  him  leave  to  remain  taken  on  28th
    September, 2015.  His appeal was heard at Taylor  House  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Davey.

3.   The appellant had sought leave to remain on the basis of his Article  8
    rights, claiming a family life with his spouse and with children.   The
    Secretary of State concluded  that  in  respect  of  the  parent  route
    requirements of Appendix FM are LTRPT.1.1.(d) of the Rules,  there  had
    been a failure by the appellant to show sole responsibility as a parent
    and the appellant had failed to provide any evidence that he was taking
    an active role in his children's upbringing.  As a result the Secretary
    of State went on to consider whether EX.1. of FM applied, but concluded
    that the appellant did not meet the eligibility requirements and  could
    not therefore take advantage of the benefit under EX.1.  The  Secretary
    of State assessed the claim with reference to 276ADE and found that the
    appellant did not meet the continuity of residence in the  UK  for  the
    purposes of ADE(1)(iii), nor because of his age (iv)  and  (v)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

4.   The judge heard oral evidence and, referring to Sections 117A  to  117D
    of the 2002 Act, concluded that the issue  turned  on  whether  or  not
    there was  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child.  The judge had no doubt  that  at  least  the  eldest
    child was a qualifying child.  The judge concluded that the appellant's
    removal was not in the children's best interests and  had  demonstrated
    that there were exceptional circumstances which show that it  would  be
    disproportionate to justify the refusal of leave to remain.

4.   The Secretary of State challenged the judge's decision in allowing  the
    appeal under  Article  8,  asserting  that  the  judge  had  not  given
    sufficient reasons for allowing the appeal.  At  paragraph  17  of  his
    determination, the  judge  accepted  that  the  children  were  British
    subjects, but had not made any particular  findings  on  what  parental
    responsibility the appellant exercised.

5.   Having  read,  insofar  as  I  was  able,  the  handwritten  Record  of
    Proceedings, I pointed out that it appeared that the judge may have had
    oral  evidence  before  him  which  would   satisfy   the   Rules   but
    unfortunately I was not able to read it.  I adjourned the  hearing  and
    directed that the judge should provide a typed copy of  the  Record  of
    Proceedings.

6.   That record has been provided today and Mr Walker has confirmed  to  me
    that he has read it.  He accepts that there  was  evidence  before  the
    judge showing contact and showing a parental relationship  between  the
    appellant and at least one, if not both of the children.  As a  result,
    Mr Walker accepted that  while  there  was  an  error  in  the  judge's
    decision, it was not material to the outcome of the appeal.

7.   In making his decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Davey did not make  a
    material error of law and I uphold the decision.

Summary
The appellant's appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable for the  following  reason.
The appellant's appeal has been successful.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

