
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number: IA
32639 2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 March 2014                              |On 24 April 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               HARJINDER KAUR
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr M Hussain, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr S Bellara, Counsel, instructed by S & S Immigration

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The claimant in this case, the respondent to the appeal,  is  a  citizen  of
India who was born in 1985.  She appealed  successfully  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal a decision of the Secretary of State, the present appellant, on  17
July 2013, to refuse to vary her leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under paragraph 245ZX(d)  of  HC  395.   In
simple terms the claimant did not have sufficient money in her bank  account
at the right time to satisfy the requirement of the Rules.  I see  no  point
in giving precise details  because  the  facts  are  not  in  dispute.   The
claimant had to show a balance in her bank account above a certain  sum  for
a period of 28 days before the application was made but  for  some  of  that
time the balance was way below the required amount.
It must be emphasised that the Rules are little to do with (in this case)  a
person's ability to maintain herself but everything to  do  with  presenting
evidence in a particular prescribed way.   This is a change in  approach  to
the  Immigration  Rules  which  can   be   frustrating   and   puzzling   to
practitioners and applicants alike but it is done for the wholly  legitimate
reason of simplifying the application system and reducing the  opportunities
for appeal. I assume that a person who can meet the strict  requirements  of
the rules is thought to be likely to be able  to  maintain  herself.  It  is
easy to see if  a  person  meets  certain  objective  criteria  and  so  the
underlying purpose of the rule, in this  case  (I  assume)  the  ability  to
maintain herself, is demonstrated by  her  ability  to  meet  different  but
(probably) correlated criteria.

The Rules required the application to be refused  because  the  requirements
of getting permission had not been met.

It is plain from the First-tier Tribunal's notes that  there  was  agreement
between the parties that paragraph 245AA of HC 395 (dealing  with  documents
submitted late) had not been considered and indeed agreement that  the  case
should be sent back to the Secretary of State for further  consideration  to
see if the application should  be  granted  exceptionally  within  paragraph
245AA. The First-tier Tribunal therefore allowed the appeal  to  the  extent
that the Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with the law.

It was also plain from the judge's notes  that  the  Presenting  Officer  on
that occasion (not Mr Hussain) did not agree that this was a case where  the
flexible evidence Rules as set  out  in  the  case  of  Rodriguez  (Flexible
evidence policy) [2013] UKUT 0042 apply.

The grounds of appeal by the Secretary of State  were  not  settled  by  the
Presenting Officer who had made the concession but by someone  else  who,  I
assume from past experience, was wholly unaware  that  there  had  been  any
kind of agreement. Permission to appeal was sought and granted.

I have to ask myself  if  the  fact  that  there  was  agreement  about  the
disposal of the appeal in the First-tier really matters.  Clearly  at  first
blush it must seem outrageous to the claimant that the  Secretary  of  State
is allowed to appeal a decision to which she consented. Nevertheless I  have
concluded that the agreement between the parties does prevent my finding  an
error of law and re-deciding the appeal.  The agreement can be no more  than
an agreement that the decision was contrary to  the  law.  That  is  not  an
agreement about the facts, which can be binding, but an agreement about  the
law which can not.

Paragraph 245AA does not give the Secretary of State  a  general  discretion
to allow applications that do  not  meet  the  strict  requirements  of  the
rules. Rather it identifies certain exceptional  circumstances  that  permit
the Secretary of State to allow an  application  that  would  not  otherwise
meet the requirements of the rules. None of the  circumstances  exist  here.
Even if the Secretary of State looked at the case again all that  she  could
do would be to refuse the application  for  the  reasons  already  given.  I
accept that the claimant's leave would be extended while  the  Secretary  of
State remade the decision but is also extended by reason of the  application
for permission to appeal. The claimant is not entitled to exceptional  leave
under the rules and requiring the Secretary of State to say  as  much  would
not have impacted significantly on the claimant's circumstances.

I record that, in the absence of  evidence to the contrary, I  am  satisfied
that the Secretary of State's application for permission to appeal  was  not
made in bad faith and Mr Bellara (for the claimant) is to be  commended  for
his professional and realistic approach in not opportunistically seeking  to
make points with no underlying merit. The agreement about  disposal  in  the
First-tier Tribunal was the result of a mistake.  I did not bind anyone.

I have the advantage of reading the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  the
case of Secretary of State for the Home Department v Rodriguez  [2014]  EWCA
Civ 2. It did not endorse the Upper Tribunal's  decision.   I  am  far  from
satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal applied properly the decision of  the
Upper Tribunal in Rodriguez but as it was wrongly decided it could not  help
the claimant. This case is not about "evidential flexibility".

It is plain from the application form that it has never been the  claimant's
case that, for example, she intended to rely on funds other than her own.

It follows that the claimant did not satisfy the requirements of  the  Rules
and the only proper decision in law  was  a  decision  that  the  appeal  be
dismissed.

It is always possible that removing someone in consequence of  the  decision
is an unlawful interference with her human rights and I asked Mr Bellara  if
there was anything he wanted  to  say  on  this  point.   Again  he  rightly
abstained from any temptation to exaggerate  or  say  more  than  the  facts
warranted.  I am quite satisfied that removal would be an interference  with
the private and family life of this claimant  but  only  the  elements  more
conveniently described as private life.  This case does not have any of  the
strong features such as might  exist  where  the  claimant  has  a  marriage
partner or minor child who cannot be expected to  remove  with  her.  It  is
settled law that there is no general right of education  that  is  preserved
by Article 8 and although there would be disappointment for the claimant  if
she is required to leave, there is nothing which would enable me  to  decide
responsibly in accordance with established jurisprudence that removal  would
be a disproportionate interference.

Cases of this kind give no satisfaction whatsoever to the  Tribunal  because
we see people being very frustrated and disappointed and  perhaps  incurring
significant costs as they try unsuccessfully to remedy  what  is  really  no
more than a rather silly mistake.   It seems likely (I make no  findings  on
the point) that if the claimant had been better  organised  she  could  have
got the funds in the right place at the right time but the fact is  she  did
not and my duty is to uphold the law.
For the reasons given I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
and substitute with the decision dismissing the  claimant's  appeal  on  all
grounds.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 16 April 2014                  |

