
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32930/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 14 July 2015                      |On 15 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Aziz Kocak
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimant: Ms S Haji, instructed by SH & Co Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The claimant, Aziz Kocak, date  of  birth  20.9.85,  is  a  citizen  of
    Turkey.

 2. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bartlett promulgated 27.2.15, allowing the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  to
    refuse his application made on 3.7.14 for leave to remain in the UK  on
    the basis of family life. The Judge heard the appeal on 23.2.15.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    28.4.15.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 14.7.15 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. For the reasons set out below I find there was an error of law  in  the
    making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  such  that  the
    determination of Judge Bartlett should be set aside and remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal to be remade afresh. In summary, I  find  that  the
    judge misunderstood the Immigration Rules and confused the guidance  or
    policy in relation to exemption from the 'no public funds'  stipulation
    applicable to certain applications under the Immigration Rules with the
    clear financial requirements set out in Appendix FM.

 6. The claimant is married to a British citizen. His application for leave
    to remain claimed  that  he  was  exempt  from  the  meeting  financial
    requirements of Appendix FM, set  out  at  E-LTRP  3.1,  because  as  a
    Turkish citizen he is eligible for certain public funds.  However,  his
    application was based on a fundamental misunderstanding of  the  Rules,
    the same erroneous approach pursued by Ms. Haji in her  submissions  to
    me and propounded to and accepted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  before
    Judge Bartlett.

 7. The application was refused because, amongst other reasons,  he  failed
    to  demonstrate  that  he  met  the  minimum   income   threshold,   or
    alternatively the requirements of E-LTRP 3.3,  which  requires  him  to
    provide specified evidence with his application that his partner was in
    receipt of one or more of the eight specific state benefits set out  in
    E-LTRP 3.3, and to  provide  evidence  that  the  partner  is  able  to
    maintain and accommodate  themselves  adequately  without  recourse  to
    public funds. The appellant's contention that he was  exempt  from  the
    financial requirements was considered in the refusal decision, but  the
    Secretary of State pointed out that he  had  failed  to  state  in  his
    application which, if any, public funds his partner is  in  receipt  of
    that would constitute an exemption from the  minimum  income  threshold
    financial requirement. At section 7.6 of the application form, in reply
    to the question asking whether he was receiving any  public  funds,  he
    ticked the no box. No evidence was  provided  that  either  he  or  his
    partner was in receipt  of  any  public  funds.  The  application  form
    clearly explains that relevant evidence  must  be  submitted  with  the
    application. Appendix FM-SE D explains that unless the absent  evidence
    falls within one of the evidential  flexibility  provisions  there  set
    out, such as a document in the wrong format,  the  Secretary  of  State
    will not consider documents not submitted with the application.

 8. In summary, an must either: (1) show that he meets the  minimum  income
    threshold; or (2) that his partner is in receipt of one of the 8 listed
    benefits and they can  maintain  themselves  with  recourse  to  public
    funds; or (3) that EX1(b) applies and  the  applicant  can  demonstrate
    that his is a genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner with
    settled status in the UK (in this case a  British  citizen),  and  that
    there are insurmountable obstacles, defined by EX2 as very  significant
    difficulties which could not be overcome or  which  would  entail  very
    serious hardship, to family life with that partner  continuing  outside
    the UK.

 9. The policy or guidance referred to, part of which is  set  out  in  the
    claimant's bundle relates to the issue of access to  public  funds  and
    the prohibition of 'no recourse to public funds' that is a  feature  of
    several immigration routes for  entry  or  leave  to  remain,  such  as
    paragraph 281 of the Immigration Rules.  This  guidance  explains  that
    certain citizens  of  certain  countries  may  rely  on  certain  state
    benefits  without  breaching  the  'no  recourse   to   public   funds'
    requirement.  It  is  in  effect  an  exemption  from  that  particular
    requirement, but only in relation to certain  specified  public  funds.
    Put another way, where maintenance is an issue in an application  under
    the Rules the Secretary of State may not refuse the application because
    it would involve reliance on certain  public  funds,  i.e.  the  listed
    state benefits, which are different, dependent on  the  citizenship  of
    the applicant. It does not, and does not purport to, exempt citizens of
    the listed states from the financial requirements for leave  to  remain
    on the basis of family life under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.
    In short, the policy or guidance document relied on has nothing  to  do
    with the financial requirements of Appendix FM.  This  misunderstanding
    lies at the heart of the application, the submissions on the claimant's
    behalf and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

10. The guidance or policy does, however, has a relevance to section E-LTRP
    3.3(b) and the requirement  to  demonstrate  ability  of  a  couple  to
    maintain themselves "without recourse to public  funds,"  but  is  only
    relevant and can only apply after evidence has first been provided that
    the partner is in receipt of one of the 8 state benefits listed  in  E-
    LTRP 3.3(a), which evidence the claimant did  not  provide.  Even  now,
    there remains no evidence that the partner is in receipt of one of  the
    8 state benefits. Ms Haji pointed to  A13  to  show  that  she  was  in
    receipt of statutory sick pay, but  that  is  not  one  of  the  listed
    benefits. The claimant is not in receipt of any state benefits and much
    of the material in his bundle amounts to a complaint  against  the  DWP
    that he has been refused benefits because he does not have a  biometric
    document. That issue is irrelevant  to  the  application  made  to  and
    considered by the Secretary of State.

11. It follows that the policy of which Ms Haji made great  play  does  not
    assist the claimant's application or appeal.

12. From A105  the  claimant's  bundle  includes  a  number  of  unreported
    decisions, in respect of which no application has been  made  to  cite.
    They are similar to each  other,  but  not  directly  relevant  to  the
    claimant's application and situation. They deal with the  'no  recourse
    to public funds' requirement under paragraph  281  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. They provide no assistance to the claimant's case. Neither  does
    the evidence of tax credits at A23 of the bundle.

13. I  reject  as  misconceived,  muddled  and  wrong  in  law,  Ms  Haji's
    submission that because the claimant is entitled as a citizen of Turkey
    to rely on certain public funds the financial requirements of  Appendix
    FM do not apply to him.

14. It follows that the claimant failed to  demonstrate  that  he  met  the
    requirements of either E-LTRP 3.1 or 3.3. Ms  Haji  accepted  that  the
    claimant  did  not  meet  the  minimum  income  threshold  requirement.
    However, there remains the  third  alternative  of  EX1,  as  explained
    above. That matter was considered by the Secretary of State and set out
    in the refusal decision, but the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  not
    addressed it, but should  have.  Neither  did  the  judge  address  the
    question of leave to remain outside the Rules on the basis  of  private
    or family life pursuant to article 8 ECHR. It follows that the decision
    was made in clear error of law and cannot stand.

15. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or that it must be remade by the Upper  Tribunal.  The  scheme  of  the
    Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign  the  function
    of primary fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. Where there have been no
    findings on a crucial issue at the heart of an appeal, as in this case,
    effectively there has not been a valid  decision.  The  errors  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge means that there was no consideration of  EX1
    or, alternatively, article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.

16. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a  case  falling  squarely  within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the parties of a fair  hearing  and  that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusions:

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

                   I set aside the decision.

                   I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be made
                   afresh.




                   [pic]
                   Signed


                   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                   Dated


Consequential Directions

18. The appeal is remitted to Hatton Cross,  to  be  listed  at  the  first
    available date;

19. There will be two witnesses and the time estimate is 2 hours;

20. It may be heard by any  judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Bartlett;

21. Not later than 7 days before the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  hearing
    listing date the claimant's  representatives  shall  submit  a  single,
    revised, indexed and paginated bundle of all  materials  on  which  the
    claimant intends to rely;

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.

Fee Award     Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
(rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
2005 and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007).

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.


                   [pic]
                   Signed


                   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                   Dated
