
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
IA/32699/2015

                                                  IA/32702/2015

                                                  IA/32703/2015

                                                  IA/32707/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 1st August 2017                       |   On 15th August 2017            |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Ki Yong Kim
                               Mrs Haeree Lee
                                Mr Daehwa Kim
                                Mr Daejun Kim
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms G Peterson, Counsel, instructed by Gillman-Smith
                    Lee Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I shall  refer  to
    the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The Appellants are citizens of South Korea and are a husband, wife  and
    two sons.  The third Appellant was born on 20th February 1998  and  the
    fourth Appellant was born on 22nd May 2004.  The Appellants came to the
    UK in 2005.

3.   Their appeals against  the  decisions  of  the  Respondent  dated  22nd
    September  2015  refusing  leave  to  remain  was  allowed  under   the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge R L Walker in a decision promulgated on 10th January 2017.

4.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department appealed on the  grounds
    that the judge  had  misdirected  himself  in  the  application  of  MA
    (Pakistan) & Ors [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and had failed to  recognise  that
    the reasonableness assessment  involved  an  assessment  of  the  whole
    family unit as well as the public interest considerations.   The  judge
    had erred by only focusing on the interests of the children rather than
    engaging with the public interest in some detail. The first and  second
    Appellants could not meet the Immigration Rules and  their  status  had
    always been precarious and/or unlawful. As such, applying Section 117B,
    the wider public interest outweighed the Appellants' Article 8 rights.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle  on
    16th June 2017 on the grounds that it was arguable that, in considering
    whether it was reasonable for the children to leave the UK,  the  judge
    failed to recognise that this  involved  an  assessment  of  the  whole
    family as well as the public interest considerations.


Submissions

6.   Mr Melvin submitted that the  judge  failed  to  recognise  the  public
    interest considerations in relation to the whole family in allowing the
    appeal and had misdirected himself on the ratio of MA  (Pakistan).  The
    judge had only paid 'lip service' to the public interest and had failed
    to have due regard to immigration control or the  economic  welfare  of
    the UK in respect of the funding of the  minor  Appellants'  education.
    The first and second Appellants had remained in the  UK  without  leave
    since 2010.   The  family  were  not  self-sufficient  and  there  were
    material errors of law in the decision.

7.   Ms Peterson submitted  that,  applying  PD  and  Others  (Article  8  -
    conjoined family  claims)  Sri  Lanka  [2016]  UKUT  00108  (IAC),  the
    Appellants' claim would succeed and the judge's decision  was  correct.
    She submitted that the Respondent's challenge was in respect of a  lack
    of reasoning, but disclosed no material error of  law.  The  judge  was
    well aware of the Respondent's case, which was set out in  the  refusal
    letter and referred to at paragraph 13 of  the  judge's  decision.  The
    Respondent was not represented at the hearing and the evidence  of  the
    Appellants was not challenged.


8.   The Record  of  Proceedings  showed  that  all  relevant  matters  were
    explored and put before the Tribunal. Even if the judge did  not  refer
    to them in his decision, it was clear  from  the  Appellants'  skeleton
    argument and the oral evidence that the judge considered  all  relevant
    factors including the immigration  history  of  the  parents.  However,
    there was strong evidence that returning the minor Appellants to  Korea
    would have devastating effects.

9.   Ms Peterson submitted that the judge quite rightly dealt with the  best
    interests of the children before going on  to  consider  reasonableness
    and there was extensive evidence, given orally and in  the  Appellants'
    bundle, of  the  catastrophic  consequences  for  the  children  to  be
    returned to Korea today. The judge had the relevant provisions in mind.
    Although, the parents did  not  have  leave  after  2010,  they  had  a
    considerable period of leave prior to that and  had  made  attempts  to
    obtain leave. The parents had given compelling evidence that  it  would
    be difficult for the children to reintegrate.

10.  Ms Peterson referred to the best practice set out in  Kaur  (children's
    best  interests/public  interest  interface)  [2017]  UKUT  0014.  This
    decision postdated the judge's decision and perhaps with the benefit of
    the guidance given in this decision the judge may well  have  explained
    his conclusions better. However, on the facts of the Appellants'  case,
    it was evident on  the  material  before  the  judge  that  the  public
    interest was taken into account and none of the factors in relation  to
    the parents' negative immigration history outweighed the best interests
    of the children. There was no error of law in the judge's finding  that
    it was not reasonable for the third and fourth Appellants to leave  the
    UK.

11.  In response, Mr Melvin submitted that  there  was  no  finding  on  the
    status of the parents. It was irrelevant that there was no Home  Office
    Representative at the appeal hearing. The judge had not  made  findings
    of fact and the best interests of the  children  were  not  a  deciding
    factor. The judge had misdirected  himself  in  failing  to  take  into
    account  the  public  interest  in  assessing  reasonableness.  He  had
    misunderstood the ratio of MA (Pakistan)  and  therefore  none  of  the
    judge's findings could stand. The decision  should  be  set  aside  and
    remitted for rehearing because the balancing  exercise  was  completely
    absent from the judge's decision.


The Appellants' Immigration History

12.  The Appellants came to the United Kingdom  on  4th  August  2005  as  a
    student, dependant wife and dependant children.  Leave  to  remain  was
    extended until 30th April 2010. In October 2013,  the  first  Appellant
    made applications for further leave to remain for the third and  fourth
    Appellants and they were granted discretionary leave from 27th March to
    30th September 2014. On 30th September 2014, the first  Appellant  made
    applications for further leave to remain for the entire  family,  which
    were  refused  on  12th  December  2014.  Only  the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants were granted a right of appeal against the  decision,  which
    they exercised. Their appeals were heard by the First-tier Tribunal  on
    20th August  2015  and  allowed  to  the  extent  that  the  Respondent
    reconsider their applications under paragraph 276B.  Subsequent  to  an
    application for judicial review, the Respondent agreed to  re-determine
    all the applications with a right of appeal. The Respondent refused the
    applications with a right of appeal on 22nd September 2015.


Discussion and Conclusions

13.  It was not in dispute that, at the date of application, the  third  and
    fourth Appellants had been living in the UK for more than  seven  years
    and were qualifying children under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).

14.  The judge identified that the issue in the appeal was  whether  it  was
    reasonable for the third and fourth Appellants to  leave  the  UK.  The
    judge  set  out  significant  paragraphs  of  MA  (Pakistan)  and  then
    considered the best interests of the children.  The  judge  appreciated
    that the best interests of the children was a  separate  assessment  to
    the test of reasonableness under Section 117B  of  the  2002  Act.  The
    judge found that it was in the best interests of the third  and  fourth
    Appellants to remain in the UK.  However, he  noted  at  paragraph  30,
    that there was a further step: to decide whether it was reasonable  for
    them  to  leave  the  UK.  Accordingly,  the  judge  has  not   equated
    reasonableness with the best interests of the children and has  carried
    out a separate assessment in accordance with MA (Pakistan).

15.  In deciding whether it was reasonable for the children to leave the  UK
    the judge considered their education and the fact that  they  had  been
    living in the UK for eleven and a half years  and  were  well  settled.
    The judge stated at paragraph 33:

         "In looking at the reasonable exercise I must take into account the
         public  interest  and  [sic]   which   comes   into   the   general
         proportionality exercise as  well.   Section  117B(6)  specifically
         states  that  the  public  interest  here  does  not  require   the
         Appellants' removal where it would not be reasonable to expect  the
         child to leave the UK."


16.  The judge's reasons are brief. However, he  properly  directed  himself
    and applied MA (Pakistan), in which the Court of Appeal held: "However,
    the fact that the child has been in the UK for seven years  would  need
    to be given significant weight in the proportionality exercise for  two
    related reasons.  First, because of  its  relevance  to  determine  the
    nature and strength of the child's best interests and  second,  because
    it establishes a strong starting point that  leave  should  be  granted
    unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary."

17.  The judge set out the parents' immigration history at paragraphs  2  to
    7. He was aware of the reasons for refusal and noted  at  paragraph  13
    that neither the first or second Appellant had leave to remain  at  the
    time of the application.

18.  On the facts of this case the immigration  history  of  the  first  and
    second Appellants did not outweigh the best interests of the third  and
    fourth Appellants. The judge took the public interest into  account  in
    assessing reasonableness. His failure to state which  factors  made  up
    the public interest in this case was not material.

19.  The third and fourth Appellants had been resident in the UK for  eleven
    and a half years. The third Appellant was 7 years old when he  came  to
    the UK and the fourth Appellant was only a year old when he came to the
    UK and was now 12. They had spent significant periods of their lives in
    the UK and their education here.

20.  The judge's decision would not have been different had he  specifically
    stated that the first and second Appellants  had  been  here  illegally
    since 2010 when he referred to the public interest at paragraph 33. The
    judge quite clearly did  take  into  account  the  public  interest  in
    assessing reasonableness.  His failure to  refer  to  the  facts  which
    weighed in favour of the public interest amounted to a lack of reasons,
    but did not amount to a material error of law. On the particular  facts
    of this case, the judge's conclusions were open to him on the  evidence
    before him. The third and fourth Appellants had  significant  residence
    in the UK and had developed a significant private life outside  of  the
    family unit. Their parents' unlawful residence was  not  sufficient  to
    outweigh their best interests.

21.  Accordingly, I find that there was no error in the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge R L Walker dated 10th January 2017  and  I  dismiss
    the Respondent's appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 11th August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

