
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32731/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 August 2016                          |On 6 September 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                          mr sadaf mubeen chaudhry
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clark, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Broe  dated  4  February  2016  dismissing   the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse to grant
    him leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student and to remove him to  Pakistan.
    The appeal was dealt with on the papers.

 2. The grounds argue, first, that the appellant was denied a first hearing
    as he requested by fax that his appeal be listed for an oral hearing in
    order that he could  make  oral  submissions  and  raise  human  rights
    arguments.  Secondly, it is contended that the judge did not consider a
    previously allowed determination following the  Devaseelan  guidelines.
    Third, it was  argued  that  the  respondent  failed  to  exercise  her
    residual discretion  to  allow  the  appeal  outside  the  Rules  which
    rendered the decision unlawful.

 3. Permission was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  in
    relation to the first ground only because accompanying the  appellant's
    grounds of application was a letter from the appellant dated 4 December
    2015 addressed to the Tribunal in Birmingham whereby  he  requested  an
    oral hearing  and  that  letter  was  accompanied  by  a  relevant  fax
    transmission slip of the same date.

 4. Grounds 2 and 3 were not granted permission.

 5. I make clear that at the hearing before  me  the  appellant  failed  to
    attend but I am satisfied that he was notified of the  date,  time  and
    venue  of  the  hearing  and  indeed  attempted   to   submit   further
    documentation to the Tribunal. I concluded that it was in the interests
    of justice and fair to proceed with the hearing in  the  light  of  the
    overriding objective of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, as amended.

 6. Despite the appellant not complying with Rule 15(2A) I did consider his
    witness statement as being his submissions and these  submissions  were
    shown to Mr Clark, the representative for the Secretary of State.

 7. Judge Broe considered the appeal was on the papers and dismissed it  on
    the basis that the reasons for refusal letter of the Secretary of State
    dated 21 December 2015 identified that on 20 May 2015 the appellant was
    informed that the  CAS  he  had  submitted  with  his  application  was
    assigned by the London College of Business Management  and  Information
    Technology but that college was not listed as a Tier 4  Sponsor  as  of
    that date.

 8. The history is as follows.  The appellant had first made an application
    to extend his leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student on 15  January  2014.
    That was refused  and  the  appellant  appealed.   First-tier  Tribunal
    decision of Judge Turquet allowed his appeal on 19th May  2014  to  the
    limited extent it be remitted to the Secretary of  State.   Before  the
    decision was made the Secretary of State checked the register  and  the
    college which had assigned the CAS was not on the list. Its licence had
    been revoked on 6th January 2015.  On 20  May  2015  the  Secretary  of
    State informed the appellant of this and allowed 60 days  to  obtain  a
    new sponsor and CAS but he had not  provided  a  new  CAS  within  that
    period or by the decision on  21st  September  2015.   This  the  judge
    recorded T [6].

 9. It is quite clear that the appellant had  failed  to  comply  with  the
    Immigration Rules as he was not in possession of a valid CAS.  It is  a
    requirement of paragraph 245ZX(c) of the  Immigration  Rules  that  the
    appellant provide a valid CAS with the application.

10. The appellant was advised by the Tribunal on 12 November 2015  that  he
    had indicated that he wanted the appeal to be decided on the papers and
    that he should "send  any  written  evidence  and  submissions  to  the
    Tribunal and the respondent by 10 December 2015".   The  appellant  did
    not comply with this and to date has not supplied a valid CAS.  Whether
    giving oral evidence or not he could not comply  with  the  Immigration
    Rules and thus the decision of the judge, albeit that it  was  made  on
    the papers, recorded at paragraphs 9, 10 and  11  that  the  judge  had
    given careful consideration to all of the documents and  that  the  CAS
    provided by the appellant was invalid and he "did not provide another".



11. Although the appellant had appealed on the basis of human rights issues
    once again no evidence and no particularisation  of  his  human  rights
    claim was submitted despite being invited by the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter to submit a Statement of Additional Grounds.  By the date of the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge which was on 4  January  2016
    no grounds had been submitted and as I state the  appellant  had  still
    not provided any further particularisation of his claim and  failed  to
    attend the Upper Tribunal hearing.

12. As such, even though there is a letter from the appellant purporting to
    request an oral hearing dated 4 December 2015 I am not  persuaded  that
    his attendance at the hearing in person would have altered  or  amended
    the decision in the circumstances, particularly in  the  light  of  the
    evidence and Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC), and,
    therefore the decision of Judge Broe contains no material error of  law
    and the decision shall stand.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


