
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/32197/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                      |Decision  & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 November 2017                  |On 6 November 2017                    |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                             BABATUNDE OGUNLADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Ogundero, Chris Alexander Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  He  applied  for  a  residence
      card as confirmation of his right to reside in the United  Kingdom  as
      the former spouse of an EEA citizen.  The couple divorced  on  4  June
      2014.  This application was refused by the SSHD in a decision dated 23
      September 2015.


   2. In a decision dated 13 July 2016  I  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal
      against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal dated 29  November  2016
      dismissing his appeal.  I gave directions that  the  appeal  would  be
      remade by me at an  adjourned  hearing  to  enable  the  appellant  to
      submit, and the respondent to address updated evidence.

Hearing


   3. At the hearing before me both representatives  agreed  that  the  sole
      issue in dispute was whether the appellant's  ex-wife  was  exercising
      Treaty rights on the date of the divorce.  The appellant  relied  upon
      documentary evidence from his ex-wife's accountants and  the  HMRC  to
      support his evidence that she was working as a mobile  hairdresser  at
      the material  time.   The  respondent  outlined  some  brief  concerns
      regarding the documentary evidence in a position  statement  dated  31
      August 2017.


   4. I heard evidence from the appellant,  who  was  cross-examined  by  Mr
      McVeety, before hearing brief submissions from  both  representatives.
      Mr McVeety invited me to determine the appeal  on  the  basis  of  the
      evidence available.  Mr Ogundero submitted that the appellant provided
      credible evidence supported by documentary evidence,  and  the  appeal
      should be allowed.


   5. I reserved my decision, which I now provide with reasons.

Findings

   6. Having heard from  the  appellant,  I  accept  that  he  has  provided
      truthful and credible evidence.  He answered the  questions  asked  of
      him carefully and directly.  He was  candid  in  explaining  that  the
      divorce proceedings were not amicable and he had lost touch  with  his
      ex-wife, such that the evidence available as to her self-employment is
      limited.  In particular, I accept the evidence set out below.


   i) I accept that the appellant is a self-employed  barber.   He  provided
      credible evidence that he moved out of his Parkdale  road  address  to
      Lamcote road when he  was  in  dispute  with  his  landlord  and  this
      explains the different addresses in the HMRC evidence relevant to him.


  ii) I accept the appellant's own evidence that his ex-wife was working  as
      a self-employed 'mobile' hairdresser from the time they got married in
      2009 to the date of divorce, and this continued after the divorce.


 iii) I accept that the appellant has provided cogent  documentary  evidence
      in support of his own evidence.  He has credibly explained how he  was
      able to obtain this evidence with the assistance of a  mutual  friend.
      The documentary evidence includes:


   a. accounts prepared for  the  appellant's  ex-wife  trading  as  "Unique
      Hairdressers" for the years ending  April  2014  and  April  2015.   I
      accept the appellant's explanation that the addresses provided by  the
      accountants refers to correspondence  addresses,  as  she  was  moving
      around at the time.
   b. HMRC self-employed tax calculations for the tax years 2012 to 2015.  I
      am satisfied that  these  documents  are  reliable  even  though  some
      include typos (eg. Barkdale road address instead of Parkdale road).  I
      note the submission that Nottingham addresses have been provided  when
      the appellant claims that his ex-wife moved to London, but accept  his
      oral evidence that these were used as correspondence addresses by  his
      ex-wife.  The  HMRC  evidence  is  consistent  with  the  accountants'
      evidence.

   7. When all the evidence is considered together, I am satisfied that  the
      appellant's EEA former spouse was exercising free movement rights as a
      self-employed hairdresser  at  the  time  of  their  divorce  and  the
      appellant is currently in self-employment as a barber.


   8. It follows that as the only issue in dispute has been resolved in  the
      appellant's favour, his appeal is allowed under regulation 10  of  the
      Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

Decision

   9. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal.


Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
2 November 2017

