
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32124/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19th January 2018                      |On 13th February 2018             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       MISS PURVIBEN NAVNITBHAI PATEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Iqbal, Counsel instructed by AY & J


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   In this appeal the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  is  the
    appellant and to avoid confusion I shall refer to her  as  being,  "the
    claimant".


2.   The respondent is a citizen of India, born on 2nd May 1985,  who  first
    entered the United Kingdom on 15th February 2009, with entry  clearance
    conferring leave to enter until 31st March 2011, as a student.  On 23rd
    June 2012, the respondent made a  combined  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant
    under the points-based system and for a biometric residence test.

3.    With  her  application  she  submitted  a   TOEIC   certificate   from
    Educational Testing Service to the Home  Office  and  her  sponsor,  in
    order for them to provide her with a  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for
    Studies.  However, according to information provided to the Home Office
    by  ETS,  the  respondent  obtained  her   TOEIC   certificate   number
    0044201649015141, as a result of a test she took  at  Premier  Language
    Training Centre on 27th  June  2012.   Evidence  was  provided  to  the
    Secretary of State confirming that  the  certificate  was  fraudulently
    obtained by the use of a proxy test taker and  ETS  have  declared  the
    test invalid as a result of a proxy tester who took  the  test  in  the
    respondent's place, and the scores have been  cancelled  by  ETS.   The
    claimant  refused  the  respondent's  application   and   refused   the
    application under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.

4.   The respondent appealed the claimant's  decision  and  her  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge L K Gibbs sitting at Hatton Cross on
    7th February 2017.

5.   It is clear from the determination that the judge heard  oral  evidence
    from the respondent.  However, the judge failed to set out a record  of
    it,  or at the very least, a  summary  of  it,  in  the  determination.
    Instead, she referred to the  oral  evidence  being  contained  in  the
    Record of Proceedings.  That it very  unhelpful.   A  determination  is
    meant to be a comprehensive document explaining to the parties why they
    have been successful or unsuccessful in the appeal.  It is intended  to
    be a complete document and it should not be necessary for  the  parties
    to have to refer to other documents.  In any event, the  other  parties
    are not entitled to a copy of the judge's Record of Proceedings  unless
    they appeal.

6.   In this determination the judge simply made findings  and  conclusions.
    She found the respondent to be a credible witness, who gave a  detailed
    and consistent account regarding the TOEIC test that she took  on  27th
    June 2012.  She provided detailed evidence of where she took the  test,
    why she chose the  test  centre,  how  she  travelled  there  and  what
    happened when she was there.  However, the judge then went  on  to  say
    that she found the [respondent]:

         "... was able to speak fluent English.  Further I place  weight  on
         the fact that she had previously been studying an  ACCA  course  as
         evidence of her ability to speak English to a good standard,  which
         I find is evidence that she did not need to treat at her test."



7.   That was in paragraph 9 of the determination to  which  I  shall  refer
    again in a moment.  The judge went on  to  refer  to  SM  and  Qadir  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS - evidence - burden  of
    proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC) and was aware that the Upper Tribunal  had
    found the generic evidence  provided  by  the  claimant  sufficient  to
    discharge the evidential burden that  fell  upon  her  in  raising  the
    allegation of dishonesty.  The judge went  on  to  find  that  she  was
    satisfied that the respondent had raised an innocent explanation.   She
    found  that  the  respondent  had  provided,  "a  cogent  and  detailed
    explanation  regarding  the  test"  and  that  she  had  also  credibly
    explained why she would have no need to cheat at the test (because  her
    standard of English is sufficient).

8.   The judge then went on to criticise an ETS SELT  source  data  provided
    at Appendix D of the claimant's bundle.  The judge believed that  there
    were errors in this document such as affected the  reliability  of  the
    whole document.  The respondent's nationality was incorrectly  recorded
    as being 'Malaysian'.  The Presenting Officer had submitted  that  this
    was a simple clerical error which did not affect the reliability of the
    document.  The judge found that the error caused her to  have  concerns
    with regard to the care with which the document  was  produced  and  it
    affected the weight that she felt she could attach to it.  She was  not
    satisfied that the respondent had used deception  as  alleged  and  not
    satisfied that the application should have been refused under paragraph
    322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.

9.    The  respondent  challenged  the  determination.    The   respondent's
    challenge was on the basis that the judge had failed to  give  any,  or
    adequate reasons for holding that a person who clearly  speaks  English
    would have no reason to secure a test certificate by deception.   There
    may be reasons why a person  who  is  able  to  speak  English  to  the
    required level would, nonetheless cause or permit a proxy candidate  to
    undertake an ETS on  their  behalf,  or  otherwise  cheat.   The  judge
    appears not to have considered that possibility.

10.  The judge, at paragraph 9 of the determination, was clearly  influenced
    by the fact that the respondent was able to speak  fluent  English  and
    had been previously studying an ACCA course, but that was no basis  for
    the judge to find that the respondent did not  need  to  cheat  at  her
    test.  In both SM and Qadir and in MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016]  450
    (IAC) the Tribunal cautioned against placing weight on  an  appellant's
    ability to speak English.  The judge ignored the fact that the test was
    undertaken in 2012,  some  five  years  before  the  judge  heard  oral
    evidence from the respondent.

11.  The ETS SELT source data did contain an error, which was  an  error  as
    to the respondent's nationality but, when assessing the document in the
    round, the judge failed to have regard to the fact that she only needed
    to be satisfied on a balance of probability.  All the other information
    was correct and the Presenting Officer addressing her  was  correct  to
    suggest that there had been a  simple  clerical  error  which  did  not
    affect the reliability of the document.

12.  I reject the submissions made to me by Ms  Iqbal.   I  accept  that  at
    paragraph 10 the judge was correct to find that the  evidence  provided
    by the respondent was sufficient to  discharge  the  evidential  burden
    falling on her in relation to the allegation  of  dishonesty,  but  the
    judge was entirely wrong to use her own assessment of the  respondent's
    use of English and the fact that she had previously  been  studying  in
    English, as evidence that she did not need to cheat at the  test.   The
    mere fact that a respondent may well have been in a  position  to  pass
    the test does not mean that they did not cheat and use a proxy and,  as
    the Presenting Officer pointed out,  the  respondent's  test  had  been
    undertaken in June 2012, and  the  hearing  before  the  judge  was  in
    February 2017.

13.  I have concluded that the determination cannot stand.  I  believe  that
    clear findings are necessary.  I am aware that were I to  adjourn  this
    appeal and hear  it  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  myself  there  would  be
    inevitable lengthy delays in listing.  This is a matter that  needs  to
    be decided without undue delay, because of course  it  will  have  been
    causing the respondent a great deal of uncertainty and concern.  In the
    interests of justice, therefore, I remit this appeal to be heard  by  a
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal other than Judge L  Gibbs.   One  hour
    and a half should be allowed for the hearing of the appeal.

Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley             dated 12 February 2018


