
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32658/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 July 2014                               |On 10 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                    n t d
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones, Counsel instructed by Farani Javid
                    Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify  the  appellant
    or her alleged partner. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make this order because the  appellant  claims  to
    need international protection and I do not want there to be any  chance
    of her  being  persecuted  because  this  determination  comes  to  the
    attention of the authorities in her country of nationality.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  She challenges  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing her  appeal  in  a  determination
    dated 9 April 2014 against the decision of the respondent  on  16  July
    2013 to refuse to vary her leave to remain and to remove her by way  of
    directions.  The appellant had entered the United Kingdom lawfully as a
    student in February 2005.  She had leave to enter as a student until  4
    May 2013.  On 3 May 2013 she applied for further leave to remain  on  a
    discretionary basis.

 3. In simple terms it was the appellant's case that  she  is  entitled  to
    international protection.  She is gay and has a gay partner  and  could
    not safely express her sexuality in Sri Lanka.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeal because she did  not
    believe that the claimant was in a gay relationship.

 5.  The  findings  are  challenged  in  two  ways.   Firstly,  it  is  the
    appellant's contention that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to
    determine the appeal properly. When concluding that the  appellant  was
    not involved in a gay relationship in the United  Kingdom  it  did  not
    decide if she is in fact gay and, if she is gay, if  she  would  be  at
    risk in Sri Lanka.  Secondly, the grounds contended that  the  findings
    that were made were legally flawed because they were perverse.

 6. Legally, in simple  terms,  it  was  the  respondent's  case  that  the
    decision to disbelieve the appellant about her claimed relationship  in
    the United Kingdom was reasoned sufficiently and  in  context  it  must
    have amounted to a finding that she was not telling the  truth  in  her
    claim to be gay.

 7. Before saying anything else it is appropriate to consider exactly  what
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge did decide and her reasons for so doing.

 8. It was the appellant's case that she had had a boyfriend and  that  her
    present gay relationship was her first gay relationship.

 9. The first reason given for doubting the  appellant's  credibility  (the
    fact that it was the first one mentioned in the determination does  not
    mean it was regarded by the judge as the  most  important  or  was  the
    first one that she considered) was the  lack  of  detail  in  the  oral
    evidence which contrasted with the detailed witness statements and  the
    lack of supporting documentary evidence.  The judge  noticed  that  the
    appellant and her partner had claimed  to  have  lived  together  since
    January 2012 although their relationship was  not  intimate  until  May
    2012.  They gave evidence in March 2014 but although there was a letter
    from a letting agent there were  no  bank  statements,  utility  bills,
    council tax bills or other documents suggesting the cohabitation  which
    was said to go with their intimate relationship.

10. Photographs were produced but the judge  said  that  "the  majority  of
    these simply show the appellant and [her partner] with  friends".   All
    of the photographs were at least a year old  and  there  were  only  "a
    couple" of photographs of  the  appellant  and  her  purported  partner
    which, the judge found, was insufficient to show that they  were  in  a
    same sex relationship.  The judge did  not  accept  that  none  of  the
    friends shown in the photographs were available  to  give  evidence  or
    that they  would  not  have  been  called  if  they  could  help  on  a
    contentious point.

11. The judge was unimpressed with two witnesses who were called  as  close
    friends of the appellant.  One of them had only visited the appellant's
    house on one occasion and her accounts about when she had last met  the
    appellant were inconsistent saying, variously that it was a week before
    the hearing and a day before the hearing.

12. Another witness had not seen the appellant  and  her  partner  together
    since May 2013.   The  judge  did  not  find  this  suggested  a  close
    relationship.  She found that neither witness was in a position to give
    useful evidence about  the  nature  of  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and her alleged partner.

13. I read the evidence.  I am not satisfied that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's findings deal adequately with the evidence given.  For  example
    the photographs include a photograph on a drinking mug of the appellant
    with another woman (I assume this to be her purported partner)  and  it
    is marked to refer to "Valentine  Day".   This  is  not  a  picture  of
    friends.  It is a picture of lovers.  It could of  course  be  a  posed
    picture not representing the relationship at all but that  is  what  it
    purports to  do  and  that  is  not  reflected  in  the  determination.
    Further, at least two of the photographs  show  the  appellant  and  (I
    assume) her purported lover very close to each other and not in a way I
    would  expect  between  women  who  were  merely  friends  unless   the
    photograph gave a very unfair  impression  which  I  know  can  happen.
    Again the photograph could be posed but its utility does not appear  in
    the determination.

14. Further, as the grounds point  out,  the  witness  statements  do  give
    considerable detail about the nature of the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and her  purported  lover.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    turned this against the appellant  by  contrasting  it  with  the  oral
    evidence.  This point needs to be explained.  If it is  the  case  that
    very detailed and intimate (the statements are not overly intimate  but
    they are personal) evidence adduced with the assistance  of  solicitors
    is quite different from the evidence in cross-examination and may be  a
    point to be made but it could be explained in several ways that are not
    to the appellant's discredit including embarrassment.

15. The grounds are also right to point out  that  the  supporting  witness
    statement included a clear declaration of opinion  that  the  appellant
    and her purported partner were lovers.  I am  not  satisfied  that  the
    reasons given in the judge's determination  deal  adequately  with  the
    positive elements in the appellant's case.

16. It is quite clear that the  judge  did  not  decide  in  terms  if  the
    appellant was gay.  The respondent submits that rejection of this claim
    can be implied, indeed has to be implied into  the  findings  generally
    because it is plain that the appellant is  not  believed.   I  see  the
    strength of that but I also feel the weight of  Ms  Jones's  submission
    that it would have been very easy for the judge to say if she  did  not
    accept  the  appellant  was  gay  and  it  is  undesirable  to   decide
    international protection issues by inference or in clear findings could
    have been made.

17. I remind myself that I must not interfere unless there  is  a  material
    error of  law.   Almost  all  decisions  could,  with  the  benefit  of
    hindsight, have been done better and the fact that  Counsel,  with  the
    benefit of hindsight, could find something to criticise does  not  mean
    the decision was inadequate.  The truth is  that  I  find  the  reasons
    given by the judge for disbelieving the appellant's claim to be  living
    in a gay relationship in the United Kingdom are unpersuasive  and  this
    makes her failure to give a clear finding on  the  core  claim,  namely
    whether or not the appellant is gay, still more concerning.

18. In my judgment if I upheld this decision the  appellant  would  have  a
    justifiable sense that her evidence had not  been  considered  properly
    and her case not decided  fairly.   There  is  absolutely  no  definite
    finding  on  the  issue  of  whether  or  not  she  is  gay.   In   the
    circumstances I find the appellant's case is made out and I  set  aside
    the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I  think  the   natural
    consequence of this decision is the case has to be decided again in the
    First-tier.  My conclusion is  the  appellant  has  not  had  a  proper
    hearing and she is entitled to one.  I therefore set aside the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal, I allow the appeal and I  direct  that  the
    case be decided again in the First-tier.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 22 October 2014                |



