
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: IA/32739/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 November 2017                          |On 05 December 2017           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                     atb
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms U Miszkiel, Counsel, instructed by Chipatiso
Associates LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Devitte,  promulgated  on  2  December  of  2016.   There  are  certain
    sensitivities in this case and for that  reason  I  make  an  anonymity
    order, albeit such order was neither sought nor made in the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

2.   The appellant is a national of Jamaica who came to the  United  Kingdom
    on 3 June 2012 on a six month visitor visa to  visit  her  grandmother.
    She did not return within the time limit prescribed.

3.   On 30 January 2013 the appellant  made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain which was refused on 28 May of 2015.  She indicated that she did
    not wish to claim asylum but wished instead  to  pursue  an  Article  8
    appeal.

4.   The judge sets out the witness evidence which was received  in  written
    form and orally from the appellant as well as this  evidence  again  in
    written form and orally from the  appellant's  grandmother.  The  judge
    came  to  the  conclusion  that  such  evidence   lacked   credibility.
    Specifically, the judge rejected the account given that the appellant's
    family had been at risk of serious harm  from  an  alleged  rapist  and
    various gang members.

5.   The judge dealt with the issue of the appellant's return to Jamaica  at
    paragraph 10, paragraph 11, reciting the countervailing  considerations
    and proportionality exercise. In paragraph 12 the judge:

         "I therefore find that the consequences of  interference  with  the
         private life of the appellant would not be sufficiently serious  to
         outweigh the public interest given  the  maintenance  of  effective
         immigration control.  This is an appellant who has remained in  the
         United Kingdom in deliberate breach of the  Immigration  Rules  and
         whose explanation for doing so this Tribunal has found  to  be  not
         credible".

4.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hollingworth on the various matters  set  out  in  the  grounds,  which
    allege that the judge failed to give consideration to paragraph  276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules particularly by  reference  to  whether  there
    were insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  appellant  upon  returning  to
    Jamaica. The  grounds  also  allege  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
    sufficient reasons in his determination for coming to  the  conclusions
    that he did.

5.   Ms Miszkiel, who appears on behalf of  the  appellant  today,  did  not
    represent her before the First-tier Tribunal nor  did  she  settle  the
    Grounds of Appeal. She made oral submissions in relation to the pleaded
    Grounds and placed further reliance on what she stated  is  a  Robinson
    obvious point, namely that the judge failed  to  engage  with  relevant
    case law in coming to the conclusions which he did.

6.   Counsel's submissions relate  to  the  absence,  as  she  puts  it,  of
    reasons for finding the evidence of the appellant and  her  grandmother
    not to be credible.  I do not consider these  criticisms  to  be  well-
    founded. The judge's reasons are briefly expressed  but  are  perfectly
    adequate for the purposes of a determination such as this. A First-tier
    judge has the advantage  of  hearing  the  witnesses  delivering  their
    evidence and is in a far better position to assess its credibility than
    the Upper Tribunal in its reviewing capacity.  I can see nothing  wrong
    in the way in which the judge succinctly expressed his  conclusions  in
    this regard.

7.   Equally I can see nothing wrong in the Article  8  analysis  which  the
    judge undertook.  There was no express reference  to  paragraph  276ADE
    nor to Article  7  or  Section  117B.  However,  reading  the  decision
    holistically it is abundantly plain that adequate regard was given both
    to the statutory tests and the case-law framework within which  appeals
    of this type fall to be assessed.

8.   The judge properly had regard to those factors which militated  in  the
    appellant's  favour  and  those  against  her.  The  judge  came  to  a
    conclusion which was adequately reasoned and I can detect no  error  of
    law. I do not consider that the fact that no cases are referred  to  is
    in any way suggestive of the judge not applying  the  correct  test  in
    this regard.

9.   The former practice of overly lengthy decisions is one which  has  been
    deprecated by both the Upper Tribunal and by the Court of  Appeal.  The
    comparative brevity of this determination  is  not  suggestive  of  any
    error  of  law  or  denial  of  justice.   The  matter  received   full
    consideration from the First-tier Tribunal  and  in  the  circumstances
    this appeal must be dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed and the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
affirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     4 December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC




