
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/32687/2015
                                                               IA/32688/2015
                                                               IA/32689/2015
                                                               IA/32926/2015
                                                               ia/32927/2015
                                                               ia/32928/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 5 September 2017                   |On 8 September 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                  [ClO] (1)
                                  [CHO] (2)
                                  [JEO] (3)
                              PATIENCE [U] (4)
                               VICTOR [O] (5)
                                  [JAO] (6)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants comprise a family. The fourth and fifth  appellants  are
    the parents of the children, all of whom were born in the  UK  and  are
    minors. The first appellant naturalised  as  a  British  citizen  after
    lodging his appeal and is now 11 years of age. The second appellant  is
    8 years of age. Other than the first appellant, the appellants are  all
    Nigerian citizens who have no leave to remain  in  the  UK.  They  have
    appealed a decision of the respondent, made on 24  September  2015,  to
    refuse them leave on human rights grounds.

 2. The appeals were heard by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Doyle  at
    Taylor House on 1  December  2016.  In  a  decision  promulgated  on  9
    December 2016, the appeals were dismissed. The appellants have appealed
    against that decision, with the permission of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    on the ground that the decision of Judge Doyle is vitiated by  material
    error of law.

 3. In very brief summary, the  appeals  were  argued  on  the  basis  that
    removing the family would amount to a  breach  of  their  rights  under
    article 8 of the Human Rights Convention. Emphasis was  placed  on  the
    fact the first appellant had naturalised as a British citizen on 2 June
    2016,  and  also  on  the  fact  the  second  appellant   had   resided
    continuously in the UK since her birth, which was more than seven years
    ago. The judge accepted there was extant family life. He explained that
    none of the appellants could succeed under the  Immigration  Rules.  He
    went on to consider the position outside the rules, recognising that he
    was required to have regard to section 117B of the 2002 Act. The  judge
    concluded that the interference with the appellants' article  8  rights
    would be proportionate. There was insufficient evidence before  him  to
    indicate that there was anything exceptional or  compelling  about  the
    facts and circumstances of the case and therefore there was  no  reason
    to consider the case outside the rules. As he put it, the future of the
    family lies in Nigeria.

 4. The grounds seeking permission to appeal against the decision of  Judge
    Doyle submitted that his decision contains  three  significant  errors:
    (1) he failed to apply the rules  correctly;  (2)  he  failed  to  have
    regard to section 117B; and (3) he failed to consider  the  application
    outside the rules. The lengthy grounds went on to reargue the case but,
    in large part, boiled down to an argument that it is inconceivable that
    it was reasonable for a British child to be removed to Nigeria.

 5. It granting permission to appeal,  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Osborne stated as follows:

         "4. In an otherwise careful and focused decision and reasons it  is
         nonetheless arguable that the judge failed to make any  finding  as
         to what is in the best interests of the children. It  is  therefore
         at least arguable that the judge failed to consider what is in  the
         best interests of the children. It is an arguable error of law  for
         the judge to have failed to make such an assessment."

 6. The respondent filed a response opposing the  appeal  and  arguing  the
    judge had been entitled to have regard to  the  wider  public  interest
    considerations, following AM (Pakistan) and Ors v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ
    180.

 7. At the beginning of the hearing, I felt it  was  necessary  to  observe
    that it was clear from the decision that Judge Doyle did  identify  and
    consider the best interests of the children. He did so at paragraphs 20
    to 23 of his decision. He found the  interests  of  the  children  were
    preserved because the integrity of the family unit was not  challenged.
    It is difficult to understand on what basis it was  considered  it  was
    arguable he had not. However, permission has been granted and cannot be
    rescinded.

 8. Furthermore, I considered there was a live issue in that  no  reference
    had been made to the important decision of the Upper Tribunal in SF and
    others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC).  That
    decision highlighted the existence of a passage  in  the  current  IDIs
    (see paragraph 7 of the decision where it is set out)  giving  guidance
    to case workers on when it would be unreasonable to  expect  a  British
    citizen child  to  leave  the  UK.  Although  SF  and  others  was  not
    promulgated  until  after  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,   the
    guidance had been in force since August 2015. Having been  reminded  of
    the case, Mr Bramble helpfully accepted that the respondent's  position
    was that, absent  criminality  or  a  very  poor  immigration  history,
    applicants with a British child should be granted a  period  of  leave.
    There were no findings  in  this  case  showing  that  there  had  been
    criminality or a very poor immigration history.

 9. Mr Bramble did  raise  his  concerns  that  this  point  had  not  been
    mentioned in the grounds seeking permission to appeal and permission to
    appeal had not been granted to argue it. Mr Gajjar sought  to  persuade
    me that the references in the grounds to the fact the  first  appellant
    is British and the unreasonableness of expecting him to  leave  the  UK
    were tantamount to raising the argument. With respect, the  grounds  do
    not raise this particular point with sufficient particularity and  this
    is not surprising given the fact that SF  and  others  was  promulgated
    after the grounds were drafted. However, I did allow the  point  to  be
    raised  for  the  following  reasons.  Firstly,  there  is  an  obvious
    requirement to  give  effect  to  any  derived  rights.  Secondly,  the
    importance of correctly assessing the best interests of a child and the
    caution which should be exercised before depriving a British citizen of
    the  enjoyment  of  the  benefits  of  holding  that  citizenship  both
    indicated it was appropriate to exercise flexibility  in  allowing  the
    ground to be raised late. Thirdly, there was no real prejudice  to  the
    respondent in ensuring that her own guidance was taken into account.

10.  The  failure  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  have  regard  to  the
    respondent's guidance in deciding whether it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the first appellant to leave the UK must amount  to  a  material
    error of law notwithstanding the fact that no-one appears to have drawn
    the guidance to his attention. The decision is set aside.

11. The parties agreed that the appropriate course was for  me  to  re-make
    the decision.

12. It is clear from the extract in the IDIs that the respondent's position
    is based on the application of the principle derived from Ruiz Zambrano
    (Case C-34/09). In brief, the principle established  in  that  case  is
    that Article 20 TFEU precludes national measures which have the  effect
    of depriving Union citizens of the genuine enjoyment of  the  substance
    of rights conferred by virtue of their status.  Third country nationals
    also derived rights if refusal would interfere with the Union citizen's
    freedom of movement.

13. The guidance remains in force.

14. I observed that no findings had been made about the possibility of  the
    first appellant being cared for by another relative in  the  event  the
    rest of the family were removed to Nigeria. I heard brief  evidence  on
    this point from the fourth and fifth  appellants  and  also  the  fifth
    appellant's older sisters, [VA] and [GE]. Having done  so,  Mr  Bramble
    helpfully accepted that there was nobody in  the  UK,  from  among  the
    extended family, capable of looking after the first  appellant,  who  I
    remind myself is an eleven-year old boy. The fourth  appellant  has  no
    family in the UK. Neither of the fifth  appellant's  sisters  would  be
    able to take in the first appellant. Both would be willing to if  their
    lives  were  differently  arranged  but  their  current   circumstances
    preclude it. [VA] has five sons of her  own  at  home  in  Bromley  and
    spends the working week away in Leicester, where  she  practises  as  a
    nurse. [GE] has four minor children at home  and  she  gave  compelling
    evidence that her husband would not countenance another  child  joining
    the household.

15. The fourth and fifth appellants made an additional statement  in  which
    they  described  how  the  first  appellant  is  inseparable  from  his
    siblings. He is starting secondary school this week. I accept it  would
    be bewildering and highly upsetting  for  the  first  appellant  to  be
    detached from his nuclear family at this stage of his development.

16. In Chavez-Vilchez and Others (Case C-133/15), the CJEU  considered  the
    relevant factors when deciding whether a child  would  in  practice  be
    obliged to leave the EU. They included whether the  child  is  legally,
    financially and emotionally dependent on  the  third  country  national
    parent, the child's age, physical and  emotional  development  and  the
    risks that separation might entail for the child's equilibrium.

17. Applying this guidance to the findings I have made, it  is  clear  that
    removing the parents and siblings to Nigeria would  deprive  the  first
    appellant of the ability to enjoy his rights as a Union citizen because
    he would be forced to accompany them.

18. For the avoidance of doubt, in Ayinde and Thinjom (Carers -  Reg.15A  -
    Zambrano) [2015] UKUT 00560 (IAC) the  Upper  Tribunal  explained  that
    placing a child in state care so that they can enjoy  their  rights  of
    residence was "beyond the range of proportionate responses".

19. It  follows  that  the  IDIs  are  applicable  in  this  case  and  the
    respondent's position is that the  second,  third,  fourth,  fifth  and
    sixth appellants should be granted leave to enable the first  appellant
    to enjoy his rights. Whilst the appeals cannot be allowed on the  basis
    the decisions made were not in accordance with the law,  as  the  Upper
    Tribunal explained in SF and others, decisions made in tribunals on the
    question of whether it would be reasonable to expect a British child to
    leave the UK should, as far as  possible,  be  made  consistently  with
    decisions made by the respondent. Nothing has come  to  light  in  this
    case which could properly lead a  decision-maker  to  depart  from  the
    guidance and, as said, Mr Bramble was content for  the  appeals  to  be
    allowed on this basis. I therefore substitute a decision  allowing  the
    appeals of the appellants on the ground that the  constructive  removal
    of the first appellant would be unreasonable and not in accordance with
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act. Removing his family members  would  be
    disproportionate and in breach of article 8.

20. Anonymity has not been sought and I saw no reason to grant it.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and is set aside. A decision is substituted allowing the  appeals  on  human
rights grounds.

No anonymity direction.


Signed                                  Date 6 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeals  and  because  a  fee  has  been  paid  or  is
payable, I have considered making a fee award and have decided not  to  make
a fee award for the following reasons. The appeals have turned on  a  change
of circumstances which occurred after the appeals were  lodged,  namely  the
first appellant's naturalisation.


Signed                                  Date 6 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
