
IAC-fH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32902/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 November 2014                            |On 27 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MAJIDAH BEGUM
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Sreeraman, Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Khushi, Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals   with   permission   against   the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio promulgated on 22  July
    2014 in which he  allowed  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made on 3 July 2013 to refuse to vary her  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.

 2. The respondent was born on 1 January 1950 and is a citizen of Pakistan.
     She most recently arrived in the United Kingdom on  5  May  2013  with
    entry clearance as a visitor and on 22 May 2013 applied  for  leave  to
    remain pursuant to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

 3. The respondent had previously  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  but  had
    returned to Pakistan for a short visit as her husband had died there on
    20 April 2013 with a heart condition.  She suffers from depression  and
    also from a heart condition.   She  has  no  close  relatives  left  in
    Pakistan; she lives with her son, Asad, who is married to  a  Slovakian
    national. She also has another son and daughter living  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 4. The Secretary of State considered did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules noting in particular that she
    has spent 63 years in Pakistan, a relatively short time in  the  United
    Kingdom and had not established that she had no ties to Pakistan.   She
    considered it would not breach the United Kingdoms obligations pursuant
    to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention to return her to  Pakistan.



 5. On appeal, it was accepted by the respondent's representative that  she
    did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio found:-

    (i)   that  there  were  compelling  circumstances   not   sufficiently
         recognised by the  Immigration  Rules  [10]  and  that  there  were
         compassionate circumstances outside the Immigration Rules;

    (ii)     that the respondent's children and daughter-in-law  take  care
         of the respondent and she is reliant on them in the United Kingdom,
         living with her first son; and that there is  family  life  between
         her and her children in the United Kingdom [12];

    (iii)    that the respondent is depressed, in a very low  mood  and  is
         constantly crying [13]; and  other  than  the  maintenance  of  the
         Immigration Rules there is no  public cost for the respondent being
         in the United Kingdom as her medication is  funded  by  her  family
         [15] the issue being whether it is proportionate to the  legitimate
         public end to be achieved;

    (iv) that although she had no legitimate expectation  to  remain  after
         six months, the appellant is 64 years  of  age,  she  was  recently
         hospitalised and lost her husband and  in  a  very  depressed  mood
         [16]; and

    (v)  that there was concern that the respondent's mental  and  physical
         health will deteriorate were she returned to Pakistan where she has
         no one to look after her and requires the support of  her  children
         [17];

    (vi) that the respondent has no one to live with in Pakistan  and  that
         accordingly her removal would be disproportionate to her right  for
         respect for private life.

 7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds:

    (i)  that the judge made no findings as to arguably  good  grounds  and
         compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
         Rules [5] and

    (ii) that without making adequate findings as to arguably good  grounds
         and compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under  the
         Rules,  the  judge  cannot  undertake  a  freestanding  Article   8
         assessment [6].

 8. On 17 September 2014 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  T  R  P  Hollingworth
    granted permission stating:-

         "In  circumstances  where  the  appellant  could  not  satisfy  the
         requirements of the Rules and where the medical  evidence  was  not
         extensive it appears that insufficient weight was attached  to  the
         public interest element and the Article 8 evaluation.

         All grounds are arguable."

The Hearing

 9. Miss Sreeraman sought permission to adduce before  the  Upper  Tribunal
    evidence that had not been before the First-tier Tribunal.  She did  so
    purporting to rely on Rule 15(2A) of  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Procedure)
    Rules 2007.  This application was not made on notice received and  when
    probed further it appeared that what was being sought was permission to
    adduce at the error of law stage material which had not been before the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Miss Sreeraman was unable to explain to  me  why,
    in light of the decision of E v SSHD [2004] EWCA  Civ  49  the  Ladd  v
    Marshall principles were satisfied, that is:-

    (i)  that the new evidence could not  with  reasonable  diligence  have
         been obtained for use at the trial or hearing; and

    (ii)     that the claimed errors are  be  such  that  given,  it  would
         probably have an  important influence on  the  start  of  the  case
         (although it need not  be  decisive)  that  the  new  evidence  was
         apparently  credible  although  it   need   not   have   been    in
         controvertible.

10. Miss Sreeraman was unable to satisfy me  as  to  any  reason  why  this
    material  which, by her admission, must have been before the  Secretary
    of  State  years  before  the  hearing  yet  had  not  been   produced.
    Accordingly this application failed at the first hurdle.

11. Miss Sreeraman submitted that Gulshan Article 8 - new Rules  -  correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) establishes that there is a  two  stage
    test in that there is a threshold to be overcome before a judge can  go
    on to consider Article 8, citing MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985 and R
    (Ganesabalan) v SSHD [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin) as further authorities in
    support of this proposition.

12. Miss Sreeraman submitted also that it was implicit in the grounds  that
    a challenge was made to the assessment of proportionality  carried  out
    by the judge and that he had failed to give due weight  to  the  public
    interest.

13. Mr Khushi submitted that there was a threshold test and that the  judge
    had given adequate reasons as to why he had gone on to consider Article
    8 outside the Rules.  He  submitted  also  that  the  judge  had  given
    appropriate and adequate consideration for weight to be  given  to  the
    public interest in this case and that it was implicit in his  reasoning
    that he had attached due  weight  to  the  public  interest  which,  he
    accepted, includes the maintenance of a system of immigration by  Rules
    applied to all.

Did the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involve the making of  an  error
of law?

14. I note from  MM and Others at [131] and [135]:

    131. We did not specifically hear  argument  on  whether  the  new  MIR
    together with the Guidance  constituted  a  "comprehensive  code".  But
    whether or not they do makes no difference,  on  the  analysis  of  the
    Master of the Rolls in MF(Nigeria). This is  because,  as  he  said  at
    [45], in any event it would be necessary to  apply  a  "proportionality
    test" with regard to the "exceptional circumstances" guidance in  order
    to be compatible with the Convention and in compliance  with  Huang  at
    [20].[144]

    ...

    135. Where the relevant group of IRs, upon their  proper  construction,
    provide a "complete code" for dealing with a person's Convention rights
    in the context of a particular IR or statutory provision,  such  as  in
    the case of "foreign criminals",[152] then the balancing  exercise  and
    the way the various  factors  are  to  be  taken  into  account  in  an
    individual case must be done in accordance  with  that  code,  although
    references to "exceptional circumstances" in the code will  nonetheless
    entail a proportionality exercise.[153] But if the  relevant  group  of
    IRs is not such a "complete code" then the proportionality test will be
    more at large, albeit guided by the Huang tests and UK  and  Strasbourg
    case law.[154]

15. I note also from Ganesabalan at [24] - [25]

    24.  The question of what "assessment of Article 8" is  called  for  in
    the circumstances, and in particular whether there is  a  need  for  "a
    full separate consideration" is, in my judgment, a different matter. It
    does not obviate the  duty  on  the  decision  maker  to  consider  the
    exercise of discretion.


    25.  This topic was considered by Green J in  Ahmed.  Under  a  heading
    "good arguable case needed to trigger an Article 8 review  outwith  the
    Rules" the judge considered Nagre and another authority  cited  to  him
    (paragraphs 31 to 32). He then picked up the point at paragraphs 36  to
    39. Of significance, in my judgment, in considering that  analysis  are
    two points. Firstly, Green J recognised at paragraph 33:
         "  ...  it  is  important  that  officials  applying  the  residual
         exceptional circumstances policy should be vigilant to avoid a tick
         box mentality and should bear the policy guidance in  mind  seeking
         to stand back after working through the analysis required so as  to
         formulate in an overall manner a view as to whether there might  be
         a good arguable case of disproportionality if leave to  remain  was
         not granted."
    That passage, in my judgment,  very  clearly  recognises  that,  having
    addressed the  Immigration  Rules  and  reached  conclusions  on  their
    application, there is a duty  by  reference  to  the  guidance  on  the
    decision maker then to step back and formulate a view. The need  for  a
    view is not triggered by there being some good arguable basis.  Rather,
    as Green J there explains, one of the  questions  -  indeed  the  first
    question - to be considered in formulating that view, is  the  question
    whether there might be a good arguable case.

16. It is evident from these cases that there is no two  stage  process  as
    the Secretary of State appears to envisage; there is no threshold to be
    overcome before the issue of proportionality is to be considered.

17. The grant  of  leave  is,  however,  wider  than  that  sought  by  the
    respondent.  It expands it into the area of public interest.

18. Whilst Judge Adio does refer in places to  the  public  interest,  this
    appears to be connected solely  to  economic  issues  rather  than  the
    importance attached to the maintenance of immigration control per se or
    the public interest in the maintenance of a system of Rules  applicable
    to all.  Further, there is no indication that he attached due weight to
    the fact that the appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Accordingly, I am satisfied that  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio did involve the making of  an  error  of
    law.

19. I am satisfied also that it was material and affected  the  outcome  of
    the decision, given the failure to take into account or  attach  proper
    weight to the public interest.

20. With regard to remaking the appeal, as this appeal  will  now  need  to
    take account of Section 117 of the 2002 Act as well as the new  amended
    provisions of Appendix FM  and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  It will also be necessary, to consider, as was  raised  in  the
    initial grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  whether  the
    appellant is  entitled  to  leave  to  remain  pursuant  to  Regulation
    71(1)(c) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

21. In the circumstances, given the extent of further judicial fact finding
    which will be necessary, I consider it appropriate to remit the  matter
    to the First-tier for a fresh hearing on all issues.



Signed        Date 27 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
