
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32252/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 November 2017                          |On 14 December 2017           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                           bushirat adebola akanbi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Sethi promulgated on 21 November 2016.  The  appeal  comes  before  the
    Upper Tribunal pursuant  to  permission  to  appeal  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kamara on 12 September 2017  following  the  refusal  of
    permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grant  on  22  June
    2017.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria  born  on  24  July  1973.   She
    entered the United Kingdom with entry clearance  as  a  student  on  12
    February 2005 with leave valid until 30 November 2006.  She was granted
    subsequent periods of leave as a student up until 2 December 2009  when
    an application as a Tier 1 (Post-Study)  Migrant  was  refused  with  a
    right of appeal.  The Appellant's appeal was successful and in time she
    was granted further leave to remain. She was  next  granted  successive
    periods of leave as a Tier 4 Student from  24  October  2012  until  28
    February 2014, and from 20 February 2014 until 20 May 2015.

3.   On 2 April 2015 the Appellant applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain
    on  the  grounds  of  ten  years'  continuous  lawful  residence.   The
    application was considered with particular reference to paragraph  276B
    of the Immigration Rules.  The Respondent identified  a  period  of  56
    days between 31 October 2007 and 28  December  2007  during  which  the
    Appellant was without valid leave.  It was said  that  the  Appellant's
    previous leave which was due to expire on 31 October  2007  did  indeed
    expire without the Appellant having made  an  in-time  application  for
    further leave to remain.  An application for further leave to remain as
    a student was received, it was said, on 6 December 2007 -  and  it  was
    not until 28 December 2007 that the application  was  granted  and  the
    Appellant given a further period of leave.

4.   It is the circumstances surrounding the application made  at  or  about
    the date of the Appellant's due expiry of leave on 31 October 2007 that
    have been the main focus  of  the  proceedings  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and in turn the main focus of  the  challenge  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

5.   For completeness, however, I should also identify that  the  Respondent
    in the 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') also gave consideration to
    issues of family and private life pursuant to Article  8  of  the  ECHR
    with reference in particular to Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  The Respondent also had
    regard to whether or not there were exceptional circumstances  such  as
    would warrant a grant of leave to the  Appellant  notwithstanding  that
    the Respondent had concluded that she did not meet the requirements  of
    ten years' continuous residence for the purpose of paragraph 276B,  and
    did not otherwise satisfy either Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.

6.   I should also emphasise that the Appellant's  appeal  to  the  IAC  was
    pursuant to section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 (as amended by the Immigration Act 2014) and  thereby  limited  to
    human rights  grounds.  This  was  not  an  appeal  to  be  decided  or
    determined on 'Immigration Rules grounds', albeit the Immigration Rules
    would form a  significant  and  relevant  consideration  in  evaluating
    aspects of proportionality and, in particular, 'public interest' in the
    context of Article 8.  I mention this because it does seem  that  Judge
    Sethi may not have  identified  the  nature  and  jurisdiction  of  the
    Tribunal.  Judge Sethi purported  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules (see paragraph 32)  as  well  as  on  human
    rights  grounds  (paragraph  33).   The  Tribunal  did  not  have   any
    jurisdiction to allow or  dismiss  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  I am not persuaded, however that this in itself was a  material
    error: as I have said above, it was incumbent upon the  Judge  to  have
    regard to the Immigration Rules and then to  consider  to  what  extent
    such considerations informed the evaluation under Article 8 - which, in
    substance, the Judge essayed.

7.   In such circumstances  the  focus  upon  the  purported  break  in  the
    continuity of the Appellant's residence in 2007 was understandably  the
    main focus of proceedings before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  this
    regard it is clear that the Appellant's  position  was  essentially  to
    deny that there had been any such break in continuity and to deny  that
    her application had been made out-of-time.  She gave  evidence  to  the
    effect that she had given to her course-provider - who was  responsible
    for forwarding the application to the Respondent -  all  the  necessary
    documents well in advance of the due date of the expiry of  her  leave.
    The following is set out, for example, at paragraph 8 of  the  Decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal:

         "She stated that she had  provided  the  University  with  all  the
         necessary documents around a week or two weeks before the expiry of
         her leave and that it was the University's  policy  to  submit  the
         application within a day  or  two  of  the  student  providing  the
         paperwork."

8.   The Appellant also indicated that she had attempted to  obtain  a  copy
    of her application from the university but had been  unsuccessful.   In
    this regard she is recorded as having stated:

         "that she was  confident  that  had  the  Respondent  produced  her
         application it would show that she had signed and dated  it  before
         the expiry of her leave on 31 October 2007, and if there  had  been
         delays by the university in submitting it these  were  not  of  her
         making"  (paragraph 9).

9.   The Respondent, who indeed had not produced a copy of  the  Appellant's
    application in  the  appeal  bundle  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    maintained the position that the records showed  that  the  Appellant's
    application had been made on 6 December - a CID  printout  or  vignette
    had been produced in this regard.

10.  Because of the significance of  the  dispute  as  to  the  application,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Sethi exceptionally made directions  for  the
    parties to file and serve any additional materials in the appeal  after
    the hearing - which provided a further opportunity for the  application
    form to be placed  before  the  Tribunal.   The  Judge  refers  to  the
    directions at paragraph 16 in these terms: "...my directions that  each
    party be afforded a further period of 5 days from the date  of  hearing
    to file and serve a copy of the disputed 2007 application form...".

11.  The Judge identifies that the Respondent  did  indeed  file  materials,
    under cover of a letter dated  7  November  2016  -  I  turn  to  those
    materials shortly.

12.  It is clear that the Appellant's representatives fully understood  that
    such a direction had been given by the Judge.  They responded by way of
    a letter dated 1 November 2016 referring to the "order"  of  the  Judge
    and enclosing a letter written on 27 October 2016 to  the  Respondent's
    Subject Access Requests Directorate seeking the  relevant  information.
    It  would  appear  in  those   circumstances   that   the   Appellant's
    representatives were implicitly acknowledging that they themselves  did
    not have a copy of the application, but that they were acting  as  best
    they could in order to secure such a document.

13.  The Respondent in the covering letter of 7 November  2016  also  refers
    to the Judge having "requested some documents".   I  pause  to  note  -
    although perhaps ultimately nothing too significant  turns  on  this  -
    that the time for filing the documents in accordance with Judge Sethi's
    direction expired on  3  November.   To  that  extent  the  Appellant's
    response  was  in  time  (albeit  of  limited   value),   whereas   the
    Respondent's response was late (albeit that it  contained  exactly  the
    information that the Judge  had  sought).   The  Judge  refers  to  the
    information and documents filed by the Respondent at paragraph 5 of her
    Decision.  She also gives consideration to those documents  thereafter,
    in particular at paragraph 18.

14.  The materials filed by the Respondent, contrary to  the  ardent  claims
    of the Appellant before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  identify  that  the
    application was not forwarded to the Respondent until it  was  done  so
    under cover of a letter  from  the  University  of  Greenwich  dated  5
    December 2007. To that end it is clear  that  the  Respondent's  record
    that the application was received  on  6  December  2007  is  accurate.
    Moreover the documents reveal that the application form itself was  not
    signed by the Appellant until 27 November 2007.   This  undermines  her
    claim in her oral evidence that she had provided  the  university  with
    her application form in good time and inasmuch as there was  any  delay
    it was attributable to the fault of the university.

15.  I note that 27 November 2007 would have been within one day of  the  28
    day period of grace permitted pursuant  to  paragraph  276B(v)  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Whilst it might be said in those circumstances  that
    the Appellant had provided  the  university  the  relevant  information
    within the period of grace - though see further  below  as  to  whether
    this was indeed the case - it is perhaps unrealistic for the  Appellant
    to have expected the university to be able to forward  the  application
    to the Respondent within the period of grace in circumstances where her
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was that it might take  one  or
    two days for the university to forward such an application.  Be that as
    it may the university did indeed forward the application  to  the  Home
    Office,  and  indeed  the   application   was   successful.    In   the
    circumstances it is perhaps understandable that no particular issue was
    explored any further at that time as to its timeousness  -  it  perhaps
    not being conceived that it might  occasion  some  difficulty  for  the
    Appellant at a later stage.

16.  The body of the application covering letter from the university  refers
    expressly to the fact that the application is being  made  out-of-time.
    It is said in the letter that this is "due to a regrettable  oversight"
    on the part of the Appellant.   The  writer  of  the  letter  expresses
    surprise at such oversight given the qualities and diligence  that  the
    Appellant otherwise demonstrates.  It is said that the Appellant offers
    her sincere apologies for the delay.

17.  One further matter to be noted in respect of these  documents  is  that
    supporting materials were submitted with  the  Appellant's  application
    which included a letter from the Appellant's sponsoring uncle  dated  1
    November 2007, and a letter from the Appellant's employer in respect of
    part-time work, a company called Strand, purportedly dated  3  December
    2007.  On its face the dating of this letter (3  December  2007)  would
    suggest  that  the  Appellant's  application  was  not  passed  to  the
    university  until  even  later  than  27   November,   and   in   those
    circumstances outside the 28 day 'period of grace'.

18.  In consequence of the production of the application form  Judge  Sethi,
    understandably, came to the clear conclusion that the Appellant did not
    satisfy paragraph 276B.  She says this at paragraph 18:

          "I find that it is clear from the dates recorded on the supporting
         evidence submitted with the  application  that  such  evidence  was
         itself obtained by the appellant after the date of  the  expiry  of
         her leave.  The appellant in turn has not provided any  submissions
         in answer to this further evidence."

    The Judge continues at paragraph 19 in these terms:

         "Taking these matters in the round and on balance I find that I  am
         entirely satisfied that the appellant's evidence that  she  had  in
         fact completed and submitted  her  application  to  the  respondent
         before the expiry of her leave on 31  October  2007,  is  at  best,
         entirely mistaken and unsupported.  I find  that  in  refusing  the
         application  the   respondent   correctly   calculated   that   the
         appellant's application was submitted out  of  time  and  that  the
         appellant had at the time of the application remained in the UK for
         a period in excess of 28  days  without  leave  and  so  could  not
         benefit from the saving provision of para 276B(v)."

    At paragraph 20 the Judge said this:

         "Regrettably for the reason that the appellant's  case  under  para
         276B was advanced entirely on the basis that the appellant disputed
         the respondent's contention as to the late submission of  the  2007
         application there is no evidence  before  me  to  demonstrate  that
         there were any exceptional circumstances as to why the  application
         could not have been submitted in  time  in  respect  of  which  the
         respondent was then required to exercise discretion."

19.  The Judge's adverse conclusion under paragraph  276B  disposed  of  the
    matter so far as the Judge was concerned under the Immigration Rules  -
    albeit as I have indicated above whilst  it  was  appropriate  to  have
    regard to the Rules, and indeed to measure the Appellant's  application
    against the Rules, there was no jurisdiction to allow  or  dismiss  any
    aspect of the appeal under  the  Rules.  Be  that  as  it  may,  it  is
    inevitably the case that  the  failure  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276B would have informed the  evaluation  of  the  Article  8
    considerations. The Judge indeed considered Article 8 with reference to
    the Appellant's private life, but concluded that there was  nothing  in
    her private life  that  sufficiently  outweighed  the  public  interest
    considerations.


20.  The Appellant's challenge to the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    is essentially one of procedural  fairness.   The  Appellant  complains
    that she did not have an opportunity to address the materials filed  by
    the Respondent  pursuant  to  Judge  Sethi's  directions.   Indeed  the
    Appellant told me today that she did not have sight of those  documents
    until approximately seven days before she received the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  This does not, on its  face,  appear  implausible
    given that there was a period of approximately  fourteen  days  between
    the date of the Respondent's  covering  letter  and  the  date  of  the
    promulgation of Judge Sethi's decision.

21.  Perhaps  the  first  natural  reaction  to  the  Appellant's  claim  of
    procedural unfairness is to question what difference it might have made
    had the Appellant had the opportunity of responding  to  the  documents
    filed by the Respondent - particularly in circumstances where  she  had
    so  adamantly  put  her  case  in  respect  of  having  submitted   her
    application  in-time.   The  documents  clearly  indicated   that   the
    application  in  2007  was  made  late,  and  squarely  reinforced  the
    Respondent's position as to the break in the continuity of residence.

22.  In this regard the Appellant now says that  as  soon  as  she  saw  the
    documents she remembered what had actually happened.  She says that  at
    the time both she and her uncle had been unwell  and  this  had  caused
    delay in finalising the application.  She  points  in  this  regard  to
    aspects of her preparation well ahead of the expiry of  her  leave.  In
    particular she identifies the renewal  of  her  passport  in  September
    2007, even though it was not due to expire until the end of  the  year,
    in an attempt to ensure that there would  be  no  difficulty  when  the
    passport was with the Secretary of State; as  such  she  suggests  that
    this demonstrates that from as  early  as  September  she  was  in  the
    process of preparing her application.

23.  The Appellant also maintains that  she  gave  the  application  to  the
    university within the 28  day  period  of  grace.   The  document  that
    damages her case in this regard, that is to say the employment document
    dated 3 December 2007 (see  paragraph  17  above),  she  now  seeks  to
    address by way of a further letter from  a  company  called  Outsourced
    Client Solutions.  This  letter  is  dated  30  November  2016  and  is
    addressed to the Appellant.  The Appellant tells me that  she  obtained
    this evidence shortly after she had  seen  the  Respondent's  materials
    because she was alert to the issue or questions raised by reason of the
    letter from Strand being  dated  3  December  2007.   The  letter  from
    Outsourced Client Solutions is in these terms:

          "OCS Group - Formerly known as Strand


         A request was made in October 2007 by the  above  for  a  proof  of
         employment letter, this letter was generated on  03  November  2007
         but there has been a typing error  and  the  date  had  been  input
         incorrectly as the 03 December 2007.


         To clarify the date that should have been  on  the  letter  was  03
         November 2007."


24.  The Appellant essentially says that  had  she  had  an  opportunity  to
    respond to the materials filed by the Secretary of State, these are the
    type of points that she would wish to have advanced to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Whilst it may well be  that  she  would  then  have  had  to
    overcome the circumstance of having so strongly put her case in respect
    of having made her application in-time  -  which  might  give  rise  to
    issues as to either or both  her  reliability  and  credibility  -  she
    essentially argues that she  was  denied  the  opportunity  of  a  fair
    hearing to have such matters explored.  In short,  although  she  might
    have  had  particular  significant  matters  to  overcome  she   should
    nonetheless have been heard.

25.  I am concerned in this case that although Judge Sethi  gave  directions
    as to the filing of further evidence, and although she has observed  at
    paragraph 18 that the Appellant has not  provided  any  submissions  in
    answer to this further evidence, it is not apparent by  what  mechanism
    any such further submissions were to be made.  The  Judge's  directions
    appear to have been given orally: I can identify nothing on  file  that
    indicates that any directions  were  given  in  writing.   The  Judge's
    record of proceedings in this regard is reflected in what  is  said  at
    paragraph 26 of the Decision insofar as the directions related  to  the
    filing of the application if either party was able so to do.  There  is
    nothing in the record of proceedings, or elsewhere in the materials  on
    file, or in the body of the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,
    to indicate that there was a further opportunity thereafter for  either
    party to respond to any materials that might be filed or served, or any
    timetable for such a response.  It seems to me in  those  circumstances
    that the Appellant's point in respect of procedural  fairness  is  well
    made.

26.  It is perhaps an unfortunate  circumstance  of  this  case  that  Judge
    Sethi's attempts clearly to try and  ensure  a  fair  disposal  of  the
    appeal by securing the germane documents that would make the key  issue
    that had been the focus of proceedings more readily resolvable,  should
    have inadvertently resulted in unfairness in any event.   I  would  not
    wish to discourage the use  of  such  a  mechanism  to  secure  further
    evidence in future cases, but it seems to me that Judges must be  alert
    to the risk of unfairness if the materials  thus  filed  give  rise  to
    issues that require to be addressed further.  It seems to me that  some
    facility for responding must be made plain  when  such  directions  are
    given, including an indication that if  necessary  the  appeal  may  be
    reconvened to hear further evidence.  No such protection mechanism  was
    present in the proceedings herein, and in all of  the  circumstances  I
    find that there was indeed procedural unfairness.  In my judgement  the
    Appellant ought to have been afforded a clear opportunity of responding
    to any materials filed by the Respondent, and of  being  informed  with
    clarity of the mechanism and timescale for making any response.  Whilst
    it  cannot  be  said  that  the  outcome  would  therefore  have   been
    determinatively in her favour it seems to me important that due process
    be observed regardless.

27.  The Appellant has now  raised  something  by  way  of  response.   Such
    matters must be evaluated along with the materials already filed by the
    Respondent further to Judge Sethi's direction, and in  the  context  of
    the Appellant's evidence and stance at the hearing before Judge  Sethi.
    In re-evaluating the case the next Judge will no  doubt  wish  to  have
    regard to the Appellant's apparent changed position:  whether  that  is
    credible and simply the case of somebody  being  able  to  recall  with
    better clarity than hitherto the events of some ten years ago with  the
    assistance of a 'prompt' from the documents now disclosed;  or  whether
    it is insufficiently reconcilable with  the  firmness  of  her  initial
    assertions as to the  timeliness  of  her  application  such  that  her
    testimony is rendered either unreliable or  incredible.  Any  resulting
    findings in respect of the circumstances will then need to be  factored
    into an evaluation of Article 8.

28.  I conclude that all such matters require to be reconsidered  afresh  by
    a different  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  relevance  or
    otherwise of the possibility that the Appellant can make  a  case  that
    the ten year Rule should have been applied in her favour to the overall
    Article  8  decision  will  need  to  be  considered  in  all  of   the
    circumstances and findings of the next Tribunal.  Suffice  to  say  for
    the moment I am satisfied that there was an error of law such that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside.

Notice of Decision

29.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.

30.  The decision in the appeal is to be remade by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Sethi.

31.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.

The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 13 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

