
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/32540/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 January 2016                   |On 19 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                         MRS BIJAL KIRITKUMAR PATEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:  Mr F Khan, counsel (Direct Access)
For the Respondent: Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the decision, promulgated on 16 June  2015,
       of First-tier Tribunal Judge LM Shand QC (hereinafter referred to  as
       the FTTJ).

  Background

    2. The appellant married Mr Felipe Pereira, a Portuguese national, on 14
       October 2013. She sought a Residence  Card  as  confirmation  of  her
       right of residence as the spouse of an EEA national. In refusing  her
       application on 30 April 2015, the Secretary of State  concluded  that
       the appellant was a party to a marriage of convenience owing  to  the
       information gleaned from a home visit, which took place  on  17  July
       2014. The respondent also considered whether the appellant was  in  a
       durable relationship with Mr Pereira but concluded otherwise owing to
       insufficient  documentation  as  well   as   the   outcome   of   the
       aforementioned home visit.

    3. In the somewhat formulaic grounds of appeal; the appeal being  lodged
       on 14 August 2014;  the  appellant  asserted  that  she  intended  to
       particularise the grounds further at the hearing of the  appeal.  She
       sought a paper consideration of her appeal. She subsequently  changed
       this to an oral hearing by letter dated 6 October 2014.

    4. In accordance with the appellant's request, the appeal was listed for
       an oral hearing. The appellant did not attend and the FTTJ  dismissed
       her appeal on the evidence before her. The FTTJ  concluded  that  the
       appellant had entered into a marriage of convenience and that she was
       not in a durable relationship with the EEA sponsor and dismissed  her
       appeal.

  Error of law

    5. The grounds of application argue that the decision of the  FTTJ  made
       no  reference  to  the  appellant's  witness  statement,  which   was
       submitted on her behalf; that  the  appellant  did  not  receive  the
       notice of hearing and had she done so she and her husband would  have
       attended the hearing. It was further argued that the FTTJ  had  erred
       in respect of the burden of proof; that she had not  considered  that
       the respondent had failed to conduct an  interview  or  consider  the
       appellant's case under Article 8 either within or outside the Rules.

    6. FTTJ Colyer granted permission solely on  the  basis  that  the  FTTJ
       arguably erred in  failing  to  make  reference  to  the  appellant's
       evidence as it was not in the tribunal file;  that  it  was  arguable
       that the appellant should have been given an opportunity to give oral
       evidence and make submissions. Permission was  expressly  refused  on
       the grounds  regarding  Article  8,  this  being  an  EEA  case.  The
       remaining grounds were described as  "weaker,  less  meritorious  and
       less persuasive" but were not excluded.

    7. The Secretary of State lodged a Rule 24 response on 27 November 2015.
       In opposing the appeal, the respondent said that  the  FTTJ  directed
       herself appropriately and had correctly observed the appellant's lack
       of attendance; that proper service  of  the  notice  of  hearing  had
       occurred and a lack of contact from the appellant to explain her non-
       attendance. There was no evidence that  a  copy  of  the  appellant's
       statement had been served on the respondent and it was not before the
       tribunal.

    8. At the hearing before me, Mr Melvin served a skeleton argument on the
       Tribunal and  Mr  Khan,  which  expanded  somewhat  on  the  Rule  24
       response.

    9. For my part, I advised the representatives that  the  IAC  case  file
       showed that the appellant had corresponded with the Tribunal  on  two
       occasions, once in order to request an oral hearing and  secondly  to
       request that the matter be transferred to a London hearing centre.

   10. At the outset, Mr Khan informed me that  the  appellant  was  not  in
       attendance before the Upper Tribunal. No  explanation  was  provided.
       There was also no  indication  that  the  EEA  sponsor  had  attended
       either. He told me that the appellant forwarded a bundle of  material
       to the IAC and respondent on 23 December 2015.   His  submission  was
       simple in that the appellant had not received the notice  of  hearing
       and had not been  given  an  opportunity  to  provide  her  evidence.
       Furthermore, he argued that there was no proper basis for saying  the
       appellant was not in a genuine relationship with the sponsor  and  in
       addition, the respondent  had  erred  by  failing  to  interview  the
       appellant and sponsor.

   11. Mr Melvin argued that there was no material error of law. The  Notice
       of Hearing had been sent to the appellant. The onus was  not  on  the
       tribunal to  telephone  appellants  to  confirm  why  they  have  not
       attended the hearing.  The  FTTJ  dealt  with  all  of  the  evidence
       presented on behalf of the appellant. With regard to the issue of the
       interview, this  was  a  matter  of  course  in  marriage  cases.  He
       continued that the decision in question was  made  in  2014  and  the
       appellant had a good length of time  to  put  forward  her  evidence.
       There was no witness statement from the claimed partner and it likely
       that appellant is still married  to  someone  else.  This  point  was
       raised by respondent and not addressed by appellant in  the  form  of
       divorce papers, the grounds  of  appeal  or  any  other  evidence  to
       counter the Immigration Officer's file  note.   There  was  still  no
       witness statement from the sponsor or corroborative evidence from any
       friends to support the claimed relationship. It was also open to  the
       appellant to make a fresh application, which addressed the issues  in
       dispute.  With  regard  to  the  appellant's  apparent  interests  in
       pursuing her appeal, Mr Melvin argued that her sole interest  was  in
       putting off the hearing date. Her evidence could have  been  sent  in
       for the earlier hearing in January 2015 rather than held back.

   12. In reply, Mr Khan stressed that a fresh application would not rectify
       matters or result in a quicker resolution of the matter.

   13. At the end of the hearing, I announced that the FTTJ made no material
       error of law and that I upheld  her  decision.  The  reasons  are  as
       follows.

   14. The first ground of appeal asserted that  the  FTTJ  failed  to  make
       reference to a witness statement, which was said to  be  before  her.
       There is no indication from the case file to show that  the  Tribunal
       received that document. The said statement has  now  been  submitted,
       however it is a brief document containing  a  series  of  unsupported
       assertions. Accordingly, while the Tribunal might have  inadvertently
       erred in considering the appeal without this statement, such error is
       not material to the outcome of the appeal.

   15. It was said that the appellant was not in receipt of  the  notice  of
       hearing. It is clear from the case file that the  notice  of  hearing
       was posted to the appellant, at the address provided by her. I do not
       accept that the appellant's claim not to  have  received  it  can  be
       relied upon. The appellant does not deny  receiving  each  and  every
       other piece of correspondence from the Tribunal of which  there  were
       several.  I am also inclined to accept Mr  Melvin's  submission  that
       the appellant's main aim was to delay consideration of her appeal.

   16. Firstly, the appellant appealed in August 2014  but  waited  until  6
       October 2014 to request an oral hearing. Despite being notified of  a
       hearing date in Birmingham by notice  dated  11  November  2014,  she
       responded only on 29 December 2014 a matter of days prior to it being
       due to be heard in Birmingham on 8 January 2015. This resulted  in  a
       further delay. The appellant chose not to attend  the  hearing  today
       and no explanation was provided. Nor did the EEA  sponsor  attend.  I
       also note that in the evidence sent by the appellant on  23  December
       2015, there is no witness statement or even letter  in  support  from
       the sponsor.  I consider it more likely than not that  the  appellant
       received the notice of hearing and chose not to attend the hearing.

   17. Mr Khan did not seek to develop the third ground, which refers to the
       burden on the respondent  in  relation  to  marriage  of  convenience
       allegations. The FTTJ made no error in her treatment of this issue.

   18. Finally, Mr Khan argued that the appellant and sponsor ought to  have
       been interviewed. The  grounds  cite  Miah  (interviewer's  comments:
       disclosure:fairness) [2014] UKUT 00515 (IAC), however  this  case  is
       not authority for  that  proposition.  In  view  of  the  appellant's
       description of herself as a married housewife when she  sought  entry
       clearance in 2011; that she described herself as single when marrying
       the EEA national in 2013 and that the  contents  of  the  appellant's
       room when visited by Immigration Officers in 2014 showed that she was
       cohabiting with someone by the name of Shirish, whereas the sponsor's
       name is Felipe,  I  can  see  no  basis  of  the  argument  that  the
       respondent was obliged to conduct a  marriage  interview  when  faced
       with clear evidence of a marriage of convenience.

   19. There is no material error of law in the FTTJ's decision.

   20. There is no justification for making an anonymity direction  in  this
       matter.

  Conclusions

        1) The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
           involve the making of an error on a point of law.

        2) I uphold the decision of the FTTJ.


     Signed:  Date: 17 January 2016

     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
