
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/32329/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 9 October 2014                    |On 20 November 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                  YING SUN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr C Lam, instructed by David Tang & Co
For the Respondent: Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of China, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  her  a
    Derivative Residence Card in accordance with regulation 15A of  the  of
    the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the  EEA
    Regulations). First-tier Tribunal Judge Steer dismissed the appeal  and
    the appellant now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal is that  the  appellant  claims  to  have
    entered the UK clandestinely in 2004. She claims that she began  living
    with her partner, a British citizen, in September 2008. He has a  young
    son from a previous relationship who lives with the  couple  and  is  a
    British citizen. The couple also have a son together who  was  born  in
    the UK on 19 September 2009 who is also a British citizen.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeal under  the  EEA  Regulations  and  under
    paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules.  The  Judge
    considered the guidance in the cases of Gulshan (Article 8 - new  Rules
    -  correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC)  and  Shahzad  (Art  8:
    legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC) and decided that there were  no
    exceptional circumstances not adequately recognised  in  the  Rules  to
    justify considering the application outside the Rules on the  basis  of
    Article 8. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal contend that the
    Judge erred in her  decision  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 15A of the Regulations. The grounds of appeal
    further contend  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  her
    consideration of the Immigration Rules in relation  to  Article  8  and
    that the Judge should have gone on to consider the appeal  outside  the
    Immigration Rules and under Article 8.

 4. Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    appellant renewed her application for permission to the Upper  Tribunal
    and Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt refused to grant permission to appeal  on
    the first ground. She said that the ground  concerning  regulation  15A
    was misconceived because the appellant cannot meet the requirements  of
    regulation 15A (4A) (c) as the children's father  is  British  and  the
    child would therefore be able to reside in the UK even if the appellant
    returns to China. It seems clear to me that the appellant  could  never
    have met the requirements of paragraph 15A and it is not at  all  clear
    why she made the application on this basis. Upper Tribunal  Judge  Pitt
    granted permission to appeal on the second ground only.

Error of Law

 5. Mr Whitwell submitted  that  there  was  no  jurisdiction  to  consider
    Article 8. Mr Lam submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did have
    jurisdiction by virtue of schedule 1 of the  EEA  Regulations.  However
    Schedule 1, paragraph 1 of the EEA Regulations  provides  that  certain
    provisions of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  have
    effect in relation to an appeal under the EEA Regulations as if it were
    an appeal against an immigration decision under section 82(1)  of  that
    Act except for section 84(1) (a) and (f).  Section  84(1)  (a)  is  the
    ground that the decision is not in accordance with  Immigration  Rules.
    The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  regulation  26
    of the EEA Regulations and Schedule 1, paragraph 1 of those Regulations
    therefore prohibited the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  from  considering
    whether the refusal decision was in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
    Rules. I am therefore satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had
    no jurisdiction to consider an appeal in this case on the  ground  that
    the decision is not in accordance with the Immigration Rules. The First-
    tier Tribunal Judge therefore erred in  considering  the  appeal  under
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE. The Judge therefore materially  erred
    in law in considering the appeal on this ground.

 6.  Mr  Lam  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did   have
    jurisdiction to consider the appeal under Article 8. He submitted  that
    this was because the application was made in October 2011,  before  the
    changes introduced to the Immigration Rules in July 2012. He  therefore
    submitted  that  the  Judge  had  erred  in  failing  to  undertake  an
    assessment under Article 8.  I accept this submission.  Schedule  1  of
    the EEA Regulations does not preclude  consideration  of  human  rights
    grounds of appeal. In light of the provisions of  schedule  1  and  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Edgehill & Anor v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 402, in relation to  applications  made  before  July  2012,  I  am
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in considering  this
    appeal under the Immigration Rules and failing to consider Article 8.

 7. I therefore set aside  paragraphs  21-25  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision which deal with human rights and I  go  on  to  remake
    that part of the decision.

Remaking the decision

 8.  Mr Lam submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to consider
    the effect of  the  appellant's  removal  upon  the  children  and  the
    proportionality of the decision.  He submitted  that  there  was  undue
    delay on the respondent's part in considering this application and that
    the  consequent  uncertainty  was  agonising  for  the  appellant.   He
    submitted that at the time the application was made the  boundaries  of
    the derivative right of residence were not so clear.

 9. Mr Whitwell submitted that the appellant can make an application to the
    respondent under Article 8. He accepted that there had been a delay  on
    the respondent's part but pointed to the delay on the appellant's  part
    as she had not made any application between 2004 and 2011. He submitted
    that it  is  entirely  proportionate  for  the  appellant  to  make  an
    application for leave to remain as there is no removal decision.

10. In remaking the decision under Article 8 I bear in mind that schedule 1
    of the EEA  Regulations  precludes  me  from  considering  whether  the
    refusal decision is in accordance  with  the  Immigration  Rule  and  I
    cannot therefore make findings as to whether the  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE or  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

11. I therefore consider the appellant's appeal  under  Article  8  as  the
    appellant does have a right of appeal on this basis. In undertaking  an
    assessment under Article 8 I follow the five stage approach set out  by
    Lord Bingham in R v Secretary of State for the Home Department ex parte
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

12. The appellant enjoys family life in the UK with  her  partner,  stepson
    and son. In the Reasons for Refusal  letter  dated  15  July  2013  the
    respondent suggested that if the appellant wishes to  have  her  family
    life considered she should make a separate  application  for  leave  to
    remain under Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE. As soon as the  appellant
    makes such an application there will be no threat to  remove  her  from
    the UK whilst the application is being considered.  If  the  respondent
    refuses any such application any decision to remove the appellant  will
    attract a right of appeal within the UK. In these  circumstances  I  am
    satisfied there is at present no real interference with the appellant's
    family life in the UK. However I go on to consider the other  steps  in
    the Article 8 assessment in the event that I am wrong in this. If there
    is an  interference  with  family  life  I  accept  that  it  may  have
    consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of
    Article 8. In light of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision  in
    relation to the EEA Regulations (which still  stands)  I  am  satisfied
    that any such interference would be in accordance with the law.

13. The final two questions go  to  the  proportionality  of  the  decision
    appealed against. Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  there  is  no  removal
    decision in this case and  that  it  is  proportionate  to  expect  the
    appellant to make an application for leave to remain under Appendix  FM
    if she wishes to stay in the UK. Mr Lam submitted that there  has  been
    undue delay in this case. I note  that  the  application  was  made  in
    October 2011 and the decision was not made until July 2013.  However  I
    weigh against this the fact  that  the  application  and  appeal  under
    regulation 15A was bound to fail in the circumstances of this case  and
    the  appellant  has  therefore  wasted  time  and  effort  pursuing  an
    application for an EEA residence card which had little  merit.  I  also
    bear in mind the fact that the appellant claims to have been in the  UK
    since 2004 and have lived with her partner since September 2008 yet she
    did not make any application to regularise her stay  in  the  UK  until
    October 2011. There have therefore been delays on both sides.

14. In all of the circumstances I am satisfied that any  interference  with
    the appellant's family life, in the form of a requirement  to  make  an
    application under the  Rules,  is  proportionate  to  the  respondent's
    legitimate aim of the maintenance of an effective system of immigration
    control for the prevention of  disorder  or  crime  or  to  secure  the
    economic well-being of the country.



Conclusion:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on point of law in relation to Article 8 only.

I set aside that part of the decision only and remake it by  dismissing  the
appeal.



Signed      Date: 19 November 2014

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



