

                                                          [pic]

The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal number:
IA/32914/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |             Determination  |
|                                     |issued                      |
|On March 6, 2015                     |             On March 9,    |
|                                     |2015                        |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                         MR SYLVESTER NNAETO IYIEGBU
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
Appellant   Mr Rene, Counsel, instructed by Dorcas Funmi & Co
      Solicitors
Respondent  Ms Everett (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria and at the date  the  matter  was
    originally heard he was 70 years of  age.  The  appellant  entered  the
    United Kingdom as a visitor on April 4, 2013 that enabled him to remain
    here until June 6, 2014. On June 5, 2013  the  respondent  received  an
    application from him on Form FLR(O) in which he sought leave to  remain
    for a purpose not covered by other application  forms.  The  respondent
    considered the application but refused his application on July 8,  2013
    and at the same time took a decision to  remove  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom by way of directions  under  section  47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The appellant appealed on August 2, 2013 under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Solicitors acting on  his
    behalf, at this point, raised articles 2, 3 and 8 ECHR on the basis the
    respondent had failed to consider  whether  the  treatment  needed  was
    available in Nigeria and the consequence of the appellant being  unable
    to access treatment in Nigeria. The grounds  also  contended  that  the
    respondent should have exercised her discretion differently  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

 3.  The  matter  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Brown
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on October 13, 2014  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on November 21, 2014 he dismissed  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds and under the Immigration  Rules.  Ms  Magrath  of
    Counsel on that occasion represented the appellant.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on December  4,  2014  on  three
    grounds. On January 21, 2015 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Levin
    gave permission to appeal finding there were arguable grounds that  the
    FtTJ had erred with his approach to article 8 ECHR. He found  no  merit
    in  the  first  ground  of  appeal  given  that  counsel  had,  in  her
    submissions and skeleton argument, argued for the case to be dealt with
    outside of the Rules.

 5. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above. The appellant was in attendance with  his
    daughter.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 6. Mr Rene indicated that he wished to revisit the first ground of  appeal
    that Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Levin had found no merit  in.  he
    submitted the FtTJ should have considered the appeal under paragraph 51
    HC 395 and  that  it  was  an  obvious  issue  that  should  have  been
    determined. Whilst he accepted neither the solicitors nor  counsel  had
    raised this avenue  before  it  was  something  the  FtTJ  should  have
    considered and as such there was a material error.

 7. Ms Everett opposed the expansion of the grounds and submitted that this
    was not something that had been argued before the FtTJ.  The  Court  of
    Appeal had made clear at paragraph [89] in GS (India) [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    40 that the hurdle as set out in Robinson v Secretary of  State  [1998]
    QB 929 was a high hurdle. There was no evidence before the FtTJ that he
    could have met the Rules in any event so this was  not  the  "Robinson"
    obvious point now being raised. I was invited to reject an expansion of
    the grounds of appeal.

 8.  Having  considered  the  submissions  of  both  representatives  I  am
    satisfied that this is a new matter that counsel now  seeks  to  raise.
    The appellant lodged his own application but when his  application  was
    refused he instructed solicitors  who  signed  and  lodged  grounds  of
    appeal on his behalf. On  June  16,  2014  the  appellant's  solicitors
    lodged a paginated bundle and relevant annexes  and  asked  that  these
    documents be treated as a "necessary part of the  appellant's  appeal".
    No additional grounds were  raised  in  this  bundle.  At  the  hearing
    counsel handed to the respondent and Tribunal her skeleton argument and
    she invited the Tribunal to allow the appeal only under article 8 ECHR.



 9. At the hearing counsel confined her grounds  of  appeal  to  article  8
    ECHR.

10. Following the FtTJ's decision grounds for  permission  to  appeal  were
    lodged and the first ground submitted that  the  "FtTJ  has  materially
    erred by failing to consider the appellant's case under the Immigration
    rules, in particular Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE in  line  with  "
    recent decisions on article 8 .

11. When Mr Rene submitted to me the issue was "Robinson" obvious I  raised
    with him the hypothetical question that if it was so obvious  then  why
    had no one, prior to today, raised the issue.

12. At paragraph [89] of GS the Court of Appeal stated

        Generally, the UT will not make an  error  of  law  by  failing  to
        consider a point never put to it. That is not, however, an absolute
        rule. Sometimes new issues are (in the  lamentable  patois  of  the
        cases) "Robinson obvious". The reference is to Robinson v Secretary
        of State [1998] QB 929, in which it was held at paragraph  39  that
        the appellate authorities "are not required to engage in  a  search
        for new points. If there is readily discernible an obvious point of
        Convention law which favours the  applicant  although  he  has  not
        taken it, then the special  adjudicator  should  apply  it  in  his
        favour, but he should feel  under  no  obligation  to  prolong  the
        hearing by asking the parties for submissions on points which  they
        have not taken but which could be properly  categorised  as  merely
        'arguable' as opposed to 'obvious'... When we refer to  an  obvious
        point we mean a point which has a strong prospect of success if  it
        is argued. Nothing less will do."


13. Ms Everett  pointed  out  that  paragraph  [51]  carries  a  number  of
    requirements and raised the question of  whether  the  appellant  could
    switch from general visitor  status  to  visitor  for  private  medical
    treatment.

14. It seems the appellant would be able to switch as long as he did so  as
    a person with leave so that would not have been an issue for the  FtTJ.
    Paragraph 51 HC 395 sets out what  requirements  need  to  be  met  and
    whilst  there  are  no  mandatory  requirements  there  are  evidential
    requirements  surrounding  his  condition,   treatment,   duration   of
    treatment and availability of funds.

15. As Ms Everett submitted the appellant was not automatically entitled to
    a grant under paragraph 51 HC 395. I also am  satisfied  that  if  this
    issue was so obvious then it would have been contained in  the  grounds
    of appeal as well as the skeleton argument. At the very  least  Counsel
    would have raised it.

16. I disagree with Mr Rene and find the matter is not "Robinson  obvious".
    This argument does not reflect the way the case was put before the FtTJ
    or the basis on which  he  was  given  permission.  It  was  raised  in
    counsel's skeleton argument for the hearing and  only  emerged  at  the
    hearing before me. The Upper Tribunal is not required to hear arguments
    that were neither raised nor argued until today. Whilst this is not  an
    article 8 case the Tribunal in MB (Article  8  -  near  miss)  Pakistan
    [2010] UKUT 282 (IAC) considered matters not mentioned in  the  grounds
    or notice of appeal and stated that as the issue had not been  properly
    raised before him, the judge could not be said to have made an error of
    law.

17. I therefore limit the grounds of appeal to  those  matters  upon  which
    leave has been given.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

18. Mr Rene submitted that the FtTJ erred by failing to have regard to  all
    of the factors raised including the relationship with his daughter  and
    her son and his medical situation. Whilst Section 55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 did not assist the  appellant  but
    the  FtTJ  should  have  considered  the  effect  of  removal  on   the
    appellant's daughter and child. The Court of Appeal had made  clear  in
    GS that a medical  condition  along  with  others  factors  can  engage
    article 8. The FtTJ erred when he found the circumstances were  neither
    exceptional nor compelling. He further erred because he accepted  there
    was family life in paragraph [22] of his determination  but  failed  to
    consider all of the circumstances.

19.  Ms Everett submitted the FtTJ considered the medical evidence and  did
    not find anything exceptional about it because  he  was  satisfied  the
    appellant could return to Nigeria and obtain treatment there as he  had
    done prior to his visit. In Singh and Kahlid v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ  74
    the Court of Appeal made  clear  at  paragraph  [67]  that  neither  MM
    (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985 nor Ganesabalan [2014] EWHC 2712  (Admin)
    undermined the point made by Sales J in paragraph [30] of his judgement
    in  Nagre.  The  FtTJ  demonstrated  from   paragraph   [21]   of   his
    determination that he had considered all of the evidence in  the  round
    and found the appellant had a limited family life with his daughter and
    grandchild but a stronger family life with his wife in Nigeria. He  may
    have created a private life here  through  his  medical  treatment  but
    there was no challenge to the FtTJ's finding that medical treatment was
    available in Nigeria and the sponsor was able to pay the same.

20. Mr Rene emphasised that there were no financial implications for the UK
    government because all medical treatment had been  paid  for  privately
    and the FtTJ was wrong to find there was nothing exceptional about  the
    appellant's medical condition.

21. I reserved my decision after hearing these submissions.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

22. The issue I have to consider is the FtTJ's assessment and  approach  to
    article 8. The FtTJ was fully aware that this was a  claim  outside  of
    the immigration Rules because counsel's skeleton argument indicated  as
    much.


23. The FtTJ approached this appeal in that vein because at paragraphs [21]
    and [22] he stated-

         "I must consider the appeal under the general law  in  relation  to
         article 8 of the ECHR outside of the Immigration Rules... I  accept
         that over a relatively short  period  of  time  the  appellant  has
         developed some family life in the UK  with  his  daughter  and  her
         family but I take account of the fact  that  the  majority  of  his
         family including his wife remain in Nigeria. The appellant  has  by
         reason of his illness engaged with UK health services and therefore
         has some private elements of private life."

24. My view that he considered article 8 is strengthened further because in
    paragraph [23] of  his  determination  he  proceeded  to  consider  the
    remaining questions posed by Lord Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL  00027.
    He identified in paragraph [23] that the issue before him was  "whether
    any interference with private and/or family life  is  proportionate  to
    the legitimate aim set out".


25. He then  considered  the  appellant's  medical  situation  and  current
    circumstances and made findings  that  are  unchallenged  in  paragraph
    [24].

26. In paragraph [25] he referred to case law placed before him  namely  GS
    and EO (India) [2012] UKUT 00397. The recent case of GS (India)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 40 provides the approach to be taken  in  medical  cases.  The
    Court of Appeal upheld the approach taken by Moses LJ in MM  (Zimbabwe)
    [2012] EWCA Civ 279 where he stated

         "The only cases I can foresee where the absence of adequate medical
         treatment in the country to which a person is to be  deported  will
         be relevant to Article 8, is where it is an additional factor to be
         weighed in the balance, with  other  factors  which  by  themselves
         engage  Article  8.  Suppose,  in  this  case,  the  appellant  had
         established firm family ties in this country, then the availability
         of continuing medical treatment here, coupled with  his  dependence
         on the family here for support, together establish  'private  life'
         under Article 8. That conclusion would  not  involve  a  comparison
         between medical facilities here  and  those  in  Zimbabwe.  Such  a
         finding would not offend the principle  expressed  above  that  the
         United Kingdom is under no Convention obligation to provide medical
         treatment here when it is not available in the country to which the
         appellant is to be deported."

27. However, this is  not  a  case  where  there  was  a  lack  of  medical
    facilities in Nigeria. The FtTJ found the cost of treatment in  Nigeria
    was similar and as his daughter was prepared to fund the  cost  of  his
    treatment privately here then she would clearly be able to continue the
    same arrangement in Nigeria.


28. Accordingly, when the FtTJ  found  there  was  nothing  exceptional  or
    compelling about his situation I am satisfied that he was dealing  with
    the appellant's medical situation. Whilst his condition was regrettable
    it was not something that had developed in the United  Kingdom  but  it
    was a condition he suffered with in Nigeria and had received  treatment
    for.

29. The appellant's daughter acknowledged that her father could apply as  a
    dependant relative but he took  a  decision  to  try  and  remain  here
    outside of the Rules.

30. His whole family live in Nigeria  and  his  wife,  of  many  years,  is
    waiting for him there. His whole life was there  and  whilst  the  FtTJ
    accepted there was family life between him and his daughter that had to
    be balanced against the family life he has in Nigeria.

31. The FtTJ was aware of all these factors when he refused the appeal  and
    nothing I have heard today persuades me there has been any error.

32. The grandchild's life is in the United Kingdom and his relationship  to
    the appellant must be viewed in  that  context.  The  daughter  is  not
    financially dependant on her  father  and  provides  financial  support
    towards medical bills. She is an adult and their  relationship  but  be
    considered in that light.

33. I therefore find there is no error in law  and  the  original  decision
    shall stand.


    DECISION


34. There was no material error. I uphold the original decision.


35. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction pursuant to
    Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I see
    no reason to alter that order.


Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no amendment to the order made in the First-tier.


Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




