
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/32378/2015
     IA/32385/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 August 2017                            |On 20 September 2017          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Arine [C]
                                    [P D]
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr N Aborisade, Quintessence Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the remaking of the decision First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Taylor
    which was promulgated on 23 November 2016 and set aside  by  me  on  12
    July 2017. For convenience, the Error of Law Decision and  Reasons  are
    annexed below.

2.   The first appellant came to  the  United  Kingdom  in  September  2010,
    following the birth of the second appellant, her daughter in  April  of
    that year. They had entry clearance until 15 March  2011.   Application
    for an extension was refused on 13 April 2011.  On 24  June  2014  they
    applied to remain in the United Kingdom on  the  basis  of  family  and
    private life with the sponsor, John [C], a United Kingdom citizen.  The
    Secretary of State's findings are  fully  set  out  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision which I need not rehearse.

3.   A principal issue before the First-tier Tribunal was whether there  was
    a genuine and subsisting relationship between the first  appellant  and
    the sponsor, which concluded that they were.  Those  findings  of  fact
    have been preserved, but fresh material has been placed  before  me  by
    both  parties,  concerning  subsequent  developments   concerning   the
    relationship between the first appellant and the sponsor.

     The appellants' evidence
4.   I heard evidence first  from  the  first  appellant,  Arine  [C].   She
    adopted her witness statement dated 14 August 2017.  She further stated
    that the reason why the  sponsor  had  not  attended  the  hearing  was
    because he believes that his family will disown him if he does  so.   A
    signed statement from the sponsor dated 14 August 2017 had  been  filed
    and served.  I indicated at the outset of the hearing that  bearing  in
    mind there  were  contentious  issues  to  be  decided,  the  sponsor's
    statement would carry little weight as he  was  not  present  to  offer
    himself for cross-examination. I invited the appellants' representative
    to consider making an application to adjourn the hearing so the sponsor
    could attend and was told in terms that the appellants did not wish  to
    have the matter adjourned.

5.   In cross-examination, the first appellant stated that  she  lived  with
    the sponsor on a permanent basis. This evidence  did  not  sit  happily
    with Appendix E of the appellants' evidence, which  is  a  letter  from
    Agnes Hemingway, a BME advocate, stating:

         "[the first appellant] further highlighted that on  many  occasions
         she and her sibling would have to leave the  home  temporary  [sic]
         and take up lodging at friends so as to avoid the abuse."

6.   It may be that there was a misunderstanding between  Ms  Hemingway  and
    the first appellant.  The letter, dated  12  July  2017,  seems  to  be
    riddled with anomaly: a reference to a sibling rather than a  daughter;
    and later a statement about seeking legal counsel "from a local GP".  I
    can derive very little assistance from what Ms Hemingway says  in  that
    letter.

7.   The first appellant accepted that she had received  a  letter  dated  8
    February 2017 from Andrew Jackson & Co,  a  firm  of  solicitors.   The
    letter read as follows:

         "We  act  for  your  husband  John  [C]  in  connection  with   the
         matrimonial situation between you both.   He  informs  as  follows:
         there has never been a proper marriage between you both.  There  is
         only the legal shell of a  marriage.   You  have  never  agreed  to
         sexual relations with him and you have acted in a very cold  manner
         to him and shown him no affection throughout the marriage.


         In view of this our client now intends to take nullity  proceedings
         against you to have the  marriage  annulled.   Our  client  can  no
         longer stand your continuing to live in his home, which is  in  his
         sole name and which he has lived in for  many  years.   Our  client
         requests that you leave the house now permanently.   We  understand
         that you have friends you can stay with as you frequently stay with
         them.  We strongly advise you to go to  a  solicitor  of  your  own
         choice to obtain your own legal advice,  taking  this  letter  with
         you, and that you do so urgently.


         Yours faithfully"


8.   The Appellant says that that letter was placed under her bedroom  door,
    not through the exterior post box as  she  would  have  expected.   She
    spoke of a conversation between herself  and  the  sponsor  asking  him
    about the meaning of the letter, which apparently led to a conversation
    about the signing of a  prenuptial  agreement.  This  she  thought  was
    somewhat odd since the marriage  had  already  endured  for  some  five
    years.

9.   The first appellant said that it was the sponsor's daughter,  Joy,  who
    tried to put pressure on him to break off the relationship and  he  did
    not want to come to court to argue against his daughter.

     The respondent's evidence
10.  Joy [P] is the daughter of the sponsor. She adopted  her  statement  as
    her evidence in  chief.   She  dealt  with  a  number  of  matters  and
    suggested that when the sponsor signed his witness statement he did not
    appreciate its content or understand its consequences.  She  said  that
    the sponsor did not wish to be at  the  hearing.  As  the  hearing  was
    taking place he was with his partner, Odette, with whom he has been  in
    a relationship for something in the  order  of  eighteen  months.   She
    referred to them recently taking a holiday all together in Benidorm.

11.  She stated that the sponsor booked an appointment to  go  and  see  the
    firm of Andrew Jackson & Co in February  of  this  year  and  that  she
    attended that appointment with him at his request.  He was  crying  and
    emotional while in the office.  He talked  very  much  about  his  late
    wife, Rose, who was the sister of the first appellant,  and  seemed  to
    feel that it was her  dying  wish  that  she  looked  after  the  first
    appellant, if necessary by marrying her.

12.   Joy  [P]  says  the  sponsor  signed  a  public  statement  that   the
    relationship was no longer subsisting on 7 February 2017, and he did so
    in her presence.  She was not challenged on  this  by  the  appellants'
    Counsel. Her evidence was that the first appellant is not living  full-
    time at the sponsor's home at Wallasey Road, and that  there  had  been
    occasions when the police had been summoned because of breaches of  the
    peace. On one occasion, the first appellant said that both the  sponsor
    and Odette, his girlfriend, were to leave the property.


     Submissions on behalf of the appellants
13.  Mr Aborisade, who acts for both appellants, made clear in opening  that
    the appellants' case was that the public statement was  a  forgery.  He
    repeated this in closing submissions. As recorded  above,  he  did  not
    challenge Joy [P]'s evidence that the document had been signed  in  her
    presence, nor (when I raised the  matter)  did  he  seek  to  have  her
    recalled so he could do so.

14.  Mr Aborisade submits that there have been many trials and  tribulations
    that the first appellant has had to contend  with.  He  says  that  the
    sponsor's daughter, Joy [P], has displayed a hostile animus towards the
    first appellant and wants  her  out  of  the  country  to  protect  her
    inheritance. He relies on the findings at the First-tier Tribunal  that
    the relationship between  the  first  appellant  and  the  sponsor  was
    genuine and subsisting. He suggests that the evidence of Joy [P]  is  a
    cunningly orchestrated smokescreen to frustrate this appeal succeeding.
    He refers to an earlier signed  statement  from  the  sponsor  dated  2
    November 2016, in which the sponsor denied all the allegations levelled
    by his family members against the first appellant,  and  asserted  that
    the sponsor loves the first appellant, and that the second appellant is
    like a child to him. In  his  written  submissions,  he  describes  the
    sponsor's daughter as "a meddlesome interloper".

15.   Mr  Aborisade  submitted  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellants  to  return  to  Nigeria.  He   states,   in   his   written
    representations, that the sponsor has some medical  issues  which  will
    not permit him to love outside the United Kingdom. He did not elaborate
    on this in his  oral  submissions,  nor  refer  me  to  any  supporting
    evidence. At appendix C of the  supplementary  material  was  a  letter
    dated 6 June 2017 from Professor  F  Joseph,  consultant  physician  in
    diabetes and endocrinology,  to  Mr  Colin  Chan,  consultant  vascular
    surgeon. It discusses the sponsor's diabetic condition and  advices  on
    future care. There is no suggestion that he is unfit to travel or  live
    overseas, or any material from which a conclusion could be reached that
    Nigeria lacks the medical facilities to care for his condition.

16.  There are, submits Mr Aborisade, insurmountable obstacles to the  first
    appellant and the sponsor relocating to Nigeria, and the best interests
    of the second appellant, under section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009, lie in her remaining in  the  United  Kingdom
    where she has lived for all but the early months of her life.

     Submissions on behalf of the respondent
17.  Mr Avery, for the Secretary of State, submitted that in  the  light  of
    the more recent evidence, there is no family life to consider  for  the
    purposes of Article 8. He states that whatever may have been  the  case
    previously,  the  relationship  between  the  sponsor  and  the   first
    appellant is now firmly at an end. Solicitors have been instructed. The
    second appellant has been compelled (by the threat of legal process) to
    leave the matrimonial home. The sponsor has signed a public declaration
    that the relationship is at an end.

18.  Mr Avery points to the complete absence of evidence from the  appellant
    to point to a meaningful emotional relationship between the sponsor and
    the second  appellant.  There  is  nothing,  for  example,  to  suggest
    engagement with her schooling. To the contrary, Joy [P]'s  evidence  is
    to the effect that he has no interest in, and precious  little  contact
    with, the second appellant. Mr Avery points to EV (Philippines) & Ors v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, and the
    oft-cited remarks of Lewison LJ at paragraph [60],  that  "Just  as  we
    cannot provide medical treatment for the world, so  we  cannot  educate
    the world".

     Assessment
19.  Those acting for the appellant have not put a shred of evidence  before
    the tribunal to support the contention of forgery in  relation  to  the
    sponsor's  public  statement  that  the  relationship  was  no   longer
    subsisting. I consider it ill-judged on the part of the Mr Aborisade to
    have made (and persisted in) such an allegation without any  foundation
    for so doing. I proceed on the basis that the document is genuine.

20.  The Supreme Court has recently provided assistance as  to  the  correct
    approach in determining cases of this type. See R (on the  applications
    of Agyarko & Anor) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2017]
    UKSC 11 and in particular the judgment of Lord  Reed,  with  which  the
    other Supreme Court Justices all agreed.  It is common  ground  between
    the parties' representatives that this approach should  be  adopted  in
    this case.

21.  On the evidence as I find it to be, whatever may  have  been  the  case
    hitherto, there is currently no family life enjoyed by the first or the
    second appellant with the sponsor such as  to  engage  Article  8.  The
    uncontroverted evidence that the  sponsor  signed  a  public  statement
    asserting  that  the  relationship  is  no  longer  subsisting  carries
    considerable weight. Equally I find  that  the  sponsor's  relationship
    with the second appellant, to the extent that  it  exists  at  all,  is
    negligible and certainly not that of parent-child.

22.  As to insurmountable obstacle,  there  is  no  material  before  me  to
    suggest that the sponsor cannot relocate  to  Nigeria  with  the  first
    appellant, were that  to  be  his  wish.  There  may  be  a  degree  of
    inconvenience but nothing more. That being the case, this  appeal  must
    fail.

23.  However if (contrary to my primary finding), there were to be a  family
    life in existence, capable of protection  under  Article  8,  then  the
    issue of proportionality would arise in the  context  of  Agyarko.  The
    approach commended by Lord Reed is at paragraphs [56] and [57]:


            [56] ... The  reference  to  exceptional  circumstances  in  the
            European case law means  that,  in  cases  involving  precarious
            family life, "something  very  compelling  ...  is  required  to
            outweigh the public interest", applying a proportionality  test.
            The Court of Appeal went  on  to  apply  that  approach  to  the
            interpretation  of  the  Rules  concerning  the  deportation  of
            foreign criminals, where the  same  phrase  appears;  and  their
            approach was approved by this court, in that context, in  Hesham
            Ali.

            [57] That approach is also appropriate when a court or  tribunal
            is  considering  whether  a  refusal  of  leave  to  remain   is
            compatible with article 8 in the context  of  precarious  family
            life. Ultimately, it  has  to  decide  whether  the  refusal  is
            proportionate in the particular case before  it,  balancing  the
            strength of the public interest in the removal of the person  in
            question against the impact on private and family life. In doing
            so, it should  give  appropriate  weight  to  the  Secretary  of
            State's policy, expressed in the  Rules  and  the  Instructions,
            that  the  public  interest  in  immigration  control   can   be
            outweighed, when considering an application for leave to  remain
            brought by a person in the UK in  breach  of  immigration  laws,
            only where there are "insurmountable obstacles" or  "exceptional
            circumstances" as defined. It must  also  consider  all  factors
            relevant to the specific  case  in  question,  including,  where
            relevant, the  matters  discussed  in  paras  51-52  above.  The
            critical issue will generally be whether, giving due  weight  to
            the strength of the public interest in the removal of the person
            in the case before it,  the  article  8  claim  is  sufficiently
            strong to outweigh it.  In  general,  in  cases  concerned  with
            precarious family life, a very strong  or  compelling  claim  is
            required to outweigh the public interest in immigration control.
            (emphasis added)

24.  It would  not,  in  my  opinion,  be  disproportionate  for  the  first
    appellant to return to Nigeria, where she has lived for the majority of
    her life. Her family life with the sponsor (if, contrary to my  primary
    finding, it subsists) was forged  largely  when  her  presence  in  the
    United Kingdom was unlawful or precarious. It therefore carries  little
    weight.

25.  What then of the second appellant, a child of 7, who  according  to  Mr
    Aborisade, has lived in this country (as at the date  pf  the  hearing)
    for fifteen days short  of  seven  years.  He  submits  that  the  best
    interests of the child are to remain in the United Kingdom.   He  draws
    particular attention to an order of Birkenhead  County  Court  dated  2
    April 2010 giving parental responsibility of the  second  appellant  to
    the sponsor (page 52 of the bundle before the First-tier Tribunal).  He
    submits that  the  sponsor  is  the  de  facto  father  of  the  second
    appellant, she having known no other father figure  in  her  life  thus
    far.

26.  In my judgment, the evidence of  Joy  [P]  is  to  be  preferred.   She
    states that there is little if anything by way of an  ongoing  parental
    relationship between the sponsor and the second appellant.  He may have
    secured a court order but he does not appear to have  exercised  it  in
    any way at all.  There is  no  evidence  from  the  school  showing  an
    involvement of the sponsor in  the  second  appellant's  education  and
    there is no evidence from the second  appellant  (whether  directly  or
    indirectly) to indicate that there is a genuine paternal  relationship.
    The second appellant's best interests are served by remaining with  her
    mother, the first appellant, and by returning with her to  Nigeria.  In
    any event, it was conceded by Mr Aborisade that the second  appellant's
    appeal was parasitic upon that of the first appellant. It follows  that
    the dismissal of the first appellant's appeal must result in the second
    appellant's appeal similarly being dismissed.

27.  For  each  and  all  of  those  reasons  these  conjoined  appeals  are
    dismissed under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  under  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside of the Rules.



Notice of Decision

   1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been set aside,  it  is
      remade as follows.


   2) The appeal is dismissed under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  human
      rights grounds.


   3) No anonymity direction is made.




Signed   Mark Hill                               Date          18  September
2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

                                   ANNEXE

                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS




                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/32378/2015
     IA/32385/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 July 2017                               |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                 THE SECRETARY OF STATE FORT THE HOME OFFICE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Arine [C]
                                    [P D]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Shittu, Quintessence Solicitors


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor  which  was
    promulgated on 23 November 2016.  It relates to a mother and child, the
    mother being a citizen of Nigeria born on 22 April 1982.  She is  in  a
    relationship with the sponsor in this case, John [C], who is  a  United
    Kingdom citizen.

2.   The judge considered this matter under the  Immigration  Rules  and  in
    particular paragraph 276ADE. Having heard  evidence  and  made  certain
    findings, he came to the  conclusion  that  there  was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship between the first appellant and the sponsor and
    that there would be insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's  return
    to Nigeria.  The judge's findings at paragraph 15 read as follows:

         "The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria and has lived there for most
         of her life and she has family living in Nigeria.  If  I  was  only
         considering the appellant I do not consider that living in  Nigeria
         would entail very serious hardship.  However, the  sponsor  is  the
         spouse of the appellant, they were married in the UK and have  been
         married since August 2011, being five years.  The sponsor was  born
         in the UK, he is a UK citizen, he is aged  66  and  has  spent  his
         entire life living in the UK.  He has given  credible  evidence  of
         the difficulties which he would face if he had to leave the  United
         Kingdom."


3.   The judge then continues:

         "I am satisfied that the combination of these  several  factors  is
         such that expecting the sponsor to relocate to Nigeria would  cause
         him very serious hardship.  For the appellant to leave  the  UK  on
         her own would deprive a UK citizen of his spouse,  which  would  be
         contrary to the guidance in the 2015 case of Mirza CSIH 28."


4.   The judge then went on to consider the position of  the  child  on  the
    basis that he had allowed  the  mother's  appeal  and  stated  that  to
    require a 5 year old to return without  parents  would  be  exceptional
    circumstances to be considered outside the Rules, and he went on in due
    course to allow the child's appeal in those circumstances.

5.   The primary ground upon which permission to appeal was granted  related
    to an alleged misdirection on  law  concerning  the  interpretation  of
    insurmountable obstacles, namely very serious hardship.  Reference  was
    made in the grounds of appeal to the case of Agyarko  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    440.  I need not recite the facts of that case save to  say  that  they
    are strikingly similar to those in the present one.

6.   Although the judge made reference to certain authorities,  he  did  not
    cite Agyarko and it seems from the passage which I have quoted that  he
    had not fully  understood  the  high  hurdle  which  is  posed  by  the
    expression  insurmountable   obstacles.   On   any   reading   of   the
    determination, the judge did not have the Agyarko test in mind and that
    accordingly did not make findings on correct understanding of the law.

7.   This is a material error of law which leads inevitably to the  decision
    being set  aside.   Since  the  judge's  determination  of  the  second
    appellant's appeal was predicated  on  his  flawed  assessment  of  the
    first's, it must also follow that the  decision  concerning  the  child
    should similarly be set aside.

8.   Since the basic facts are not in dispute,  both  matters  can  properly
    remain within the Upper Tribunal for the decision to be remade.

9.   I so order and will adjourn the matter for the remake decision to  take
    place at a later date on the first available date after  21  days,  any
    additional evidence to be put before the court and served on  the  Home
    Office seven days prior to the hearing. Skeleton  arguments  should  be
    served three clear days before the resumed hearing.

Notice of Decision

   1) An error of law having been found,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal is set aside.
   2) The matter is to be retained in the Upper Tribunal for the decision to
      be remade.
   3) The resumed hearing is to be given a time estimate of half a  day  and
      relisted before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill,  if  available,  but
      not reserved.
   4) Any additional evidence to be filed and served at least 7  days  prior
      to the resumed hearing.
   5) Skeleton arguments to be lodged at least three clear days prior to the
      resumed hearing.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     10 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

