

                                    [pic]
ST
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/32816/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 4 July 2017                                |On 12 July 2017              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                                  MR M N K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Fielden, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who appealed against the decision
    to refuse his human rights claim. His appeal against that  refusal  was
    dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal D A Pears  ("the  FTTJ"|)
    in a decision promulgated on 27 October 2016.

 2. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal  but,  given
    my references to the appellant's own and his family's circumstances,  I
    make such a direction now.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  P  J  M
    Hollingworth on 2 May 2017 as follows:

         "1.      It is arguable that the Judge  has  attached  insufficient
             weight to the findings of fact set out at paragraph 67 of  the
             decision, in that it was accepted that  the  Appellant's  time
             living in Nigeria had been limited and was many years ago.

         2. Given the periods of time spent away from Nigeria and the age of
             the Appellant at the relevant junctures, it is  arguable  that
             the Judge has not applied the full and correct construction in
             relation to "integration" in evaluating the relevant  factors.
             It is arguable that the Judge has not  set  out  a  sufficient
             analysis as to the capacity of the Appellant to participate in
             and operate on a day-to-day basis in Nigeria.

         3.  Whilst  the  Judge  has  made  findings  in  relation  to   the
             Appellant's family members in Nigeria,  it  is  arguable  that
             these findings have not been juxtaposed with the  question  of
             the Appellant's capacity to  integrate  given  the  period  of
             absence from Nigeria.

         4. At paragraph 67 the Judge has stated that there is  no  evidence
             showing problems of employment  for  young  men  such  as  the
             Appellant in Nigeria. It is arguable that in this context  the
             Judge has set out an  insufficient  analysis  of  the  factors
             appertaining to the  Appellant  in  contradistinction  to  the
             general position.

         5. Whilst the Judge at paragraph 66 has stated  that  some  of  the
             details  of  the  case  were  not  accepted,  the  fundamental
             findings in relation to  credibility  remain  intact  for  the
             purposes of carrying out a more extensive analysis in relation
             to the concept of integration."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 5. Miss Fielden, for  the  appellant,  relied  on  her  written  and  oral
    submissions; she also adopted the reasons for the grant  of  permission
    to appeal. She relied on the guidance  in  Hesham  Ali  (Iraq)  v  SSHD
    [2016] UKSC 60, particularly paragraphs 115 and  82-84.   Miss  Fielden
    submitted that the FTTJ's analysis of proportionality was inadequate in
    that insufficient account had been taken of the  appellant's  prolonged
    absence from Nigeria and his departure from that country at the age  of
    7.  As a result the analysis was materially  flawed.  Furthermore,  the
    appellant's stay in the  UK  since  2003  had  been  tolerated  by  the
    respondent.  The  appellant's  "extreme  absence"  from  Nigeria  since
    childhood had not been taken appropriately into  account  in  assessing
    the consequences for him on return and the impact  on  his  ability  to
    integrate. Although the appellant could not  satisfy  the  requirements
    inn paragraph 276ADE(1)(v), he had spent more than half his life in the
    UK and this was a powerful factor to be taken into consideration.  Miss
    Fielden accepted there had been no requirement for the FTTJ to consider
    the appeal outside paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules.

 6. For the respondent, Mr Bramble noted that  the  FTTJ  had  started  his
    findings and conclusions by recognising that the  appellant  had  spent
    more than half his life in the UK. It could not be said that  the  FTTJ
    had not been aware of the appellant's  history.  This  was  a  thorough
    decision and the quality of the evaluation could  not  be  faulted,  he
    submitted. The FTTJ had  been  entitled  to  have  concerns  about  the
    credibility of the appellant's evidence, particularly  with  regard  to
    family and a family home in Nigeria.

 7. In reply, Miss Fielden conceded that the appellant  did  not  challenge
    the FTTJ's adverse credibility findings or the findings of  fact,  only
    the evaluation with regard to the appellant's ability to  integrate  on
    return.

Discussion

 8. The FTTJ  carefully  noted  the  appellant's  evidence.  He  identified
    concerns about the credibility of that evidence. Those concerns are not
    challenged before me. Indeed the findings of fact are not challenged at
    all, as Miss Fielden made clear.

 9. The FTTJ set out at length  the  appellant's  immigration  history.  He
    recorded that the appellant had lived more than half his life in the UK
    (paragraphs 2, 58 and 66).

10. The FTTJ found the appellant had family in  Nigeria  and  that  he  had
    contact with that family  (paragraph 63). He found  the  appellant  had
    connections through family with places in Nigeria other than Wukari and
    his father had accommodation in Nigeria after he retired until at least
    as recently as 2013 (paragraph 64).  The FTTJ  accepted  the  appellant
    had lived more than half his life in the UK, had significant members of
    his family in the UK, has  friends  here  and  was  educated  here.  He
    recognised the appellant identified closely with the UK.

11. The FTTJ noted the appellant's "time living in Nigeria has been limited
    and was many years ago".  This statement is wholly consistent with  the
    evidence that the appellant lived in Nigeria between the ages of 7  and
    10 (paragraph 24) and that he did not then return to  live  there.  The
    FTTJ took into account the  appellant  had  then  "only  been  back  to
    Nigeria for three weeks at the end of 2002 and beginning of  2003  when
    his grandfather was dying".

12. The submission that the FTTJ has failed to take into account the length
    of time the appellant has lived in the UK and  his  age  when  he  last
    lived in Nigeria is wholly unsustainable given the number of references
    to these facts and the context in which they have been referenced.  The
    FTTJ has set out a  careful  history  of  the  appellant's  background,
    immigration history and the countries in which he  has  lived  at  each
    stage of his life. These findings are not challenged by  the  appellant
    before me and it is clear to the  reader  that  they  were  taken  into
    account in the assessment as to whether the appellant had  demonstrated
    that there were very significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  into
    Nigeria on return (as required by paragraph 276ADE(1)((vi)).

13. Furthermore, the FTTJ has made a positive finding at paragraph 64  that
    the appellant has relatives in Nigeria and connections  through  family
    with places other than Wukari.  These are findings taken  into  account
    by the FTTJ in his assessment of the nature of  the  obstacles  to  his
    integration on return. It is  implicit  that  the  presence  of  family
    members in Nigeria would be of assistance in supporting  the  appellant
    in his efforts to re-integrate notwithstanding the length  of  time  he
    has lived outside Nigeria.  The FTTJ, in  taking  those  into  account,
    reminds himself of the  limited  period  the  appellant  has  lived  in
    Nigeria (paragraph  67).   He  notes  the  appellant's  evidence  about
    getting a job in  Nigeria.   The  burden  of  proving  he  fulfils  the
    criteria in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) is on the appellant.  There  is  no
    challenge before me to the finding  of  the  FTTJ  that  "there  is  no
    evidence showing problems of employment for young men such  as  him  in
    Nigeria. He is supported financially by his family in the UK and  I  am
    unclear why there could not be assistance from his family if he had  to
    live in Nigeria".   This is a finding which was open to the FTTJ and is
    unchallenged.  It is  part  of  the  FTTJ's  analysis  of  the  claimed
    obstacles to reintegration, and justifiably so.

14. I have been referred to the principles in paragraphs 115 and  82-84  of
    Hesham Ali. I am satisfied that the FTTJ took a  holistic  approach  to
    the issue of whether the appellant had demonstrated  he  fulfilled  the
    criteria in  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).   He  addressed  all  issues  of
    relevance to the application of that paragraph.  There is no suggestion
    he did not consider all the evidence or  that  his  findings  of  fact,
    including adverse credibility  findings,  were  not  sustainable.   The
    issue for the appellant is the analysis of the evidence. However,  this
    is a detailed and careful examination  of  the  evidence.   The  FTTJ's
    decision that the  appellant  had  not  demonstrated  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to his integration on return  is  sustainable  on
    the facts as found.  The decision is well-reasoned.  The FTTJ has  been
    careful to take into account the appellant's residence history, his age
    at each stage of  that  history  and  his  very  limited  residence  in
    Nigeria.  He has found against the appellant as regards  the  existence
    of family members and property in Nigeria and  this  finding  has,  not
    unreasonably, tainted the assertions of the appellant  as  regards  the
    obstacles to integration on return.

15. For the avoidance of doubt, I do not  accept  the  submission  for  the
    appellant that  the  respondent  has  tolerated  the  presence  of  the
    appellant in the UK. This is not an issue of relevance to consideration
    of  whether  the  appellant   fulfils   the   criteria   in   Paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi). In any event, this is not a case where the appellant has
    sought expeditiously to rectify his lack  of  immigration  status.  His
    visit visa expired in June 2003 and it  was  not  until  2013  that  he
    applied for leave to remain.  The appellant had effectively gone  under
    the radar in the interim. Irrespective of the impact of his minority at
    the time, it cannot be said that the respondent tolerated his  unlawful
    presence here.

16. In summary, whilst it was open to the  FTTJ  to  come  to  a  different
    finding as regards the ability of the appellant to integrate on return,
    his finding on the issue  was  open  to  him  and  sustainable  on  the
    evidence. The  FTTJ  has  given  full  and  detailed  reasons  for  his
    decision.  As Lord Hoffmann said in Piglowska v Piglowski [1999] 1  WLR
    1360, 1372, "reasons should be read on the assumption that,  unless  he
    has demonstrated the contrary, the judge knew how he should perform his
    functions and which matters he should take into account". He went on to
    say that an "appellate court should resist the  temptation  to  subvert
    the principle that they should not substitute their own discretion  for
    that of the judge by a narrow textual analysis which  enables  them  to
    claim that he misdirected himself".

17. I am satisfied that the FTTJ applied the  correct  legal  test  to  the
    issue of whether  the  appellant  had  demonstrated  he  fulfilled  the
    criteria in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

18. For these reasons, there is no error of law in the decision and it must
    stand.

Decision

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

20. I do not set aside the decision.

21. This appeal is dismissed.





Signed            A M Black                  Date        10 July 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed           A M Black                   Date        10 July 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black
