
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/32820/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 January 2018              |On 24 January 2018               |
|                                |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                          MR TABISH HASSAN QURESHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr. Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 19.8.89. He  appealed
against a decision by the Respondent dated 30.9.15  refusing  to  grant  him
permanent residence in the UK. He appealed to the First  tier  Tribunal  and
his appeal was heard on 17.11.16. In a decision promulgated  on  13  January
2017, First tier Tribunal Judge Thorne dismissed his appeal,  on  the  basis
that  the  Appellant  had  not  proved  that  he  met  the  requirements  of
regulation 10(5) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

2.    The Appellant sought permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
which was refused by First tier Tribunal Judge Scott-Baker,  in  a  decision
dated 31.9.17. Upon renewal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  in  a  decision  dated
4.10.17, Upper Tribunal Judge Gill found as follows:

    "The renewed grounds contend that it is open to the respondent to  have
    obtained his ex-wife's employment history from  HMRC.  However,  it  is
    wholly unarguable that the respondent had any obligation to do so.

    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Thorne was unarguably entitled to find
    that the appellant had not established that his ex-wife was  exercising
    treaty rights as at the date of his divorce from his wife.

    Given that the appellant had  not  established  that  his  ex-wife  was
    exercising Treaty rights as at the date of divorce, the outcome of  the
    appeal before Judge Thorne could not arguably have been any  different,
    on any legitimate view, whatever errors he may have made in relation to
    the remainder of his findings, including his finding on  the  issue  of
    domestic violence. In saying this, I should say that I am aware of  the
    fact that Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Scott-Baker considered  that
    Judge Thorne may have made some errors of law.

    There is no arguably material error of law in  the  decision  of  Judge
    Thorne."

3.    However, in clear error, given the terms  of  Judge  Gill's  decision,
permission to appeal was granted to the Upper Tribunal.

Hearing

4.    At the hearing before me, Mr Harrison  submitted  that  the  grant  of
permission to appeal had clearly made  in  error.  I  agree.  The  Appellant
attended without a representative so I explained that I had no  jurisdiction
to hear his appeal because permission to appeal had been  granted  in  error
and that his remedy was to make a fresh application.

Decision

5.    There is no material error of  law  in  the  decision  of  First  tier
Tribunal Judge Thorne and that decision is upheld.


Rebecca Chapman
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

23 January 2018
