
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA323582014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25th April 2016                         |On 25th May 2016                 |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                             Annah Kapala Sloane
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss P Solanki, Counsel instructed by Braitch
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of  Zimbabwe  born  on  24th  January
    1954.  She was first granted leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    visitor sometime in 2002, and  thereafter  she  was  granted  leave  to
    remain as a student  until  31st  August  2006.   Thereafter  she  made
    various unsuccessful applications for further leave to remain until she
    was granted discretionary leave to remain for a period of  three  years
    from 21st August 2009.  On  7th  July  2009  the  Appellant  married  a
    British citizen, Peter Sloane.  He died on  26th  May  2010.   On  20th
    March 2014 the Appellant applied for indefinite leave to  remain  as  a
    bereaved partner.  That application was refused for the reasons set out
    in the Respondent's letter of 23rd July 2014.  The Appellant  appealed,
    and her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  P  Holmes
    (the Judge) sitting at Stoke-on-Trent on 4th February 2015.  He decided
    to dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on  human  rights
    grounds for the reasons given in his Decision  dated  3rd  March  2015.
    The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision,  and  on  12th  May
    2015 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant's application for indefinite leave to remain was  refused
    under paragraph BPILR.1.1(d) of Appendix FM of the Statement of Changes
    in Immigration Rules HC 395.  This was because the  Appellant  did  not
    satisfy  the  requirements  of  paragraph  E-BPILR.1.2  in   that   the
    Appellant's last grant of limited leave was  not  as  a  partner  of  a
    British citizen or a person settled in the UK; or a  bereaved  partner.
    The Judge dismissed the appeal because it was not clear from the letter
    of the Respondent dated 21st August 2009 on what  basis  the  Appellant
    had been granted her least leave to remain.  However, there was  before
    the Judge an extract from the Respondent's computer file  stating  that
    "the Applicant was granted DL to continue her studies and as the spouse
    of a UK citizen".  The Judge decided that on a true  interpretation  of
    the relevant paragraph, this was insufficient to meet  the  requirement
    that the Appellant's last grant of limited leave was as a partner.   It
    established only that "the fact that the applicant  was  married  to  a
    British citizen was taken into account as part of the reasons  for  the
    exercise of discretion in her favour."  At the  hearing,  Miss  Solanki
    argued that the Judge had erred in law in coming  to  this  conclusion.
    There was ample evidence before the Judge that the Appellant  had  last
    been granted limited leave at least in part as the spouse of a  British
    citizen.  The relevant paragraph did not require the Appellant to  have
    been granted limited leave under Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules,
    nor that such leave had to be granted exclusively as a partner.  It was
    beyond dispute that the Appellant had last been  granted  leave  for  a
    limited period, and was therefore limited leave, and it did not  matter
    if that leave was granted on a discretionary basis.

 4. Mr Diwnycz did not argue to the contrary, and I find that  the  Judge's
    interpretation of paragraph E-BPILR.1.2(a) amounted to an error of law.
     The Judge found that the requirement of that paragraph was limited  in
    a way not expressly stated nor implied by the paragraph itself.  In  my
    view nothing in law requires the paragraph to be restricted in  meaning
    as found by the Judge.  The simple facts of  the  mater  are  that  the
    Appellant was married to a British citizen, and  the  information  from
    the Respondent's computer file informs me that  she  was  last  granted
    limited leave to remain at least in part as his  spouse.   I  therefore
    set aside the decision of the Judge.

Remade Decision

 5. Having set aside the decision of the Judge, I  decided  to  proceed  to
    remake the decision in the appeal.  It was not necessary for me to hear
    any further evidence, nor submissions from  the  representatives.   The
    Appellant had been refused indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  sole
    narrow issue provided by paragraph E-BPILR.1.2  of  Appendix  FM.   For
    reasons already given, I find that  requirement  to  be  satisfied,  in
    which event I  find  that  the  Appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
    paragraph BPILR.1.1 of Appendix FM.  That being the case, the appeal is
    allowed.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.




Signed                              Date 25 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or is payable and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                              Date 25 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

