
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/32040/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport           |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 July 2015                            |On 29 September 2015            |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            mrs doreen de la cruz

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Irwin Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Michael McGarvey of McGarvey Immigration and
Asylum


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  O'Rourke)  allowing  the
    respondent's appeal against a decision taken on 24 July 2014 to  refuse
    further leave to remain and to remove the respondent from the UK.

Introduction

 3. The respondent has lived in the UK since 2010 as a Tier 4  student  and
    then as a Tier 4 post study worker with leave valid until 30 May  2014.
    She qualified as a  nurse  in  the  Philippines  and  speaks  excellent
    English. She has a degree in nursing from Glasgow Caledonian University
    and works as a live-in carer for PC who has  progressive  MS.  She  has
    been in a relationship with LT, a UK citizen, since 2011; they broke up
    in January 2014 but got back together in  September  2014.  They  lived
    together except when the respondent was living in as a carer (about two
    weeks  a  month).  The  respondent  did  not  want  to  return  to  the
    Philippines to make an application under the  Immigration  Rules  ("the
    Rules") for financial reasons. She has a child in the Philippines.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  respondent's  identity   and
    nationality but concluded that the requirements of the Rules  were  not
    met and there were no grounds for granting leave outside the Rules.

The Appeal

 5. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Columbus House on 30 January 2015. She was not  represented.
    The First-tier Tribunal found that the respondent's  arguments  against
    return were primarily economic ones and the requirements of  the  Rules
    were not met. However, her relationship with LT engaged Article  8  and
    she  would  not  be  able  to  replicate  that  relationship   in   the
    Philippines. The respondent could probably comply  with  the  Rules  if
    properly advised and was not a drain on the public purse,  providing  a
    valuable service to society as a nurse. Removal was not proportionate.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  in
    failing to  consider  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,  Asylum  and
    Immigration Act 2002 (ground 1). The  judge  further  erred  by  giving
    weight in the assessment of proportionality to the possibility that the
    appellant could probably comply with the Rules (ground 3).

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Deans  on  7
    April 2015 on grounds 1 and 3. Permission to appeal was refused on  two
    further grounds.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 9. Mr Richards submitted that the judge gave weight to  the  finding  that
    the respondent could  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  with  no
    explanation and it was not for the judge to speculate on a future event
    and to give it weight  in  the  Article  8  assessment.  There  was  no
    reference to section 117B and the appeal was allowed  on  private  life
    only - under section 117B(v) little weight should be given  to  private
    life developed in the UK when immigration  status  is  precarious.  The
    reasons are fundamentally flawed.

10. Mr McGarvey submitted that the judge did consider the  requirements  of
    section  117B  in  substance  and  the  judge  had  the  importance  of
    immigration control in mind. The respondent was financially independent
    and speaks excellent English. The finding in relation to the Rules  did
    not form  part  of  the  Article  8  assessment.  This  was  about  the
    relationship with LT.

11. I have considered Dube (ss. 117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC).  Judges
    are required statutorily to take into account a  number  of  enumerated
    considerations;  the  sections  are  not  an  a  la   carte   menu   of
    considerations. The considerations are not exhaustive.  It  is  not  an
    error of law to fail to refer to section  117A-117D  considerations  if
    the judge has applied  the  test  he  or  she  was  supposed  to  apply
    according to its terms; what matters is substance, not form.

12. In this appeal, the judge did refer to  English  language  ability  and
    financial  independence.  However,  no  account  was   taken   of   the
    considerations set out in sections 117B(5), namely that  little  weight
    should be given to a private life established by a  person  at  a  time
    when the person's immigration status is  precarious.  The  respondent's
    immigration status has been precarious throughout and  the  appeal  was
    expressly allowed on private life grounds. That is a material error  of
    law.

13. I have not found it necessary to make findings regarding ground 3.

14. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal under Article 8 involved the making of an error of law  and  its
    decision cannot stand.



Decision

15. Mr McGarvey invited me to order a rehearing in the First-tier  Tribunal
    if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph  7.2  of
    the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statements  I  consider   that   an
    appropriate course of action. The respondent was not represented at the
    First-tier hearing and there were  no  witness  statements  before  the
    judge. Further evidence and consideration  of  that  evidence  will  be
    required. I find that the error of law infects the decision as a  whole
    and therefore the re-hearing will be de novo  with  all  issues  to  be
    considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

16. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.


Signed   [pic]                      Date 27 September 2015


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


