
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33290/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 September 2018                          |On 9 January 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 huseyin [d]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss V Nassar, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant a national of Turkey applied on 20 August 2014 for an  EEA
    residence card as a non-EEA national who was a family member which  was
    refused on 24 November 2014.  His appeal  against  that  decision  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert (the Judge) who on 21 November
    2016 allowed the appeal but was somewhat unspecific upon which basis he
    did so.

3.   On 24 May 2018 this matter came  before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Chapman who concluded that there was an  error  of  law  and  that  the
    matter should be remade.  It is clear that the Judge's principal  error
    proceeded from an error in  his  understanding  of  the  basis  of  the
    Secretary of State's decision and failing to address  the  significance
    of Section 117B(6) of the NIAA  2002  as  amended,  not  least  in  the
    context of the best interests of the two children of the family who are
    British nationals now aged 14 and 12  years  respectively.   The  Judge
    simply did not address the issue of whether it was reasonable to expect
    the children as British nationals to leave  the  United  Kingdom  where
    they had resided from birth with their mother who had indefinite  leave
    to remain.

4.   The Judge simply failed to address the significance  of  the  potential
    removal.  It was accepted on the information that was before the  Judge
    he correctly recited evidence as to the fact that the children were  in
    schooling, they were settled, they were moving forward with their lives
    in the UK and they were of course  British  citizens.   In  considering
    this matter it is also fair to note that one of the  issues  which  the
    Judge did correctly resolve  was  that  the  Claimant's  conviction  in
    Germany was in 1994 rather than 2004, as had  mistakenly  been  stated,
    and upon which the Secretary of State had founded much of the  decision
    through no fault of her own.

5.   The Claimant's conviction was in 1994 and irrespective of the  guidance
    as to the age of such convictions or  to  what  extent  they  could  be
    relied upon, the fact was that he did not disclose the conviction  when
    he made an application on 16  September  2008.   It  may  be  the  non-
    disclosure was the fault of others, an agent or the person helping with
    the application.  It matters not.  The non-disclosure was his  and  the
    fact was that was a material consideration.  I consider this matter  in
    the context of the case law of MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 60 and  AM
    (Pakistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 11.

6.   It is clear that MA (Pakistan)  has  been  considered  by  the  Supreme
    Court in KO (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC  53.   The  considerations  of  the
    relationship between 117B(6) NIAA 2002 and the general  proportionality
    exercise; as well as whether or not there are powerful reasons  Section
    117B(6) should not be applied.  I apply the law as it is today and I do
    so with reference to the above cases.  I therefore  conclude  that  the
    evidence that was before me and before the Judge was not sufficient  to
    show in the light of  the  conviction  and  its  age  that  there  were
    powerful reasons to override in terms  of  the  Claimant's  immigration
    history or such conduct override the general premise that UK  nationals
    should not be required  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  unless  it  is
    reasonable and proportionate to do so.

7.   In this case Mr Bramble can say no more  than  with  reference  to  the
    conviction.  I conclude having weighed all the evidence particularly in
    relation to the children's education and their  lives  in  the  UK.   I
    reached the conclusion that it is not  reasonable  for  them  to  leave
    under Section 117B(6) NIAA 2002; the public interest does  not  require
    the Claimant's removal.

8.   In those circumstances it therefore seemed to me in the  light  of  the
    case law that it was disproportionate and that is as much as  needs  to
    be discussed in this case of the proportionality  exercise  bearing  in
    mind there is no issue that the Appellant's family and private life  in
    the UK engaged Article 8 ECHR.  The effect of the Secretary of  State's
    decision was a significant interference that the Secretary  of  State's
    decision was lawful and properly served in terms of maintaining  proper
    and secure immigration control.  I concluded on the evidence  that  was
    present and in the light of the provisions of Section 117B(6) that  the
    public interest does not require removal and that the  interference  is
    disproportionate.

9.   In reaching that conclusion I took into account  also  as  required  by
    Section 117A and 117B the public interest question and I note for these
    purposes  that  the  Claimant  speaks  English,   he   is   financially
    independent, he is a worker, he has not been a burden upon the taxpayer
    other than his past criminality  in  1994,  had  no  other  history  of
    criminality in the UK and presented no threat to UK citizens.

10.  For all these reasons I conclude that  the  Respondent's  decision  was
    disproportionate.

DECISION

11.  The appeal is allowed under Article 8 ECHR grounds.

ANONYMITY

No anonymity direction was made, none has been requested  and  therefore  no
anonymity despite the ages of the children who are not  identified  in  this
decision and no anonymity direction is required.

Signed                                  Date 13 December 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has succeeded but on  the  strength  of  information  that  arose
after the Respondent's decision, in  particular  addressing  the  Article  8
ECHR issues.  I do not find a fee award, assuming a fee  has  been  paid  is
appropriate.

Signed                                  Date 13 December 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

P.S. Promulgation of this decision has been delayed by the case  file  being
    miss-located



