
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/33361/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham |              Decision & Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 13th November 2015                  |              On 7th December 2015   |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               mrs Astha simon
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr David Mills (HOPO)
For the Respondent:    Ms A. B. Faryl (Counsel)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McDade, promulgated on 14th November 2014, following a hearing at
    Stoke-on-Trent on 31st October 2014.  In the determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of Mrs Astha Simon.   The  Appellant  subsequently
    applied, and was granted, permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of India, who was born on 6th  August  1986.
    She appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  refusing
    her leave to remain in the UK as a  spouse  of  a  person  present  and
    settled here.  However, the  refusal  letter  dated  5th  August  2014,
    records that,

         "Your spouse has contacted us to state that your  relationship  has
         broken down and your relationship no longer  subsists.   Therefore,
         as  your  relationship  has  broken  down,  you  have   failed   to
         demonstrate that your relationship is still subsisting".

    Given that this was the case, upon E-LTRP.1.7  being  applied,  it  was
    concluded that the Appellant was no longer in a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship with the Sponsor, her husband, Sareen James, and  that  as
    far as private  life  was  concerned,  upon  application  of  paragraph
    276ADE, the Appellant could not succeed, as she could not under Article
    8 of the ECHR generally, either.

The Judge's Decision

 3. The judge's decision  is  short,  but  to  the  point,  and  clear  and
    comprehensive.  He observes, how on the day before the hearing, on 30th
    October 2013, at 13.56 hours, the  representatives  for  the  Appellant
    sent a fax seeking an adjournment and stating that  their  client  "has
    fallen ill".  They stated that the Appellant was physically  unable  to
    attend the hearing.  The matter was considered by  a  Designated  Judge
    and he refused the application in terms  that,  "there  is  no  medical
    evidence to show that the Appellant  is  unfit  to  attend.   Leave  as
    listed".

 4. Despite the  adjournment  application  having  been  turned  down,  the
    Appellant's representatives, VAS UK of 389 Derby  Street,  Bolton,  B13
    6LT, persisted with the application for an adjournment.  They now  sent
    a further fax to the Tribunal after close of business on  30th  October
    at 18.57 hours.  At this time they stated that the client had  made  an
    appointment to visit a "walk in" centre on  Friday  31st  October,  and
    that they would provide relevant medical evidence in due course.   What
    is most troubling, however, is that with adjournment application having
    been granted by the Tribunal, the representatives  then  chose  not  to
    attend the hearing before Judge McDade, but instead sent a further  fax
    with details of the Appellant's visit to the walk in centre.

 5. As the judge records,  "this  made  interesting  reading"  because  the
    doctor's report now recorded that the Appellant had stated that she had
    started to experience chest pains at approximately 9pm, on the  evening
    before, whereas the complaint of the Appellant has been that there  was
    a medical problem  prior  to  this  time,  which  the  record  did  not
    disclose.  As the judge observed, "this is wholly contrary to what  the
    representative's claim in the first application that their  client  had
    fallen ill on the morning of the day before the hearing  and  that  the
    appointment at the walk in centre was made as  a  consequence  of  that
    illness".

 6. The judge went on to consider the situation as it unfolded before  him,
    in circumstances where there was no representative  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant and a late bundle of documents, which had  only  been  served
    the day before the hearing "with  no  explanation  as  to  why  and  no
    application that these be admitted in evidence despite  the  fact  that
    they did not comply with the Procedure Rules" (see  paragraph  2).   As
    the judge concluded, "I see no reason to admit these documents on  this
    basis" (see paragraph 2).  In any event, what the judge  did  find  was
    that the medical report only proscribed painkillers for the  Appellant.
    It also showed that "the Appellant had taken no painkillers prior to  a
    visit to the walk in centre despite  alleging  that  she  had  been  in
    pain".  The judge further found that, "there is nothing in  the  record
    of the doctor to  show  that  any  abnormality  was  found  and/or  the
    Appellant was unfit to attend the hearing".  He went on to say that  on
    this basis he refused the application for an adjournment.

 7. The judge took a dim view, as  he  was  bound  to  have  done,  of  the
    Appellant's representative's failure to attend or to have  sufficiently
    prepared for  this  hearing  and  observed  that  the  conduct  of  the
    representatives left much to  be  desired,  as  it  was  tantamount  to
    imposing pressure upon the Tribunal to vacate the hearing, even  though
    the application for an adjournment had already been turned  down.   The
    judge observed:

         "In my judgment the decision of the representative  not  to  attend
         the hearing, despite the  first  adjournment  request  having  been
         refused, was a somewhat cynical attempt  to  force  the  Tribunal's
         hand into adjourning this matter.  I hold there to be absolutely no
         justification for such an adjournment." (Paragraph 1).

 8. In determining the appeal, the judge went on to hold  that  the  burden
    was entirely upon the Appellant to prove that she continues to be in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with her spouse.  He held that,

         "Her absence, the  absence  of  her  spouse,  the  absence  of  her
         representatives and the absence of documentary  evidence  submitted
         in compliance with the Procedure Rules leads me to  the  inevitable
         conclusion that she has not discharged this burden". (Paragraph 2).



 9. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  have
    discarded the medical evidence as he did and this was tantamount to  an
    error of law.

11. On 16th January 2015, permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

12. On 23rd January 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered by the  Respondent
    Secretary of State to the effect  that  the  judge  was  faced  with  a
    situation where the Designated Judge had refused an adjournment on  the
    basis that there was no medical evidence to  support  the  application,
    the  documentary  evidence  was  not  served  in  accordance  with  the
    directions, and there was no Appellant present and no representative.

Submissions

13. At the hearing before me, the Appellant was represented  by  Ms  Faryl.
    She found herself in the difficult position,  which  she  managed  most
    professionally  and  in  an  entirely  commendable  manner,  given  the
    invidious position that she was placed in.  She began by  stating  that
    she thought this was a First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.   She  said  that
    these were her instructions.  She had also been instructed by  VAS  UK,
    the Appellant's representatives, to the effect  that  the  hearing  was
    actually in Manchester.

14. Not being entirely satisfied with what she was being  told,  she  asked
    for a notice of hearing to be disclosed to her.   This  made  it  clear
    that the hearing was indeed before the Upper Tribunal and it was not in
    Manchester, but in Birmingham.  She  submitted  that,  given  that  her
    understanding was that  this  was  a  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  in
    Manchester, both the Appellant and her  sponsoring  spouse,  Mr  Sareen
    James, had today turned up to give evidence.  In having  realised  that
    this was manifestly not a First-tier Tribunal hearing,  she  asked  for
    time to prepare her submissions before this Upper Tribunal.

15. I am bound to say that the conduct of VAS UK leaves much to be desired,
    not only when regard is had to what transpired at  the  hearing  before
    this Tribunal, but most notably also by what  transpired  before  Judge
    McDade, to which he makes  a  most  clear  and  direct  reference.   At
    10.25am, I adjourned the hearing to enable  Ms  Faryl  to  prepare  her
    submissions before this Tribunal, and indicated that I would take  this
    matter at the end of this morning's list.

16. When Ms Faryl returned at 12.10pm, she  submitted  that  having  had  a
    separate conference with  both  the  Sponsor  and  the  Appellant,  the
    Sponsor, Sareen James, had made it clear to that he wanted  to  support
    his wife's application for indefinite leave to remain, despite the fact
    that there was  a  reference  in  the  refusal  letter  to  his  having
    contacted the Home Office to say that  their  relationship  has  broken
    down and was no longer subsisting.  She was  aware  that  a  number  of
    letters had been written, or allegedly written, by Mr Sareen  James  to
    the authorities with respect to the nature of  his  marriage  with  the
    Appellant.  She submitted that these matters could be  probed  further,
    were the evidence to be heard again on a remittal back  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, subject to an error of law having  been  found  by  this
    Tribunal.  I explained that the first task before this Tribunal was  to
    determine whether Judge McDade's determination did indeed  comprise  an
    error of law.  The matters that she referred to would only  be  germane
    once a finding had been made in her favour.  Otherwise they  would  not
    be relevant.

17. Ms Faryl submitted that an adjournment should have been  granted  given
    the overriding objective considerations that had become relevant as  of
    20th October 2014 before the Tribunals.  The purpose was  to  safeguard
    the interests of both parties.  The test was whether the  appeal  could
    be justly determined.  This was a case where the Appellant showed  good
    reason for requesting an adjournment.  Even if she had not done so, the
    Tribunal determination in Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness)  [2014]  UKUT
    00418 (IAC), in which Mr Justice McCloskey emphasised (at paragraph  5)
    that the Tribunal is obliged in every  case  to  consider  whether  the
    appeal can be "justly determined"  in  removing  party's  absence.   In
    principle, there may be cases where an adjournment  should  be  ordered
    notwithstanding that the moving parties failed to  demonstrate  a  good
    reason for this course.  Ms Faryl submitted that Judge McDade  made  an
    error in not looking at whether the appeal could be justly  determined.
    He also made it  an  error  in  failing  to  recognise  that  the  late
    submission of a bundle did not prejudice anyone,  as  the  Respondent's
    representative did not make a submission that he was  unable  to  avail
    himself of the new material before him.

18. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that the general Rules on  adjournment
    are about fairness.  However, the judge in this case did not just  have
    the failure of the husband and wife to attend, but a decision from  the
    Respondent  authority  that  their  marriage  was   not   genuine   and
    subsisting, and the medical evidence was deficient, and the  submission
    of a late bundle entirely unhelpful, such that the Appellant  had  been
    the architect of her own situation, which her representatives had  done
    nothing to resolve, but only to exacerbate.

19. Second, the judge also had a letter written directly  to  him  in  late
    September from Mr Sareen James  himself  confirming  that  he  was  not
    supporting his wife's application.  In the circumstances, it could  not
    be said that the failure to adjourn would have prejudiced the Appellant
    because no other result than the one reached by the judge was  possible
    on the facts of this case.

20. Finally, it may  well  be  that  the  parties  have  today  decided  to
    reconcile, but that was not the position before the judge.  It may well
    be, as the Appellant is now claiming through her representative  before
    this Tribunal today, that she  was  pregnant,  but  that  was  not  the
    position that Judge McDade had  to  decide  upon.   He  had  to  decide
    whether or not to grant an adjournment.

21. On the basis of the evidence before him, and the deliberate refusal  of
    the representatives to either turn up themselves or to send Counsel  to
    represent  the  Appellant,  the  judge  was  entitled  to  refuse   the
    adjournment.  The error, even if one was made by the judge,  could  not
    remotely be said to be a material error.

22. In reply, Ms Faryl relied upon the case of Nwaigwe again and  submitted
    that the Appellant had been deprived of a chance to put her case to the
    Tribunal.

No Error of Law

23. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

24. First, Ms Faryl, notwithstanding her determined efforts to persuade  me
    otherwise, fails to consider the Tribunal's judgment in Nwaigwe in  its
    full respects.  She relies upon paragraph 5.  However,  as  Mr  Justice
    McCloskey made  it  clear  in  paragraph  5  there  are  two  important
    considerations here that are paramount.

25. First, whereas in principle there may be cases  where  the  adjournment
    should be ordered notwithstanding that the party in question has failed
    to demonstrate good reason for this course, the decision to  refuse  an
    application must be made on the Tribunal  satisfying  itself  that  the
    appeal can be justly determined in the absence of the party  concerned.
    This was precisely the conclusion of Judge McDade below.  He  concluded
    that the appeal could indeed be "justly determined" because the medical
    evidence was either not reliable or  completely  absent.   It  was  not
    reliable for the reasons that the judge pointed  out.   It  was  absent
    because, despite the  fact  that  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  state  (see
    paragraph 6) that, "the reason the representative did  not  attend  the
    hearing was due to the fact that he is awaiting  the  relevant  medical
    evidence from the Appellant  which  the  Tribunal  had  requested",  no
    medical evidence was ever faxed, either to the Tribunal or to have been
    known to be in existence as far as Ms Faryl was concerned.

26. In fact, the Grounds of Appeal are unfortunate in the inappropriate use
    of language that is employed.  It is not only said that the "judge  was
    clearly adamant on finding against the  Appellant"  (paragraph  9)  but
    there is an allegation of "those biased  on  the  part  of  the  judge"
    (paragraph 10) and that he had "pre-empted" the decision to refuse  the
    Appellant's appeal (paragraph 10), such that the decision to refuse the
    adjournment was "wholly unacceptable" (paragraph 3).

27. Second, paragraph 5 of Nwaigwe  makes it clear that,

         "As a general rule, good reason will have  to  be  demonstrated  in
         order to secure an adjournment.  There  are  strong  practical  and
         case management reasons for this, particularly in the  contemporary
         litigation culture with its emphasis on efficiency and expedition".



    If these considerations are to be tempered that is to be on  the  basis
    that every litigant has the right to a fair hearing.  However,  whether
    or not the Appellant has been denied a right to a fair hearing can only
    be  determined   after   taking   into   account   all   the   material
    considerations.  This the judge did do.  The judge exceeded  immaterial
    considerations and took into account all material matters  before  him.
    The burden of proof, after all, is upon the Appellant.  That burden  of
    proof was not discharged.

28. Third, there is an additional issue arising in this  appeal  which  has
    been lurking in the shadows but must  be  confronted  head  on  in  the
    interests of openness and transparency of legal proceedings.   This  is
    to do with the Sponsor Mr Sareen James, having informed the  Respondent
    authority that the marriage is no longer subsisting.  The issue is  not
    irrelevant for two reasons.  First, it is the basis of the Home  Office
    refusal of 4th August 2014 where it is stated that, "your  Sponsor  has
    contacted us to state that your relationship has broken down  and  your
    relationship no longer subsists ...".  Second, it formed a  significant
    part of the submissions before me today, both from Ms Faryl,  and  from
    Mr Mills on behalf of the Home Office.  That being so, it is  difficult
    to treat what the Sponsor, Mr Sareen James has said, as being  entirely
    irrelevant to the core issue in this appeal.

29. There were at least three separate communications from Mr Sareen  James
    to the authorities.  The Tribunal below did  not  expressly  deal  with
    them.  Judge McDade  apparently  discretely  avoided  consideration  of
    them.  First, there is the refusal letter itself  of  5th  August  2014
    that I have already referred to that clearly suggests that the  Sponsor
    has contacted the Respondent Home Office to say that  the  relationship
    has broken down.  Second, there is a letter of 16th August 2014 written
    by the Sponsor, with the heading "To whom it may concern", but  with  a
    Home Office reference number given, and this states,

         "Quite on the contrary, that with the Appellant having  received  a
         refusal letter on 8th August 2014 on the basis  that  the  marriage
         was no longer a subsisting one, the Sponsor would like to  make  it
         clear that, 'Astha Simon and I are in  a  subsisting  relationship.
         We  are  happily  married,  residing  together  and  meet  all  the
         requirements of the Home Office'."

30. He goes on to say that, "I can confirm that I have  not  contacted  the
    Home Office with regards to my marriage with Astha Simon prior to  this
    statement".  He further adds  that  he  was  able  to  prove  that  the
    marriage is genuine and subsisting because he has  evidence  of  "joint
    residence  through  utility  bills,  council  tax  bills  and   tenancy
    agreement ...".  He ends with the statement that he is happy to "take a
    stand in court if necessary to declare that prior to this  statement  I
    have not contacted the Home Office to inform them of any changes in  my
    marriage".  This letter, however, is unsigned by Mr Sareen James.

31. It is, however, the third letter which is  more  intriguing.   This  is
    dated 23rd September 2014.  It is signed by Mr  Sareen  James.   It  is
    addressed directly to the First-tier Tribunal  in  Stoke-on-Trent.   It
    was  received  at  the  hearing  centre  on  3rd  October  2014.   Both
    representatives appearing before me agreed that the letter  would  have
    been before Judge McDade but that he had deemed  it  prudent  to  avoid
    referring to it.  Here, Mr Sareen James states that his marriage "broke
    down a long time ago and is no longer subsisting".  He states that,  "I
    felt frightened and pressured into making that application",  referring
    to the application made for indefinite leave by his wife.  He  goes  on
    to explain that,

         "I have been forced into this  position  by  means  of  threats  of
         physical violence and through mental torture.  Astha has threatened
         my widowed mother in Delhi, India.  She has said that she will make
         my mother's life a 'living hell'.  She  will  do  this  by  lodging
         complaints with the local police alleging  harassment  and  demands
         for excessive dowry by my family.  Once  this  happens,  my  mother
         will be harassed by the police.  I  will  not  be  able  to  return
         safely to visit her either".

32. Mr Sareen James goes on  to  explain  why  he  has  taken  a  different
    position earlier on, making it quite clear that,

         "I would like to state clearly that while I have said one thing  to
         Astha, I have never misled her legal representatives and nor have I
         been dishonest with the Home Office.  I cannot tell  Astha  that  I
         did not support her, but if I am compelled to state this under oath
         before the Tribunal, then I will".

33. It is clear from this letter, which is, as I have explained  signed  by
    Mr Sareen James and dated, that the Sponsor was prepared to  say  under
    oath that the marriage had broken down and that he did not support  her
    application.  The letter ends by further adding that,

         "You will see from the papers and police reports that my  life  has
         been very difficult.  My work colleagues will also say the same  if
         asked.  I am embarrassed to admit that I am and have  been  a  male
         victim of domestic abuse.  That is  my  position  and  I  hope  you
         understand the difficulty I face".

34. Judge McDade did not  refer  to  this  letter.   He  did  not  deem  it
    necessary to do so.  The application before him was for an adjournment.
     He had ample and proper grounds to refuse that application.   He  then
    considered the merits  of  the  appeal,  in  circumstances  of  a  late
    submission of her bundle not in compliance with  the  Procedure  Rules,
    and in the absence of the representative and both the Appellant and her
    sponsoring husband.  He concluded, in circumstances where the  marriage
    was plainly an issue before the Home Office, that it could not be  said
    to be a subsisting one,  with  the  burden  of  proof  being  upon  the
    Appellant and, that burden not having been discharged.

35. The question however,  is  whether  as  a  matter  of  judicial  policy
    communications of these kind, by one party to a marriage, who does  not
    apparently show agreement with the application of their spouse,  should
    be disclosed in court.   In  this  case,  difficult  as  the  Sponsor's
    position  is  on  the  letters   written,   he   does   not   ask   for
    confidentiality.  In fact, he states that, "if I am compelled to  state
    this under oath before the Tribunal, then I will".   That  is  a  route
    that Judge McDade could have adopted had the Sponsor bothered  to  turn
    up at the hearing.

36. On the other hand, it is true that the allegation by Mr Sareen James is
    that  he  has  been  "a  male  victim  of  domestic  abuse"  and  fears
    repercussions of a serious nature being visited upon his widowed mother
    in New Delhi through the hands of the police.  If there is a threat  to
    life then one view  would  be  to  keep  such  communication  with  the
    authorities confidential.  It would then be open to the Home Office  to
    either inform the forced marriage unit, were that to be an  appropriate
    case for referral, or to the police, or to the Foreign  &  Commonwealth
    Office.

37. In the instant case, however, given the factors outlined above, namely,
    that the basis of the decision letter was a contact by the Sponsor with
    the authorities to say that the marriage was no longer  subsisting  and
    had broken down, followed by a unsigned  letter  of  16th  August  2014
    after the refusal letter, which claimed the opposite to  be  the  case,
    namely, that the Sponsor was indeed in a subsisting marriage and  could
    prove this with the disclosure of utility bills and council  tax  bills
    and the like, these letters were a matter properly for consideration by
    the Tribunal.

38. This is not least given that a later letter of 23rd September 2014  was
    written directly to the judge at the hearing centre on  Stoke-on-Trent.
    Had the judge used any of these letters as a basis of his decision,  he
    would  have  been  duty-bound  to  disclose  their  content.   In   the
    circumstances, the judge plainly did not use them as a  basis  for  the
    decision.  He proceeded on the basis  that  the  parties  were  not  in
    attendance.  The representative had chosen not to come  to  court,  and
    the late bundle not in compliance with the Procedure Rules could not be
    considered.  The onus was upon the Appellant.  She had  the  burden  of
    proof.  She failed to discharge it.

39. Accordingly, there can not be an error of law  on  this  basis  either.
    The decision by the judge was entirely safe and entirely sustainable.

40. Finally, I should add that there is also, what  is  referred  to  as  a
    "Public Statement - relationship no longer  subsisting",  made  by  the
    Sponsor, Sareen James, and specifically signed by him, and  dated  24th
    July 2014, where he states that,

         "I, Sareen James, confirmed that my relationship with  Astha  Simon
         no longer subsists, that I do not live with her and that I  do  not
         intend to live with her as my Sponsor in  the  future.  I  give  my
         permission for the Home Office to use the information  referred  to
         above.  I  fully  understand  that  by  giving  my  permission  the
         information above will become known to Astha Simon".

    It is not clear whether this document was before the judge  below,  and
    not clear how it was disclosed, and to whom, and neither Ms  Faryl  nor
    Mr Mills referred to it, but it was plainly a document  that  was  both
    signed and dated by the Sponsor, and meant for public circulation.

Notice of Decision

41. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

42. No anonymity order is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 30th November 2015


