
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33194/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 March 2018                              | On 22 March 2018             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                               MUSAMIL HUSSAIN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, instructed by ATM Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born  on  26  December  1988  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan.

 2. The appellant arrived in the UK on 17 February 2011  and  held  varying
    periods of leave to study.  His last application for  leave  to  remain
    was made on 9 August 2014.  It was made whilst his leave  was  current,
    and therefore his leave to remain was statutorily extended by operation
    of s.3C of the Immigration Act 1971.  His application was refused on 11
    September 2015 but his leave continues because he gave notice of appeal
    within the required period.

 3. The appeal against the decision of 11 September 2015 was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa  in  her  decision  and  reasons
    statement that was promulgated on 25 September  2017.   It  is  against
    that decision  the  appellant  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with
    permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge CA Parker.

 4. The focus  of  this  appeal  is  whether  Judge  Gurung-Thapa  properly
    assessed if the respondent had discharged the  legal  burden  of  proof
    regarding  the  allegation  the  appellant  had  obtained  his  English
    language qualification by deception.

 5. Judge Gurung-Thapa's finding that the respondent discharged the initial
    evidential burden in relation to the three speaking tests the appellant
    claimed to have taken on 15 January, 6 February and 27  March  2013  is
    not challenged. In any event, applying  the  relevant  case  law,  this
    finding is sound.  The respondent provided  the  look-up  tool  results
    which showed that ETS had recorded the first and last  as  invalid  and
    the middle one  as  questionable.  The  respondent  also  provided  the
    results of all who took the speaking test on the dates indicated.   The
    overall results showed that all who took the  speaking  tests  had  had
    their results retained by ETS as being either questionable or  invalid.
    Judge Gurung-Thapa also recognised that the  information  provided  had
    been verified by a senior caseworker.

 6. The appellant alleges that Judge Gurung-Thapa failed to assess  whether
    he had provided an innocent explanation and that failure meant she  had
    not properly assessed the case.  The appellant says he had an  innocent
    explanation but his only explanation was to describe the  test  centre,
    how he booked tests, how he travelled and how the tests were conducted.
     Considering that the case law categorises an innocent  explanation  as
    "an account which satisfies the minimum level of plausibility", nothing
    in what the appellant described goes to explaining why his results were
    retained as questionable and invalid.

 7. I acknowledge that the judge does not make a discrete finding  on  this
    issue but that in context it is  clear  she  rejected  the  appellant's
    explanation.  In the context of the overwhelming evidence  provided  by
    the respondent that there was significant doubt about  the  reliability
    of all the tests taken at the test centre on the days in question,  the
    appellant had more to  prove  than  he  might  if  the  respondent  had
    provided only limited evidence, such as only the look up tool results.

 8. Judge Gurung-Thapa recognised the limited  nature  of  the  appellant's
    account  and  that  it  did  not  provide  a  sufficient  or   innocent
    explanation.  This is clear from her reliance on the Court of  Appeal's
    guidance in MA (ETS-TOEIC testing) Nigeria [2016] UKUT 450.  She  noted
    that the appellant had not sought an explanation from ETS and  had  not
    tried to obtain a copy of his recordings for an independent assessment.
     This approach to the evidence is correct  in  law,  as  more  recently
    clarified by the Court of Appeal in Ahsan v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 2009, where at paragraph  33  Underhill
    LJ accepted:

         "The observations of the UT in SM and Qadir should not be  regarded
         as the last  word.   Where  the  impugned  test  was  taken  at  an
         established fraud factory such as Elizabeth College, and also where
         the voice-file does not record the applicant's voice (or no attempt
         has been made to obtain it), the case that he or she  cheated  will
         be hard to resist."

 9. I find it was open to the Judge to make the  adverse  finding  she  did
    because the explanation and submissions provided were no more  than  an
    assertion the respondent had not discharged the burden.  The  fact  the
    appellant could describe events on  the  day  of  the  tests  does  not
    provide an innocent explanation.

10. Although this disposes of the substantive  issues  in  this  appeal,  I
    mention that at the start of  the  hearing  I  heard  and  rejected  an
    application from Ms Iqbal to amend the grounds.  She  wished  to  argue
    that the respondent had failed to comply  with  her  own  policies  and
    therefore the decision was unlawful irrespective of any  allegation  of
    deception.  She relied on the Upper  Tribunal's  decision  Kaur  (Patel
    fairness: respondent's policy) [2013] UKUT 344.

11.  After  hearing  from  both  representatives,  I  decided  it  was  not
    appropriate to amend the grounds because to do so would  have  been  to
    permit a wholly new issue to be ventilated.  The grounds  were  settled
    by experienced counsel, who did raise the issue.  There has been plenty
    of time between the grant of permission for a  written  application  to
    have been made.  There was no good reason for the delay in  making  the
    application, other than Ms Iqbal had  only  recently  been  instructed.
    That was not a sufficient reason to amend grounds in the circumstances,
    particularly as admitting the argument at this very  late  stage  would
    result in unnecessary delay.

12. As identified in the First-tier Tribunal,  the  issue  of  whether  the
    respondent  should  have  granted  the  appellant  60-days  to  find  a
    replacement  because  the  sponsorship  licence  of  his  college   was
    withdrawn is immaterial because Judge Gurung-Thapa's finding  that  the
    respondent has shown it was more likely than not that the appellant had
    used fraud to obtain his English language qualifications.  I agree.

13. As there is no legal error in the decision  and  reasons  statement,  I
    uphold the decision.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed  because  there  is  no  legal
error in the decision and reasons statement  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Gurung-Thapa.

No anonymity order has been requested and there is no reason for one  to  be
made.


Signed                              Date     21 March 2018

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

