
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33898/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 August 2015                    |On 07 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                 UMAR FAROOQ
                          (ANONYMITY Order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by Synthesis
Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwod, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for, and do not make, an order restricting  reporting  of
    this case.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 16 January 2015, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to issue  him  with  a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").



The Appellant

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  15  October  1991.  He
    entered the United Kingdom on 27 February 2011 as a student with a visa
    valid until 31 May 2014.

 4. On 28 April 2014 he married  a  Slovakian  citizen,  having  previously
    undergone an Islamic marriage ceremony with her on 9 December 2013.

 5. On 27 May 2014 the appellant applied for a residence card as the spouse
    of an EEA national under the 2006 Regulations as  confirmation  of  his
    right to reside in the UK. The respondent refused the  application  for
    two reasons:

      a. firstly, that the marriage was one  of  convenience  for  the  sole
         purpose of enabling the appellant to remain in the UK; and

      b. secondly, that the appellant's sponsor was  not  exercising  Treaty
         Rights in the UK as a qualified person under Section 6 of the  2006
         Regulations.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

 6. The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hodgkinson ("the judge").

 7. The judge heard evidence regarding the  sponsor's  employment  and  was
    satisfied that she was a qualified person exercising Treaty  Rights  in
    the UK as a worker. This finding was not appealed and was not at  issue
    before me.

 8. The larger part of the judge's decision, and the findings that are  the
    subject of this appeal, concerned whether the appellant and his sponsor
    were in a marriage of convenience.

 9. The respondent's  refusal  letter,  dated  14  August  2014,  gave  the
    following reason for finding that  there  was  sufficient  evidence  to
    believe the marriage was one of convenience:

         "On 9/8/14 at 07.06am, a visit was undertaken by immigration
         officers to your home address. The visit findings were that you
         were not present at the property nor was your EEA sponsor. The
         Immigration officers were admitted to the address by the landlady.
         She stated that you had left for work and that your EEA sponsor was
         away for a month visiting family. She continued to state that [the
         sponsor] had left around one and a half weeks ago.

         The officers were given access to your bedroom. They noted a made
         bed with pink sheets on, a clean towel resting on a chair with [the
         sponsor's name] on it and there were 3 pictures on a table next to
         a television. Given the time in the morning, the bedroom appeared
         to the officers to be too unlived in for someone who had just
         recently left for work. The bedsheets were uncreased and the room
         appeared to be presented in such a way as to suggest it was not
         inhabited.

         The officers also noted there was nothing in the bedroom to suggest
         that your sponsor was returning and that she has no family in the
         United Kingdom."

10. The respondent included in her bundle a document purporting to be a
    statement by an Immigration Officer, but which was anonymous and
    unsigned with no Statement of Truth. This document will be referred to
    hereinafter as "the Statement". The Statement, which inexplicably, and
    presumably in error, is dated 7 December 2010, sets out the same
    information as quoted above from the refusal letter. However, there is
    a sentence in the Statement that was not included in the refusal
    letter, which is as follows: "When asked if she thought their
    relationship was genuine, she [the Landlady] straight away said yes".

11. The judge made the following finding with respect to the Statement:

         "Having had the opportunity to consider the content of that
         statement, and the fact that the maker thereof, whoever that might
         be, did not attend the Tribunal hearing, I have given only limited
         weight to the content of the statement in question, as I do not
         know by whom it was made and the maker of statement did not attend
         in order to give evidence. However, I do find that, on its face, it
         nevertheless raises a reasonable suspicion....placing upon the
         appellant a burden to demonstrate that [the marriage] is not one of
         convenience."

12. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant, his landlady and the
    sponsor. At paragraph [30] he stated that the oral evidence from the
    landlady was that she was personally aware that the appellant and
    sponsor lived together as husband and wife in the accommodation they
    rented from her.  However he went on to find that there were three
    material discrepancies in the oral evidence given by the appellant and
    her sponsor:

      a. First, the appellant said that most days he worked from 6.30am
         until about 1pm or 2pm whereas the sponsor said that the appellant
         would generally get home in the early evening.

      b. Second, the appellant said that he asked the sponsor to marry him
         when on their way to a restaurant and standing in a park, whereas
         the sponsor said they were in a restaurant.

      c. Third, they gave inconsistent evidence about which side of the bed
         they slept on.

13. The judge found these discrepancies to be determinative in relation to
    the appeal and concluded that he found "as a fact, with reference to
    the available evidence, that the marriage between the appellant and the
    sponsor is one of convenience".

14. The judge made several references to the burden of proof. At paragraph
    [19] he stated that the burden was on the appellant. Later in his
    decision, at paragraphs [28] and [36] he explained that because he had
    found the evidence adduced by the respondent to be sufficient to raise
    a reasonable suspicion, the burden then fell on the appellant. He
    stated at paragraph [36]:

         "I am satisfied that there is an evidential burden upon the
         appellant to establish that [the marriage] is not one of
         convenience, as I reiterate that I conclude that the evidence
         adduced by the respondent, although far from being determinative,
         is sufficient to raise a reasonable suspicion, thereby placing a
         burden upon the appellant to establish otherwise."

15. The grounds of appeal submit that, with respect to the burden of proof,
    the judge failed to follow Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of
    convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC) and improperly placed the
    burden on the appellant. It is also argued that the judge, by finding
    that the Statement raised a reasonable suspicion, gave it too much
    weight as it was no more than the "subjective opinion of an Immigration
    Officer who might not have encountered such a neat and tidy couple".
    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever.

Submissions

16. Mr Iqbal, for the appellant, referred to and relied upon the grounds of
    appeal. He submitted that at paragraphs [19] and [36] of  the  decision
    the judge had reversed the burden of proof, improperly  placing  it  on
    the appellant, and that in so doing he had failed to follow Papajorgji.

17. Mr Iqbal also argued that the judge materially erred  in  finding  that
    the Statement was sufficient to give rise to a reasonable suspicion  of
    there being a marriage of convenience. He contended that there was  not
    even a conceivable basis for such  a  finding,  not  only  because  the
    Statement was anonymous and unsigned and  therefore  of  no  evidential
    value, but also  because  it  did  not  describe  anything  that  could
    reasonably be considered suspicious. All the  Immigration  Officer  had
    found was a tidy room. Mr Iqbal argued that because the respondent  had
    failed to discharge the burden of establishing a reasonable  suspicion,
    there was simply no case for the appellant to answer and on that  basis
    alone the judge ought to have found in the appellant's favour.

18. He further argued that the judge materially erred in putting  too  much
    weight on the  inconsistencies  in  the  oral  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant and sponsor. Understood in context, and taken  together  with
    the totality of the evidence, these were insufficient to find that  the
    appellant and sponsor were in a marriage of convenience.

19. Ms Isherwood,  for  the  respondent,  argued  that  the  Statement  was
    sufficient to raise a reasonable suspicion and it was open to the judge
    to make this finding. She argued that  the  judge  had  identified  and
    applied the correct burden of proof in accordance with IS (marriage  of
    convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 00031 and Papajorgji, and that because
    the respondent had raised a reasonable suspicion the burden shifted  to
    the appellant.

20. She recognised that the Statement was not  strong  evidence  and  noted
    that the judge had clearly acknowledged this by stating that he gave it
    only limited weight.

21. Ms Isherwood further noted that the judge had the  benefit  of  hearing
    oral evidence and contended that the inconsistencies he found  in  that
    evidence were significant, making it open to him to find  there  was  a
    marriage of convenience.

The relevant law

22. A party to a marriage of convenience is not  entitled  to  a  residence
    card under the 2006 Regulations. This is because Regulation  2  of  the
    2006 Regulations stipulates that where the term "spouse" is used in the
    2006 Regulations that "does not  include  a  party  to  a  marriage  of
    convenience".

23. Marriage of convenience is not defined by the 2006 Regulations  but  it
    is described in preamble 28 to  Direction  2004/38/EC  (Citizen's  Free
    Movement) as being "for the sole purpose of enjoying the right of  free
    movement and residence". Blake J in Papajorgji defined it as:

         "a marriage entered into without the intention of matrimonial
         cohabitation and for the primary reason of securing admission to
         the country."

24. In Miah (interviewer's  comments:  disclosure:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT
    00515 (IAC) McCloskey J noted that:

         "The phrase "marriage of convenience" is not defined.  The  purpose
         of this discrete provision is clear:  it  is  designed  to  prevent
         abuse of  the  rights  and  privileges  available  under  the  2006
         Regulations by those who contract sham marriages."

25. The main issue raised in this appeal  is  whether  the  judge  properly
    applied  the  legal  burden  of  proof  when  considering  whether  the
    appellant's marriage to  the  sponsor  was  one  of  convenience.  Both
    parties cited Papajorgji as the relevant authority  and  accordingly  I
    have given it careful consideration.

26. Papajorgji was a case in which the claimant sought to accompany her EEA
    national husband, with whom she had been married for many years and had
    two children, on a visit to the UK. Her application for admission as  a
    family member was refused on the basis that her  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience because she had not provided  documents,  such  as  wedding
    photographs,  to  substantiate  her   application   despite   no   such
    documentation being required with the application. The  Tribunal  found
    that there was not a burden on the claimant to establish she was not  a
    party to a marriage of convenience and  that  in  the  absence  of  any
    evidence giving rise to reasonable  suspicion  the  application  should
    have been granted without more. It was found  that  an  applicant  only
    needs to provide evidence about his or her marriage in the  event  that
    there is a reasonable basis for suspicion, in  which  case  he  or  she
    should be invited to respond to the basis  of  suspicion  by  providing
    evidential material to dispel it.  Blake J  found  there  was  no  such
    suspicion in this case, describing the notion that there was a marriage
    of convenience as "ludicrous".

27. The finding by Blake J in Papajorgji, as described above, concerns when
    a claimant is expected to provide evidence to dispel a reasonable
    suspicion. This should not be confused with the question of where the
    burden of proof lies when a tribunal judge considers an appeal in which
    the Secretary of State (or Entry Clearance officer, as was the case in
    Papajorgji) alleges there has been a marriage of convenience.  This
    question was not determined by Blake J, who stated at paragraph [33]
    that the whole issue will need further examination in a future case
    where the nature of the dispute requires it to be decided. However, he
    made clear his view that he would have serious reservations about an
    argument that the legal burden of proof shifts to the applicant once
    reasonable suspicion had been raised.  Blake J, at paragraph [36], went
    on to state (emphasis added):

         "It is clear that the justification for exclusion of marriages of
         convenience from those otherwise entitled to a residence document
         under the Directive is to be found in the EU law principle of fraud
         or abuse of rights. That very much suggests that in any dispute on
         appeal as to the nature of the marriage, it would in the last
         instance be for the respondent to satisfy the judge of the factual
         basis of the personal conduct of the claimant relied on to exclude
         her from the entitlement.  Thus if the respondent were to allege
         that the claimant were a spy or a drug runner or involved in other
         conduct detrimental to public policy, on the ordinary principle
         that he who alleges must substantiate, it would fall on the
         respondent to make that suggestion good, although the Judge would
         be alive to the difficulties of proof (see the recent decision by
         SIAC in SC/103/2010 Ekaterina Zatuliveter v SSHD, 29 November
         2011.)"

28. At paragraph [37] he commented:

         "We observe that the guidance of the European Commission issued  in
         respect of the Citizens Directive  COM 2009  313  2  July  2009  is
         explicit in placing the burden of proof on the  state  and  invites
         the state to set  out  indicative  criteria  for  and  against  the
         proposition that the marriage is one  of convenience....We consider
         this guidance is likely to prove helpful for  Judges  who  have  to
         decide such questions in the future although it is not binding as a
         piece of EU legislation".

29. Blake J concluded his decision by stating that where the issue of
    marriage of convenience is raised in an appeal, the question for the
    judge is whether

         "in the light of the totality of the information before me,
         including the assessment of the claimant's answers and any
         information provided, am I satisfied that it is more probable than
         not this is a marriage of convenience?".

Consideration

30. For the reasons set out below I find that the judge erred  in  law  but
    that his errors were not material and accordingly I conclude  that  his
    decision should stand.

31. The only evidence put forward by the respondent to establish  that  the
    marriage between the appellant and his sponsor was one  of  convenience
    was the Statement. The judge clearly recognised the  Statement  was  of
    limited value - he stated that he gave it only "limited weight"  -  but
    nonetheless found it to be of sufficient weight to raise  a  reasonable
    suspicion.

32. The  Statement  cannot  reasonably  be  said  to  raise  any  suspicion
    whatsoever about the appellant. On the contrary,  if  anything,  it  is
    supportive of him being in a genuine  marriage  with  the  sponsor  and
    might go some way to dispelling suspicion that could have  arisen  from
    other factors, such as the proximity in time between the  marriage  and
    expiry of the appellant's leave to remain in the UK as a  student.  The
    Statement says that immigration officers visited the premises and spoke
    to the landlady who, when asked if the appellant and sponsor were in  a
    genuine relationship immediately said "yes".   The  landlady  told  the
    officers that the appellant was at work and the sponsor abroad visiting
    family. The officers  then  entered  the  appellant's  room  and  found
    pictures of the appellant and sponsor's wedding day and items  strongly
    suggestive of them both living there. They also found the  room  to  be
    neat and tidy with a "perfectly made bed"  and  uncreased  sheets.  The
    findings of the immigration officers, as documented in  the  Statement,
    cannot on any reading be construed  as  giving  rise  to  a  reasonable
    suspicion and I find that the judge has erred  in  law  by  giving  any
    weight to this evidence. In light of the  comments  attributed  to  the
    appellant's landlady in the Statement, it would have been open  to  the
    judge to consider the Statement as evidence, albeit of limited  weight,
    supporting the view that the appellant and sponsor were  in  a  genuine
    marriage.

33. It is also apparent from the decision that the judge  has  mis-directed
    himself as to where the legal burden of proof lies. The  judge  appears
    to have  construed  Papaajorgji  as  holding  that  once  a  reasonable
    suspicion is raised the legal burden shifts to the appellant.  This  is
    not the case. As  explained  by  Blake  J  in  Papajorgji,  although  a
    reasonable suspicion triggers an evidential burden on the appellant  to
    address the suspicion, that does not mean the legal burden has shifted.
    By conflating the issue of when the appellant is  required  to  provide
    evidence to dispel a suspicion with where the  legal  burden  of  proof
    lies the judge fell into error.

34. However, despite finding the above described errors, when  reading  the
    decision as a whole, it is apparent that the judge has taken the proper
    approach to consideration, and weighing, of the  evidence  before  him.
    The task for the judge, in accordance with Papaajorgji, was to look  at
    the totality of the information before him to determine whether he  was
    satisfied that it was more probable than not the marriage  was  one  of
    convenience. This was required of the judge irrespective of whether  he
    found the Statement was sufficient to raise a reasonable suspicion.  Mr
    Iqbal submitted that if the respondent had not discharged the burden of
    establishing a reasonable suspicion there was no need for the  case  to
    go any further. However, the matter  for  the  judge  to  determine  on
    appeal was not whether the respondent had followed the proper  approach
    with respect to the evidential burden but whether  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities there was a marriage of  convenience,  and  in  answering
    this question the judge was required to look at  the  totality  of  the
    evidence before him.

35. It is clear from the decision that this is what the judge has done.  He
    has carefully taken into consideration all of the evidence before  him,
    including the written statements of the appellant,  sponsor  and  their
    landlady, the letter from the sponsor's employer, the  GP  registration
    cards, the Statement, and the oral evidence he heard at the hearing.

36. It is apparent that the  judge  found  the  oral  evidence  -  and  the
    contradictions he identified therein  -  to  be  determinative  of  the
    appeal, significantly outweighing any importance he might have attached
    to the other evidence,  including  that  of  the  Statement,  which  he
    described as being "far from being determinative".

37. Having considered the overall approach to the  evidence  taken  by  the
    judge, I am satisfied  that,  irrespective  of  how  he  formulated  or
    understood the legal burden of proof, he has given proper consideration
    to the totality of the information before him and  reached  a  decision
    open to him based on  that  information  as  to  whether  it  was  more
    probable than not the marriage between the appellant  and  sponsor  was
    one of convenience. Although I consider the  judge  to  have  erred  by
    giving even limited weight to the Statement, I am satisfied that he did
    not treat the Statement as a significant factor  weighing  against  the
    appellant and therefore that the weight he gave to it did  not  have  a
    material effect on the overall assessment based on the totality of  the
    evidence.

38. Accordingly, I find that any errors of law in  the  decision  were  not
    material and that it was open to  the  judge,  based  on  the  evidence
    before  him  and  for  the  reasons  he  gave  -  in   particular   the
    discrepancies he identified in the oral  evidence,  which  were  by  no
    means insignificant - to find that on balance it was more probable than
    not this was a marriage of convenience.

Notice of Decision

39. The appeal is dismissed.

40. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law and shall stand.

41. No anonymity direction is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated                                |

