
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33639/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 21st May 2014                                |On 10th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                      Mr Mohamed Ameer Mohamed Mumthaj
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Solomon, Counsel, instructed by Jein,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka who on 30th April 2013 made an
    application for further leave to remain here  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student under the points-based system.  He had previously been  granted
    leave to remain in  the  capacity  of  a  Tier  4  Student  on  several
    occasions having first entered the UK on 27th September 2005.

 2. The Appellant appealed against the refusal under the Immigration  Rules
    and as noted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilsher his  application  was
    refused in a decision dated 22nd July 2013.   The  Grounds  of  Refusal
    were described by the Judge as extremely narrow in that the  Respondent
    said the Appellant had failed to satisfy  paragraph  245ZX  (ha)  which
    requires that a person not be granted leave to remain where this  would
    result in having spent more than five years in  the  UK  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Migrant unless "(i) the applicant has successfully  completed
    a course at degree level in the  UK  of  a  minimum  duration  of  four
    academic years".

 3. For a number of reasons Judge Wilsher dismissed the  appeal.   Firstly,
    at the date of application the Appellant had not successfully completed
    a course at degree level.  Secondly, the course  that  he  took  was  a
    three year course; the fact that he was taking a bridging course at the
    same institution for one year to enter their degree programme  was  not
    relevant.  Finally the Judge concluded  that  he  only  had  restricted
    jurisdiction to consider new evidence and the Appellant had  not  filed
    the degree certificate with his application because it did not exist at
    that time.  The Tribunal therefore had no jurisdiction to consider this
    evidence which came into existence after the application was lodged.

 4. Grounds of application were lodged on a number of grounds.  Firstly, it
    was said that the Rules did not require the  successful  completion  of
    the course "at the date of application" and the judge had  ignored  the
    continuing nature of the application per AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2009]
    EWCA Civ 1076 and other cases.

 5. Furthermore the judge was wrong to hold that the fact that it may  have
    taken the Appellant more than three years  to  finish  the  course  was
    irrelevant.  This was undoubtedly  material  in  assessing  the  actual
    duration of the course.  The  judge was wrong to hold the  BA  bridging
    course was irrelevant  as it was undoubtedly material given that it was
    a preparatory course required to be admitted onto the third year of  BA
    in business studies programme and as such was part of  his  studies  at
    degree level.  In the alternative, inadequate account was taken of  his
    studies at the London School  of  Commerce  where  he  had  studied  an
    advanced diploma validated by the University of Wales as part of the BA
    in business studies course.

 6. The judge had reasoned against the Appellant on the basis that he could
    not take account of the degree certificate by the virtue of Section 85A
    of the 2002 Act because it was not submitted with his  application  and
    came into existence after the  initial  date  of  application.   In  so
    reasoning the judge made a material misdirection of law.   Section  85A
    (4)(d) allowed  the  Tribunal  to  consider  evidence  adduced  by  the
    Appellant if it was adduced in connection with the Secretary of State's
    reliance on a discretion under the Rules.  Paragraph 245ZX(ha) did  not
    relate to the acquisition of points and Section 85A  did  not  preclude
    the Tribunal from considering evidence submitted by the Appellant after
    the date of application but before the date of decision  (see  Nasim  &
    Others (Raju: reasons not to follow? Pakistan) [2013] UKUT 610 (IAC)).

 7. Permission to  appeal  was  initially  refused  but  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Goldstein on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal  may
    have failed to give adequate reasons for its findings.

 8. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.  Before me Mr Solomon
    relied on his grounds.  As stated there the judge was wrong to say that
    he could not take the degree certificate into account.   Reference  was
    made to head note number 4 in Nasim (above) in that Section 85A did not
    prevent a Tribunal  from  considering  evidence  that  was  before  the
    Secretary of State when she took the  decision,  whether  or  not  that
    evidence reached her  only  after  the  date  of  application  for  the
    purposes of paragraph 34F of the Immigration Rules.

 9. In terms of the second ground the actual duration  of  the  course  was
    important and the matter must be looked at holistically.  If  the  Rule
    was intended to exclude a break in the degree  course  then  the  Rules
    would have said so.  I was referred to paragraph 6 of  the  Immigration
    Rules and the interpretation of "degree level study" which was said  to
    mean a course which leads to a  recognised  United  Kingdom  degree  at
    bachelor's level.  The important words were "which leads" and were  not
    "that is" and the Appellant therefore came within the Rules as  he  had
    not gone beyond the six year limit.  I was therefore asked to  conclude
    that there was a material error of law, to set the decision  aside  and
    allow the appeal.

10. For the Home Office it was said that the judge  was  quite  correct  to
    find that the Appellant had not  successfully  completed  a  course  at
    degree level of four academic years.  It was  not  the  case  that  two
    separate courses could constitute a degree.   As  such  the  judge  was
    correct in his analysis.

11. The Appellant had been studying here since 8th September 2005.  He  had
    been here for some eight years already.  If any extension was going  to
    be granted it would put him past the six year entitlement  set  out  in
    paragraph 245ZX (ha) (i) in that a grant of leave must not lead to  the
    applicant having spent more than six years in the UK.

12. It was said that the Secretary of State did have a policy of looking at
    evidence which postdated the application but which preceded the date of
    decision - as set out in Nasim.

13. However any error in law by the judge was not material and the decision
    should be upheld.

14. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

15. The background to this appeal is  that,  as  stated  by  the  judge  in
    paragraph 5 of the determination, the Appellant began  his  studies  at
    the London School of Commerce in October 2006.  This  was  an  advanced
    diploma in business management  which  was  a  two  year  course.   The
    Appellant maintains he did  not  like  the  teaching  quality  at  that
    college and he transferred to the Kensington College of Business in the
    period 2009-2010 and undertook what is described  as  a  "BA  bridging"
    course.  This was a preparatory course that was required by  Kensington
    College in order for a student to be admitted onto the  third  year  of
    their BA in business studies programme.  Having completed the  bridging
    course he took two more years between 2011 and 2013 at  the  Kensington
    College to complete the third year of  the  BA  (honours)  in  business
    studies validated by the University of Wales.  As the judge put it  the
    refusal was a  narrow  one  and  is  on  the  basis  that  he  has  not
    successfully completed a course at degree level in the UK of a  minimum
    duration of four years.

16. Paragraph 245ZX of the rules sets out the  requirements  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student. As is said there if an  applicant
    meets the rules he will be allowed leave to remain and if he  does  not
    then the applicant will be refused. Parties were at one in viewing  the
    outcome of this appeal as depending on the interpretation  of  what  is
    meant under paragraph 245ZX(ha) (i)  when it is said that the applicant
    requires to have "successfully completed a course at  degree  level  in
    the UK of a minimum duration of four academic years".

17. However, before he reached that point, the judge dismissed  the  appeal
    on the basis that a degree certificate with  his  application  was  not
    lodged (it was not available) as at the date of application.

18. Mr Solomon relied on the head note (4)  of  Nasim  on  the  basis  that
    evidence could be considered that postdated the application - the judge
    having found that he could not  do  so.   Mr  Duffy  agreed  with  this
    proposition but it must be said that paragraph 34F mentioned  in  Nasim
    relates to a variation of leave to remain which is a different scenario
    and not the position before the judge.

19. Mr Solomon relied on a number of cases  mentioned  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal including AS (above) but as noted in  Raju  and  others  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 754 paragraph 34G precludes the concept of a continuing
    application which starts when it is first submitted  and  concludes  at
    the date of decision, either of the Secretary of State, or, on  appeal,
    of a Tribunal (paragraph 17). An application is made when paragraph 34G
    says it is made (paragraph 24). When the judge said in paragraph 6 that
    the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to consider this evidence (the degree)
    which came into existence after the application was  lodged  the  judge
    was following existing jurisprudence by which he was bound -  as  noted
    in head note (1) of Nasim it is not legally possible for  the  Tribunal
    to decline to follow the judgment in Raju.

20. It seems to me that what the judge was doing was linking the lack of  a
    degree certificate to the reasons for refusal given by the Secretary of
    State.  Absent the degree certificate the judge was not satisfied  that
    the Appellant had successfully completed the course  at  degree  level.
    There is no error in law in such an approach and indeed it is difficult
    to see how the judge could have found otherwise. As such, and for  this
    reason alone, the judge was correct to dismiss the appeal.

21. Furthermore it seems to me that the judge was correct to say  that  the
    course he took "quite clearly" was a  three  year  course.   It  cannot
    therefore reasonably be said  that  he  had  successfully  completed  a
    course at degree level of a "minimum duration of four academic years" -
    to have found otherwise would have not  sat  easily  with  the  natural
    interpretation of those words. When the judge said  that  the  bridging
    course for one year was not relevant he was explaining  that  this  did
    not transform the Appellant's studies into a four  year  degree  course
    which was what the Appellant had to show to succeed  under  the  rules;
    his failure to demonstrate this was the basis  of  the  refusal.   Even
    looking at the matter holistically as suggested by Mr Solomon it cannot
    reasonably be said that the Appellant was engaged in a course at degree
    level of a minimum duration of four academic years.  As  such  it  does
    not come within the exception permitted under paragraph 245ZX (ha) (i).

22. It follows that there was no error in the judge's approach  or  in  his
    decision which must stand.

Decision

23. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

24. I do not set aside the decision.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


