
[pic]
IAC-HW/TH-MP/LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33005/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 January 2016                   |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                     M a
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Short of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He was born on 13 June 1969.

 2. He appealed against the respondent's decision dated 6  August  2014  to
    refuse him leave to remain outside the Rules to care for his brother.

 3. Judge Birk (the judge) in a decision  promulgated  on  27  April  2015,
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and  on  human  rights
    grounds.  She found the appellant did not meet the requirements of  the
    Rules and that as regards Article  8,  the  respondent's  decision  was
    proportionate.

 4. Judge Lambert considered the grounds and in a decision  dated  15  July
    2015, found no arguable error of law was disclosed by the  application.
    The grounds  were  renewed  and  considered  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Lindsley who in a decision dated 2 September 2015, found in  favour  of
    the appellant with regard to only one of the grounds.  It was argued on
    behalf of the appellant that the best interests of  the  child  of  the
    appellant's  brother  and  his  son  aged  9  and  who  the   appellant
    supervised, had not been taken  into  account  because  an  adjournment
    request put to the judge at the hearing to be able to provide  evidence
    about the arrangements for the child and contact, was refused.  It  was
    submitted that in accordance with Mwaigwe (Adjournment fairness) [2014]
    UKUT 418 and JO  (Section  55  duty)  Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT  00517,  an
    adjournment ought to have been granted in the interests of fairness and
    proper scrutiny of the best interests of the child.

 5. Judge Lindsley found it was arguable that the judge erred in law in not
    adjourning the appeal in the interests of fairness to enable the mother
    of the appellant's nephew to give evidence about the  appellant's  role
    in the contact between the nephew and his schizophrenic father and  his
    relationship with the child.  Further, to  provide  the  Tribunal  with
    information regarding the child's best interests.  Judge Lindsley found
    it was clear that it was accepted by the Tribunal that that arrangement
    had been going on for eight years and it was appreciated that it  might
    be that the nephew's mother would not  allow  another  person  to  take
    over.  (See [33] of the decision).  That was clearly a  major  part  of
    the appellant's  private/family  life  relationship  and  s.55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 required the Tribunal  to
    be properly informed of the position of the child (who would appear  to
    be a British citizen and was at least a  long-term  resident)  and  his
    best interests.  It followed that it was arguable that the appeal under
    Article 8 had not been lawfully determined.

 6. The Rule 24 response filed on behalf  of  the  respondent  opposed  the
    appeal.  The respondent submitted inter alia that  the  judge  directed
    herself appropriately and made  reasonable  sustainable  findings  that
    were properly  open  to  her  on  the  evidence.   The  judge  properly
    considered the appellant's carer relationship with his brother and  his
    nephew and made reasonable sustainable findings properly  open  to  her
    that  the  decision  to  refuse  the  appellant's  application  was   a
    proportionate one in all the circumstances.

 7. As regards the appellant's ground that the judge procedurally erred  in
    failing to grant the appellant an adjournment to submit new evidence on
    the basis that he also cared for his  nephew  and  facilitated  contact
    between his nephew and his schizophrenic brother bearing  in  mind  the
    best interests of the child, the respondent submitted that the  judge's
    decision to refuse the application was entirely  within  the  range  of
    reasonable responses open to her particularly bearing in mind that

         "... the evidence on this aspect had not been raised previously  at
         all at any stage even though the appellant is  legally  represented
         and so it was unclear what precisely the evidence which  was  going
         to now be investigated by the appellant's representatives was to be
         produced, save for the possibility of a statement from  the  mother
         of the child ... There is no court  order  for  contact  which  the
         appellant would be able to adduce." See [4] of the decision.

 8. Moreover, the respondent submitted that it was clear from the  evidence
    that was before the judge that the appellant's claimed participation in
    the contact and care  arrangements  for  his  nephew  were  not  a  new
    development.  The appellant had ample opportunity to raise  that  issue
    before the substantive appeal hearing which he had failed to  do.   The
    judge properly considered s.55 with regard to the best interests of the
    child and made reasonable sustainable  findings  at  [33]-[34]  of  the
    decision.

Submissions on Error of Law

 9. Ms Short relied upon the grounds which in summary were that  there  was
    an issue of fairness regarding the failure to adjourn and following  on
    from that, an inadequate consideration of the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant's nephew.

10. Mr Duffy referred me to [30] of the  judge's  decision.   He  submitted
    that as the judge had accepted the  appellant's  evidence,  no  further
    information was needed.  The child was  not  threatened  with  removal,
    such that there were lesser consequences  in  issue  in  terms  of  the
    child's best interests.  There was no reason why other arrangements  to
    facilitate contact between the child and his schizophrenic father could
    not be put in place; if necessary, an application could have been  made
    in that regard to the Family Court.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11. The judge was asked to consider  an  adjournment  on  the  day  of  the
    hearing so  additional  evidence  could  be  subsequently  put  forward
    regarding the best interests of the child, given it was said  that  the
    appellant facilitated contact between the child and  his  schizophrenic
    father, the appellant's brother.  The  judge  refused  the  adjournment
    because the issue had not been raised previously and  because  she  was
    unclear precisely what evidence was going to  be  investigated  by  the
    appellant's representatives, save for  a  statement  from  the  child's
    mother.  The judge determined that the child's  mother's  evidence  was
    not necessary and that relevant evidence could be adduced  through  the
    oral evidence of the appellant  and  his  witnesses,  his  brother  and
    family friends.

12. The judge knew because she had been told that  there  were  issues  the
    appellant wanted  to  address  with  regard  to  the  child's  mother's
    evidence; in particular with regard to the best interests of the child.
    The judge was clearly faced with an unsatisfactory situation  regarding
    a late application for an adjournment with regard to issues  which  had
    been on-going for a  considerable  time  and  which  should  have  been
    addressed earlier.  Nevertheless, the judge should have  adjourned  the
    hearing because excluding that evidence was unfair.  I bear in mind  in
    that finding, Mwaigwe and JO.

13. The judge erred firstly by refusing an adjournment and  secondly  as  a
    result of that failure to adjourn, because the best  interests  of  the
    child were not able to be adequately considered.  To  assess  the  best
    interests of the child his mother needed to  give  evidence  about  the
    appellant's role in the contact between her son and  his  schizophrenic
    father; also, the relationship between the  appellant  and  the  child.
    Given these family arrangements had been ongoing for eight  years,  the
    possibility of such a significant change caused by the removal  of  the
    appellant from the child's life, needed to have been considered by  the
    judge in terms of the child's best interests.  I  do  accept  that  the
    judge attempted such consideration and took into account at  [33]  that
    the child's mother might not be happy for another person to  facilitate
    contact but because of the decision to shut  out  additional  evidence,
    the judge's analysis in that regard was inevitably inadequate.

Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside.   The  decision
    will be remade in the First-tier following a de novo hearing.

15. Anonymity direction not made.


Signed   Date 26 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

