
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33340/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8th August  2014                             |On 8th August 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                               MR sajjad qamar
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Oke (instructed by M-R Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Respondent with regard to a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Brenells) promulgated on 9th May 2014.

 2. The Appellant had sought,  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  Rule
    extant at the time, leave to remain in the UK on the basis that he  had
    been resident for 14 years. He did not  claim  to  have  been  lawfully
    resident.

 3. The Secretary of State did not accept that he had shown  residence  for
    the requisite period and that  was  the  issue  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 4. The determination reveals that the Appellant had produced a  bundle  of
    documents in support of his appeal to show residence in the UK  for  14
    years. The Judge noted at paragraph 12 of the  determination  that  the
    earliest document is a  tenancy  agreement  dated  30th  November  1999
    which, if accepted, would establish a  presence  from  that  date.  The
    Judge noted further on at paragraph 12  that  these  are  not  official
    documents but signed copies were in the Appellant's  bundle.  He  noted
    that the originals were not produced and that there were no  copies  of
    the agreements in the Respondent's bundle but because they are referred
    to in the Letter of Refusal the  Judge  assumed  they  must  have  been
    produced.

 5. The judge went on to consider those documents at paragraphs 13 and  14.
    In particular at paragraph 14 the Judge noted  that  despite  the  fact
    that the Appellant and his representatives knew that the Respondent did
    not accept the tenancy agreements to be genuine  and  having  had  some
    months to obtain confirmatory evidence they had failed to do  so.  They
    had failed to submit evidence of payment of rent such as a rent book or
    receipts and as a result the Judge did  not  accept  that  the  tenancy
    agreements produced amounted to evidence of his presence in the  United
    Kingdom from 1999.

 6. At paragraph 18 the  Judge  referred  to  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer's submissions, in particular that there was no evidence such as
    letters addressed to the  Appellant  at  the  address  on  the  tenancy
    agreement to show his presence there. The Judge commented at the end of
    paragraph 19 that he sympathised with the Appellant's  representative's
    submission that if the Respondent was not satisfied about the  tenancy,
    the Respondent knew the name and address of the landlord and could have
    checked. That, as asserted by Mr Jarvis does indicate a reversal of the
    burden of proof. However, reading the determination as a  whole  it  is
    clear to me that the Judge did not accept that the  tenancy  agreements
    confirmed the Appellant's presence from 1999 as claimed  and  proceeded
    on that basis.

 7. The Respondent challenged on  that  basis  the  Judge's  conclusion  at
    paragraph 23 that he found the documentary evidence  submitted  by  the
    Appellant, coupled with the evidence of the witnesses who had submitted
    statements and given evidence established  that  he  had  been  present
    continuously for 14 years. The  Secretary  of  State  argues  that  the
    documentary evidence, previously referred to, did not show that and the
    judge had therefore made contradictory findings.

 8. The Judge did not specify in paragraph 23 what documentary evidence  he
    was referring to. However if  the  Judge  had  already  discounted  the
    tenancy agreement, as I have found he had, it  could  not  be  that.  A
    perusal of the Appellant's bundle does show that there is a significant
    amount of other documentary evidence which does show presence in United
    Kingdom albeit not as far back as 1999. For example, there is a  letter
    from a consultant homoeopath confirming that  the  Appellant  had  been
    registered as his patient since January 2002. There are  also  payslips
    from 2000 and a number of other documents.  Those were  not  challenged
    by the Secretary of State.

 9. It is not true to say therefore that in placing reliance  on  documents
    the Judge made contradictory findings. The only documents the judge did
    not find satisfactory was the tenancy agreements.

10. The Judge made clear at paragraphs 15, 16 and 17  that  he  heard  from
    three witnesses. He set out their evidence in those paragraphs  and  at
    paragraph 22 said that he  found  all  the  witnesses  to  be  entirely
    credible. Their evidence was that they had known the  Appellant  for  a
    period which established his presence in the UK for 14 years. The Judge
    had those witnesses before him, something  which  I  do  not  have  the
    benefit of. The judge was entitled to find the witnesses  credible  and
    gave reasons for his credibility findings.

11. While it may be regarded as a generous decision and that not all Judges
    may have decided this appeal in the same way, there is no requirement
    that a Judge can only decide an appeal on the basis of documentary
    evidence to prove a fact.  A Judge is entitled to accept oral evidence.
     That is what occurred here and I can discern no error of law in the
    Judge's reasoning which would permit me to set aside the determination.
    Accordingly, the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date 8th August 2014




Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
