
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33423/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at HMCTS Employment Tribunals,       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Liverpool                                  |                                 |
|On 12th January 2017                       |On 12th July 2017                |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 mr jia wang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Ahmed (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Clough, promulgated on 29th April 2016, following  a  hearing  at
    Glasgow  on  3rd  February  2016.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of Mr Jia Wang, whereupon he subsequently  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of  China,  who  was  born  on  30th
    October 1982.  He entered the UK as a work permit holder  and  on  11th
    December 2013 was  granted  leave  to  enter  in  line  with  his  visa
    conditions.  He has a spouse by the name of Chan He, and she  was  also
    granted entry clearance as a dependent spouse of a work  permit  holder
    and she entered the UK on 27th August 2009.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he has made an application for settlement
    on 26th November 2013 and the application was refused  on  8th  October
    2015 on the basis that he had not met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    134(vi) because the TOEIC test submitted  was  withdrawn  by  the  test
    provider and declared invalid on grounds  that  the  voice  recognition
    software detected the presence of a proxy  tester  in  his  case.   The
    Secretary of State is of the view that the Appellant has  obtained  his
    original ETS certificate by deception because at interview he  required
    an interpreter to assist him answer the  questions  put  to  him.   His
    case, however, is that he is proficient in  the  English  language  but
    does not get many opportunities to use the English language because  he
    is employed as a head chef and remains in the kitchen for most  of  the
    time and his work colleagues are mostly Chinese, and speak  in  Chinese
    to him.  As a result of this, "his  English  language  proficiency  has
    deteriorated as displaced at the interview" (see  paragraph  4  of  the
    determination).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge determined this appeal "on the papers" because,  despite  the
    Appellant being represented by legal  representatives,  a  request  had
    been made that the Appellant's appeal should be determined  without  an
    oral hearing.  The judge had the benefit of  Grounds  of  Appeal  which
    were emailed on 26th October 2015, and at page 12 of the appeal bundle,
    it was stated that a full bundle of papers would be provided  for.   No
    such bundle was provided before the judge other than  the  Respondent's
    bundle.  The judge went on to determine the appeal on  the  basis  that
    there  was  "scant  evidence"  in  relation  to  the  Article  8  claim
    (paragraph 7).  The judge concluded that the Appellant did  produce  an
    invalid TOIEC test in that the provider correctly identified the person
    who took the test as a proxy for the Appellant.  There were no  details
    of the Appellant or his dependent wife in terms of the Article 8 claim.
     Moreover, although there was a child in  existence  nothing  had  been
    raised in relation to the child's life in the UK.  As a result  of  the
    limited evidence, the judge inevitably concluded that the appeal  could
    not succeed.

Grounds of Application

 5.  The  grounds  of  application  place  reliance   upon   the   Tribunal
    determination of SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016]
    UKUAT to suggest that the Secretary of State had failed to make  out  a
    case on the basis of an initial burden being upon  her  that  deception
    had actually been exercised.  On 4th October 2016, permission to appeal
    was granted.  On 20th October 2016, a Rule 24 response was  entered  to
    the effect that the Appellant had asked for a  paper  hearing  and  the
    Respondent was of the view that a proxy had been used to take the TOIEC
    test which was a matter that the Appellant could inevitably  not  rebut
    due to his absence at the hearing.

The Hearing

 6. At the hearing before me, Mr Ahmed, appearing as Counsel on  behalf  of
    the Appellant submitted that he would place reliance, not just  on  the
    case of SM and Qadir, but on the more recent Court of  Appeal  judgment
    in Shehzad and Chowdhary [2016] EWCA Civ 615, where it had been  stated
    at paragraph 30, that generic evidence must be accompanied by  specific
    evidence if the Secretary of State is to discharge the  initial  burden
    of proof that is upon her.  This was  not  the  case  here.   What  the
    Secretary of State should have done was to have produced a  spreadsheet
    with the entry "invalid test"  on  it  and  since  this  had  not  been
    disclosed it was difficult to say whether the  Appellant  actually  had
    used a proxy, or whether there had been a error  on  the  part  of  the
    authorities, which error is now well-known to occur in  certain  cases,
    given the Tribunal decision in SM and Qadir.  Second, the Appellant had
    been in the UK now for ten years and he was making an  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain and he also had a child and there  had  been
    no proper consideration of the "best interests" of the child before the
    judge came to his  conclusion.   There  was  no  consideration  of  the
    Section 117 criteria.

 7. For his part, Mr Harrison submitted that he had had to accept  that  no
    spreadsheet had been provided to give specific detail, other  than  the
    generic information that had been provided, showing that the  Appellant
    indeed had used a proxy.  However, the Appellant had asked for a  paper
    hearing and he had been unable to rebut the allegation by  not  turning
    up at the hearing.

 8. At the end of the Hearing  I  proceeded  to  write  my  decision  which
    appears below.

Error of Law

 9.  I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA  2007)
    such that I should set aside the decision.  This is  despite  the  fact
    that the Appellant chose a paper hearing and it was inevitable that  in
    such a scenario he would  not  be  able  to  rebut  any  allegation  of
    deception, especially given that a proper appeal bundle  had  not  been
    submitted, as the judge very properly pointed  out.   Nevertheless,  in
    terms of discharging the initial burden which is on  the  Secretary  of
    State, Lord Justice Beatson was clear that  "no  material  was  put  in
    front of the Tribunal to show that Mr Shehzad's TOEIC speaking  English
    test had been judged to be 'invalid' as opposed to 'questionable'.  All
    that the Tribunal had in front of it were  his  results.".   The  judge
    went on to say that, "it thus appears that the documents before the  FT
    did not identify Mr Shehzad's test as 'invalid'.

10. The rule that emerges from this Court of Appeal judgment is  that,  "in
    circumstances where the generic evidence is not accompanied by evidence
    showing that the individual under considerations test  was  categorised
    as 'invalid', I consider that the Secretary of State faces a difficulty
    in respect of the evidential burden at the initial stage (see Ber  Lord
    Justice Beatson at paragraph 30).  I consider this to be the  situation
    here as well.

11. Accordingly, given that the initial  evidential  burden  has  not  been
    discharged this appeal is allowed such that it is remitted back to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, to be determined again de novo by  a  judge  other
    than Judge Clough, by which time it is be  hoped  that  the  evidential
    burden would be discharged by the Secretary of State, and if it is not,
    then the matter will fall to be determined by a Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal on the basis of the evidence as it stands from  the  Secretary
    of State.  Needless to say, it will do the Appellant no harm whatsoever
    to attend the hearing and to have legal representation provided.

Notice of Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed to the extent that it is to be remitted back to a Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal under Practice Statement 7.2 other  than  by  Judge
    Clough.

13. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th July 2017






