
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/33837/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 March 2016                    |On 24 March 2016                   |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                            MONICA IJEMEH IKHILE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr J Plowright counsel instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge J D L Edwards promulgated on 1 April 2015 which  dismissed
   the Appellant's appeal against a decision to remove from the UK following
   the refusal of an application dated 26 March 2014 for discretionary leave
   to remain on the basis of family and private life.
Background
4. The Appellant was born on 18 May 1989 and is a national of Nigeria.
5. The Appellant arrived in the UK on 4 October 2006  with  entry  clearance
   as a student and this leave was extended until February 2013 as a Tier  1
   HS Post study student.
6. On 13 February 2013 she applied for leave as Tier  1  Entrepreneur  which
   was refused. The decision was appealed but permission was refused and the
   Appellant was appeal rights exhausted on 26 March 2014.
7. On 26 March 2014 the Appellant made the  application  whose  refusal  was
   the subject of this appeal.
8.  It  was  conceded  that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  any  of   the
   requirements for leave under the Immigration Rules  although  these  were
   considered in the refusal letter. The application  for  leave  was  on  a
   discretionary basis under Article 8. The refusal letter  stated  that  in
   essence there were no compelling circumstances in  the  Appellant's  case
   that warranted a grant of leave outside the Rules.


The Judge's Decision
9. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Edwards ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's
   decision. The Judge :
   a) Set out the Appellant's immigration history against which  the  appeal
      was made.
   b) Set out the applicable law that was considered by the refusal  letter,
      both the Rules and Article 8 setting out in full the 5 questions posed
      in Razgar [2004] UKHL 2015.
   c) Summarised the evidence that she had come to the  UK  to  further  her
      education in 2006 and was joined by her parents in 2009;  her  parents
      her help with household duties as her mother had an arthritic knee and
      her father had hypertension and diabetes; she has performed  a  number
      of charitable works; she claimed to have no ties to Nigeria and  would
      find difficulty in acquiring work or accommodation.
   d) He found that  the  parents  were  unimpressive  witnesses  and  their
      dependency was exaggerated given that the mother worked part time  and
      their health issues were the concomitants of old age.
   e) He found that she did have ties with Nigeria in that she relatives and
      her father had a pension payable there.
   f) She was young well qualified and intelligent and energetic  and  could
      easily reintegrate into Nigerian society.
   g) He concluded by noting that she had entered  the  UK  on  a  temporary
      basis and he could find no compelling reasons not covered by the Rules
      that would warrant a grant of leave outside the Rules. The refusal was
      therefore proportionate.
10. Grounds of appeal were lodged suggesting that the Judge wrongly  focused
   on paragraph 276ADE and failed to give adequate consideration to  Article
   8 outside the Rules; he failed to consider the evidence that there was  a
   high level of co-dependency between the Appellant and her  parents  which
   constituted more than normal emotional ties for the purposes  of  Article
   8(1); he made no assessment of the proportionality of the decision

11.  Permission was initially refused but the application  was  renewed  and
   on16 October 2015 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman gave permission  to
   appeal.

12. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Plowright on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :

   a) The Article 8 assessment was very brief and was a short analysis  that
      did not address all of the issues.

   b)  The  Appellants  relationship  with  her  parents  was  not  properly
      addressed.

   c) There was a lack of reasoning in the assessment of family and  private
      life and whether the Judge accepted there  was  family  life  for  the
      purpose of Article 8.

   d) There was no basis to move onto proportionality.

13. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Mc Vitie submitted that :

   a) The decision was brief.

   b)  How  could  this  appeal  ever  have  succeeded  on  the   basis   of
      compassionate features: there were no health issues; the Appellant was
      well educated; the only issue raised was a s to  her  parents'  health
      but that was rejected.

   c) The Judge accepted there was  family  life  but  arguably  could  have
      stopped at stage 1 and no more analysis was required.

The Law

14. In relation to claims under Article 8  the  Respondent  considers  these
   under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Rules and the Secretary  of
   State's Guidance. If an applicant does not meet the criteria set  out  in
   the Rules then guidance issued by the Secretary of State in the  form  of
   instructions provides in effect, that leave to remain outside  the  rules
   could be granted in the exercise of residual discretion  in  'exceptional
   circumstances' which are defined in the guidance and must be exercised on
   the basis of  Article  8  considerations,  in  particular  assessing  all
   relevant factors in determining whether a decision is proportionate under
   Article 8.2.

15. It is now generally accepted  that  the  Immigration  Rules  Rs  do  not
   provide in advance for every nuance in the application of  Article  8  in
   individual cases. At para 30 of Nagre, Sales J said:


   "30.     ... if, after the process of applying the new rules and  finding
       that the claim for leave to remain under them  fails,  the  relevant
       official  or  tribunal  judge  considers  it  is  clear   that   the
       consideration under the Rules has fully addressed any family life or
       private life issues arising under Article 8, it would be  sufficient
       simply to say that; they would not have to go on,  in  addition,  to
       consider the case separately from the Rules. If there is no arguable
       case that there may be good grounds for  granting  leave  to  remain
       outside the Rules by reference to Article 8, there would be no point
       in introducing full separate consideration of Article 8 again  after
       having reached a decision on application of the Rules."

16. This was also endorsed by the Court of Appeal in Singh and Khalid where
    Underhill LJ said (at para 64):


   "64.     ... there is no need to conduct a full separate  examination  of
       article 8 outside  the  Rules  where,  in  the  circumstances  of  a
       particular  case,  all  the  issues  have  been  addressed  in   the
       consideration under the Rules."



17. More recently the Court of Appeal in  SS  Congo  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387
    stated in paragraph 33:


   "In our judgment, even though a test of exceptionality does not apply  in
   every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it is accurate to say
   that the general position outside the sorts of special contexts  referred
   to above is that compelling circumstances would need to be identified  to
   support a claim for grant of LTR outside the new Rules in Appendix FM. In
   our view, that is a formulation which is not  as  strict  as  a  test  of
   exceptionality or a requirement of "very compelling reasons" (as referred
   to in MF (Nigeria) in the context of  the  Rules  applicable  to  foreign
   criminals),  but  which  gives  appropriate   weight   to   the   focused
   consideration of public interest  factors  as  finds  expression  in  the
   Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in Appendix FM. It also
   reflects the formulation in Nagre at para. [29], which  has  been  tested
   and has survived scrutiny in this court: see, e.g., Haleemudeen at  [44],
   per Beatson LJ. "Section 117A (2) of the 2002 Act provides that  where  a
   Tribunal is required to determine  whether  a  decision  made  under  the
   Immigration Acts would be unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
   Act 1998 it must, in considering 'the  public  interest  question',  have
   regard in all cases to the considerations listed in  section117B  of  the
   Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as  amended  by   the
   Immigration Act 2014). Section 117 (3) provides that the 'public interest
   question' means the question of whether an interference with  a  person's
   right to respect for private and family life is justified  under  Article
   8(2).

18. The S117B considerations are as follows:

         "(1)     The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,  that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

19. In relation to the writing of decisions I  remind  myself  of  what  was
   said  in Piglowska v Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR 1360 Lord Hoffmann said at p.
   1372 that "The exigencies of daily court room life are such that  reasons
   for judgment will always be capable of having been better expressed......
   These reasons should be read  on  the  assumption  that,  unless  he  has
   demonstrated the contrary, the judge  knew  how  he  should  perform  his
   functions and  which  matters  he  should  take  into  account.  This  is
   particularly true when the matters in question are so well known as those
   specified in section 25(2) [of the Matrimonial Proceedings Act 1973].  An
   appellate court should resist the temptation  to  subvert  the  principle
   that they should not substitute their own  discretion  for  that  of  the
   judge by a narrow textual analysis which enables them to  claim  that  he
   misdirected himself."

20. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons:  set
   aside) Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1) :  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the judge."

Finding on Material Error

21. Having heard those  submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no errors of law that were material to the outcome  of  the
   decision.

22. This was an application for leave to remain predicated on  a  concession
   that the Appellant could not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
   Rules, specifically Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE (1) whose purpose is
   set out in Appendix FM as:

   "it reflects how, under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention,  the
   balance will be struck between the  right  to  respect  for  private  and
   family life and the legitimate  aims  of  protecting  national  security,
   public safety and the economic well-being of the UK;  the  prevention  of
   disorder  and  crime;  the  protection  of  health  or  morals;  and  the
   protection of the rights and freedoms of others (and  in  doing  so  also
   reflects the relevant public interest considerations as set out  in  Part
   5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002)"

23. While recognising that the Rules can nevertheless not  cater  for  every
   nuance of applicants lives the courts  have  recently  identified  in  SS
   Congo  that  the correct test to apply is that 'compelling  circumstances
   would need to be identified to support a claim for grant of  LTR  outside
   the new Rules.'

24. When read as a whole this is exactly what the Judge has assessed in  his
   decision.

25. The Judge set out in detail and self-directed himself  appropriately  on
   those questions he was required to ask at paragraph 12  of  his  decision
   where he sets out the 5 Razgar questions: he is not required to set  them
   out again in his findings provided it is clear he has considered them.

26. There is no merit in the argument that the Judge  focused  too  much  on
   paragraph 276ADE as indeed it was conceded by counsel in the  first  tier
   that the Appellant could meet the evidential burden of establishing  that
   she had no ties to Nigeria,  the  test  at  that  time.  The  Judge  made
   reference to the Appellant's ties to Nigeria in his Article 8  assessment
   as this was clearly part of a rounded assessment of  the  proportionality
   of her returning there.

27. It was argued there is no proper analysis of family or private life  but
   the starting point in this case in relation to family life was that  this
   was a relationship between parents and an adult child where there  is  no
   presumption of family life. The case was argued on the basis  that  there
   was a high level of co dependency which supported a  finding  that  there
   were more than normal emotional ties and therefore family  life  for  the
   purpose of Article 8. The Judge considered that argument at paragraph  22
   in some detail having heard oral evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  her
   parents. He did not  find  the  parents  convincing  witnesses  and  made
   findings that were open to him that their health issues were 'simply  the
   sad concomitants of old age.' He also noted  that  whatever  difficulties
   the Appellant's mother had they did not prevent her working part time  in
   a nursing home as a care assistant. I am satisfied that it was  therefore
   open  to  him  to  find  that   their   circumstances   were   'seriously
   exaggerated'. This finding was not challenged.

28. The Judge might be  criticized  for  accepting,  given  his  finding  in
   relation to the serious exaggeration of the  alleged  co-dependency  that
   Article 8(1) family life was established, but given that he  went  on  to
   consider proportionality he was clearly  prepared  to  accept  this  even
   allowing for his reservations. Nevertheless, that finding would impact on
   the nature and quality of family life in this case that  underpinned  the
   appeal and the assessment of proportionality. He might additionally  have
   been entitled to note that the Appellant's relationship with her  parents
   had always apparently  been  enjoyed  at  a  distance  in  that  she  had
   according to the witness statement before  the  Judge  attended  boarding
   school in Nigeria and then come to the UK without her parents in 2006 and
   they had not lived together as a family again until her parents  came  to
   the UK in 2009.

29. The Judge I accept made very  limited  findings  about  the  Appellant's
   private life (paragraphs 21 and 23 refer to  her  career  and  engagement
   with the community) but given that he would have been statutorily obliged
   under s117B to give little weight to a private life established while her
   status was precarious this could have made no material difference to  the
   outcome of the case. The Judge should also (but  did  not)  consider  the
   other statutory public interest factors set out in section 117B which not
   only do not assist her but include the requirement to take  into  account
   that the maintenance of immigration control is in the public interest and
   the Appellant does not meet  the  Rules  that  underpin  that  system  of
   control.

30. Ultimately the Judge set out all of the material facts in this case  but
   both counsel in the first tier and Mr Plowright had to concede  that  the
   only factor that could be prayed in aid of  an  argument  of  'compelling
   circumstances', which it was accepted was the correct test to apply,  was
   the health of her parents. Given his findings about that I  am  satisfied
   that the Judge was entitled to conclude that  there  were  no  compelling
   circumstances.

31. I remind myself of what was said in   Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:
   set aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1) :  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the judge."

32. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning and  identified  accurately  the  facts  on
   which the argument of compelling circumstances  was  based  but  rejected
   that evidence.

CONCLUSION

33. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

34. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
10.3.2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

