
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33224/2013




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 October 2014                             |On 9 October 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                              miss Folake Kuti
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Nigeria,  date  of  birth  4  March  1972,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision dated 18 July 2013 to refuse
    to vary leave to remain.  The appeal against that decision came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Wellesley-Cole, who on 25 July 2014 dismissed
    the appeal seemingly with reference to paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM
    of the Immigration Rules and with reference to Article 8 of  the  ECHR.
    Permission to appeal that decision was  given  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge P J G White on 14 August 2014.  The Respondent  made  a  response
    under Rule 24 of the Upper Tribunal Procedure  Rules  dated  28  August
    2014.

2.   Before the First-tier Tribunal Judge Mr Sellwood appeared and  provided
    an extract from the skeleton argument which he put before the judge.

3.   His primary submission was that at the  date  of  application,  16  May
    2012, the old Immigration Rules were in being and there was  no  direct
    provision for the Appellant's application and so it was made outside of
    the Rules with reference to Article 8 of  the  ECHR.   The  Rules  were
    changed by the Statement of Changes of 13 June  2012  which  came  into
    effect on 9 July 2012.

4.   In the submissions to the judge Mr Sellwood  argued  that  because  the
    application had been made before the Rules were changed the  effect  of
    the transitional provisions was that the matter should only  have  been
    considered with reference to Article 8 of the ECHR.  In support of that
    he brought to the judge's attention the  case  of  Edgehill  &  Anor  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 402  and  in
    particular the court's interpretation of the implementation  provisions
    which indicated that applications made before the Rules came into force
    on 8 July but a decision upon which had not been decided then  it  fell
    to be decided under the Rules as they were then.

5.   It is fair to say that  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Edgehill  were  not
    specifically taken to  paragraph  277  of  the  amended  Rules  and  in
    particular whilst 277A and B did not apply it was to be argued that  it
    was open to the Secretary of State where the Secretary of State  deemed
    it appropriate to consider an application to which  the  provisions  of
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE did not already apply so as to  enable
    leave to remain on bases under the amended Rules.

6.   That matter was neither taken to the attention of  the  judge  in  this
    case but more importantly it is clear from the reasons for refusal that
    the Secretary of State did not appear to be applying the provisions  of
    paragraph 277C but had simply gone  straight  into  the  issue  in  the
    refusal letter of 18 July 2013 of paragraph 276ADE.

7.   In relation to any other matters including Article 8  in  a  brief  and
    unreasoned paragraph the Secretary of State said this:

         "It has also been considered whether  your  application  raises  or
         contains any exceptional circumstances which, consistent  with  the
         right to respect for private and family life contained in Article 8
         of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights,   might   warrant
         consideration by the Secretary of State of grant of leave to remain
         in the United Kingdom outside the requirements of  the  Immigration
         Rules but it has been decided that it does not.   Your  application
         for leave to remain in the United Kingdom is therefore refused."


8.   First it is clear that the Reasons for Refusal Letter does not  address
    the issue which  by  then  had  been  obviously  the  subject  of  some
    consideration, namely consideration of the matter outside of the Rules,
    but rather the assumption that seems to have been made that because  of
    the date when the decision was  made  the  new  Rules  applied  and  so
    paragraph 276ADE was essentially the end of the matter.


9.   It is clear that the judge dealing with the appeal did  not  deal  with
    the primary submission of Mr Sellwood, namely that paragraph 276ADE had
    no application, and although the judge was positively informed that the
    Appellant could not meet those requirements the judge then went  on  in
    the context of Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640 to look at Article 8 outside  of
    the Rules.

10.  What the  judge  then  did  it  seemed  to  me  from  paragraph  10  to
    paragraphs 13 and 14 was to consider whether Article 8 was engaged  and
    whether or not it was disproportionate to reject the Appellant's  claim
    for leave to remain  and  by  reason  of  the  view  that  it  was  not
    disproportionate to conclude in a way which is self-evidently  back  to
    front in relation to the case law that there  were  therefore  not  the
    circumstances which were  sufficiently  exceptional  or  compelling  or
    compassionate circumstances so as to look at the matter outside of  the
    Rules.

11.  A further sustainable criticism of the  decision  is  that  whilst  the
    judge identified the important case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 the  judge
    did not set out the five stages of questions posed to the conclusion as
    to whether or not the Respondent's decision was disproportionate.  What
    there is is a melange of  considerations  in  which  ultimately  it  is
    extremely difficult to find clear findings save insofar  as  the  judge
    rejected the argument that the Appellant had through  her  relationship
    with family members and particularly her aunt, effectively her  mother,
    did not have a family life although such people may form  part  of  her
    private life.  The judge did not go on to assess  the  significance  of
    interference in that private life and did not ultimately go on to  make
    an analysis  as  to  what  extent  the  Respondent's  decision  was  in
    accordance with the law or  necessary  to  address  the  considerations
    arising under Article 8(2) of the ECHR.  Ultimately, in a confusion  of
    reasoning the judge concluded, seemingly engaging with the  concept  of
    exceptional  circumstances  to  address   proportionality,   that   the
    Respondent's  decision  was  proportionate  because   there   were   no
    exceptional  circumstances.   The  circularity  of  the   argument   is
    demonstrable from reading the determination.  In  the  circumstances  I
    therefore found in any event unfortunately that the  determination  did
    not disclose a freestanding analysis as required of Article 8 and it is
    noted and should be commented upon that the judge makes  no  discussion
    of the public interest as  part  of  her  reasoning  on  the  issue  of
    proportionality.  In  these  circumstances  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    original Tribunal's decision discloses material errors of law  and  the
    original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.

12.   Miss  Everett  could  not  because  of  her  instructions   make   any
    concessions upon the correctness of the decision in Edgehill,  which  I
    infer is opposed by the Secretary of State.  She did  accept  that  the
    judge's reasoning gave every appearance  of  asking  the  questions  in
    relation to looking at Article 8 outside the Rules the wrong way  round
    in the light of the case law that the judge was  evidently  citing.   I
    think  her  acceptance  of  that  factual  matter  was  undoubted   and
    reasonable on her part.

13.  In all the circumstances it seems to me, finding as I do that  Edgehill
    is good law and binding upon me, that  the  appropriate  course  is  to
    conclude  that  the  Secretary  of  State  made  an  error  of  law  in
    considering the application outside of the  Rules  and  has  failed  to
    address as the law then stood the position in relation to an Article  8
    claim.  Accordingly I find that the appeal is  allowed  to  the  extent
    that it is  remitted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  be  remade  in
    accordance with the law.

ANONYMITY

No  anonymity  order  was  made  nor  was  one  sought  or  indeed  I   find
appropriate.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The judge made no finding in relation to a fee award but  in  the  light  of
the appeal failing  before  the  judge  that  does  not  make  any  material
difference.



Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
