
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/33574/2014
                                                               IA/33578/2014
                                                               IA/33579/2014
                                                               IA/33582/2014
                                                               IA/33583/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |            Decision and Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 9 July 2015                           |            14 July 2015             |
|                                         |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            ADEDEJI OLUBUMMO (1)
                           FOLASHADE OLABUMMO (2)
                             AYOMIDE OLUBUMMO (3)
                            INIOLUWA OLABUMMO (4)
                           IMISIOLUWA OLUBUMMO (5)
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O Ogunbiyi, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The respondents to this  appeal  are  citizens  of  Nigeria  born  on  20
   September 1962, 30 October 1968, 18 November 1996, 3  March  2000  and  3
   March 2000 respectively. They are a family and  therefore  their  appeals
   have been linked and heard together. The appellant is  the  Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department, who has appealed with  the  permission  of
   the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Coutts, allowing the respondents' appeals against  decisions  of
   the Secretary of State, dated 9 August 2014, to remove them  to  Nigeria,
   having refused their applications for leave on human rights grounds.  The
   Secretary of State refused the applications for leave on reconsideration,
   having found the respondents could  not  succeed  under  Appendix  FM  or
   paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules,  HC395,  and  there  were  no
   exceptional circumstances for the purposes of  article  8  of  the  Human
   Rights Convention.


2. It is more convenient to refer to the parties as  they  were  before  the
   First-tier Tribunal. I shall  therefore  refer  to  the  members  of  the
   Olubummo family from now on as "the  appellants"  and  the  Secretary  of
   State as "the respondent".


3. I was not asked and saw no reason to make an anonymity direction.


4. The first appellant arrived in the UK in October 2001 with a visit  visa.
   After being refused further leave in November 2002  the  first  appellant
   overstayed. The second appellant also came to the  UK  as  a  visitor  in
   September 2004, accompanied by all the children.  They  all  returned  to
   Nigeria before the expiry of their leave. They returned to the UK shortly
   before their leave expired  on  10  March  2005.  They  last  entered  as
   visitors on 15 July 2005 and they overstayed their leave. As Judge Coutts
   recorded, the  first  and  second  appellants  decided  they  should  all
   continue their lives here.

5. After a hearing on 6 February 2015 Judge Coutts allowed the  appeals.  He
   noted there was no real challenge to the evidence. The first  and  second
   appellants had made their choices as to where they made their lives.  The
   first appellant set up a business  as  a  motor  trader  and  the  second
   appellant also ran her own business selling clothing  until  2009.  Since
   then she has not worked. The children all  attended  state  schools.  The
   eldest child, Adewale, is not an appellant. He had achieved  good  grades
   at A-level and now wishes to go to university. He had been accepted on  a
   course but could not start it because of his lack of immigration  status.
   The third appellant was about to take her A-levels and very  high  grades
   were predicted. The fourth and fifth appellants, twin  boys,  were  doing
   well in their studies also. The first and second appellant now  regretted
   their choices given the impact  on  the  children,  which  they  had  not
   foreseen. Their eldest son was unable to start  his  degree  course.  The
   third appellant had not been able to go abroad on  school  trips.   Judge
   Coutts concluded that, if the case only concerned the  first  and  second
   appellants, it would be relatively straightforward. They  would  have  to
   take the consequences of their poor decisions. However, the children were
   now  experiencing  the  consequences  of  those  choices  and  they  were
   blameless. The third fourth and fifth appellants came to the UK when they
   were 8 and 5 years of age and they  would  remember  little  of  Nigeria.
   Their connection to the country consisted of speaking to  their  paternal
   grandfather on the telephone from time to time. They had grown up in  the
   expectation of life here.  In paragraph 27,  Judge  Coutts  concluded  in
   respect of the third, fourth and fifth appellants as follows:

     "27.     It follows therefore that I am satisfied that it would not  be
    reasonable to expect the third, fourth  and  fifth  appellants  ...  to
    return to Nigeria; there being no dispute that they have been here  for
    more than seven years. Accordingly, they qualify for leave  in  respect
    to their private life under para 276ADE of the immigration rules."

6. Judge Coutts found the first and second appellants did not qualify  under
   the rules but  there  were  exceptional  or  compassionate  circumstances
   present  which  were  not  covered  by  the  rules  and  which   required
   consideration of the  position  under  article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
   Convention. That is because the three children he had found were entitled
   to enjoy their private life in the UK needed their parents here  to  look
   after them in order to  do  that.  On  proportionality  he  concluded  as
   follows in paragraph 30:

     "30.     I find that it would not be proportionate to remove the  first
    and second appellants to Nigeria. If the first  and  second  appellants
    were removed to Nigeria they would not be able  to  return  because  of
    their immigration history or, at the  very  least,  there  would  be  a
    significant delay in them being able to return here which would  affect
    both the private life of their children ... and also their family  life
    together with their parents, the first and second appellants. It  would
    therefore be damaging to the children's welfare as they  would  not  be
    able to look after themselves here without their parents' financial and
    emotional support nor would it be reasonable to expect them to do so."

7. Finally Judge Coutts considered the position of Adewale, even  though  he
   was not an appellant. He purported to  allow  his  appeal  on  article  8
   grounds.

8. The respondent sought permission to appeal from the  First-tier  Tribunal
   on three grounds: (1) lack of jurisdiction to allow Adewale's appeal, (2)
   misdirection in law for failing to apply section 117B in  substance,  and
   (3) failing to carry out a balanced assessment of the third,  fourth  and
   fifth appellants' appeals so as to determine what was reasonable.

9. Permission to appeal was granted by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   Davidge. She considered  it  was  arguable  Judge  Coutts  had  erred  in
   paragraph 27 by treating  the  length  of  the  children's  residence  as
   determinative. All grounds could be argued.

10. I heard argument on the question of whether Judge Coutts's  decision  is
   vitiated by material error of law.

11. Mr Parkinson applied to  vary  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  include  an
   argument that the judge made a material error of  fact  amounting  to  an
   error of law in paragraph 26 where he said they did not know the language
   in Nigeria. English is spoken in Nigeria. The application  was  unopposed
   and I allowed it. Whilst the ground did not appear to  have  great  merit
   seen in isolation, it was in my view part of  a  wider  critique  of  the
   judge's  overall  assessment  of  the  reasonableness  of  the   children
   returning to Nigeria.

12. Mr Parkinson argued that paragraphs 25 and 26 of the  judge's  decision,
   which contain his reasons for finding that it was unreasonable to  expect
   the children to return were little more than a  list  of  the  inevitable
   consequences of the children returning. There was no reason the  children
   would have little appreciation of Nigerian culture as they were part of a
   Nigerian church group. There was no obligation to educate the  appellants
   in the UK. In Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74, the Supreme  Court  reviewed
   the applicable principles and confirmed that it was right  to  take  into
   account the fact the child is not British in assessing the weight  to  be
   given to best interests (see paragraph 24). In EV (Philippines) &  Ors  v
   SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874, in the context of an article 8  proportionality
   balancing exercise, Lewison LJ found on the  facts  of  that  case  that,
   where the parents had no independent right to remain in the  UK,  it  was
   "entirely reasonable" to  expect  the  children  to  go  with  them.  The
   desirability of the children being educated in the UK at  public  expense
   could not outweigh their best interests, which was to remain  with  their
   parents. The judge had not shown it was unreasonable for the children  to
   return. The judge had not taken into account the need for  the  Secretary
   of State to control immigration. The case was commonplace. In short,  the
   judge had not given adequate reasons for his decision.

13. Mr Ogunbiyi argued the judge's decision did  not  contain  any  material
   error. The children had never known Nigeria except when  they  were  very
   young. The judge had made clear  findings  on  this.  There  was  a  huge
   difference between living in Nigeria  and  familiarity  with  a  Nigerian
   church group in the UK. The judge was right  to  look  at  the  emotional
   impact on the children who were doing well in their education. He  argued
   that there was no need for there to be anything out of  the  ordinary  in
   the facts. Children who had  lived  in  the  UK  for  seven  years  would
   normally qualify  unless  there  were  unusual  circumstances  making  it
   unreasonable.

14. Mr Parkinson argued the case required a more nuanced approach  than  the
   judge gave it. Children are adaptable.

Error of law

15. I start by noting the judge plainly erred  in  allowing  the  appeal  of
   Adewale for the simple fact there was no appeal before him.  He  referred
   to it being well-established that the family life of family  members  not
   party to the proceedings could be taken into account. That is correct but
   does not extend to allowing non-existent appeals. Mr Ogunbiyi referred to
   the unfortunate circumstances relating to Adewale's case. It  appears  an
   appealable decision was not made in respect of him, which might well have
   been an error. Mr  Ogunbiyi  suggested  the  judge  had  thought  it  was
   sensible to deal with him as well. I agree it was right and  sensible  to
   include  consideration  of  Adewale's  circumstances  given   there   had
   apparently been an oversight in failing to make  an  appealable  decision
   for him. Nonetheless it was erroneous to purport to allow his appeal.

16. The error noted above has no bearing on the  remaining  appellants.  The
   decision to allow Adewale's appeal is set aside for want of jurisdiction.



17. Turning to the appeals of the third,  fourth  and  fifth  appellants,  I
   note the wording of the rule:



         "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave
         to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the
         date of application, the applicant:

         (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
         LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and

         (ii) has made a valid  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
         grounds of private life in the UK; and

         ...
         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any  period  of  imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; or

         ..."

18. I note the appeals turn on whether it would be reasonable to expect  the
   children to  leave  the  UK  or  not.  Insofar  as  the  grounds  seeking
   permission to appeal argued the judge erred by regarding the seven years'
   residence as determinative (as the judge granting  permission  to  appeal
   notes in relation to Judge Coutts's paragraph 27), I do  not  regard  the
   point as arguable. I note it was not pursued by Mr Parkinson.  The  first
   sentence of the  paragraph  shows  the  judge  was  firmly  planting  his
   decision on the basis of reasonableness and not simply the  seven  years'
   residence.

19. Mr Parkinson's arguments amounted in essence to saying the judge  failed
   to give adequate  reasons  for  his  conclusion  that  it  would  not  be
   reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK. I do not accept  Judge
   Coutts is unaware that English is spoken in  Nigeria  and  I  reject  the
   argument that he made a material error of fact.

20. It is helpful to scrutinise the decision to discover which  factors  led
   Judge Coutts to his conclusion. As noted, he made no adverse  credibility
   findings. The factors are as follows:


    1) the children were young when  they  entered  the  UK  (8,  5  and  5
    respectively) and had resided in the UK for 10 years;
    2) there was no blame attributable to the children for the choices made
    by their parents;
    3) the children would have few memories of Nigeria  and  their  current
    connection with Nigeria consisted of speaking to their grandfather from
    time to time;
    4) the children have not returned to Nigeria since arrival because they
    do not have any travel documents;
    5) the children did not attend secondary school in Nigeria;
    6) the children do not know the language (other than  English)  and  do
    not have an appreciation of cultural differences;
    7) the children have been doing well  at  school  and  hope  to  go  to
    university; and
    8) the children's experience has been in the UK and they expect to live
    their lives here.




21. The judge's decision undoubtedly contains  reasons  for  his  conclusion
   that, having resided here continuously for  more  than  seven  years,  it
   would not be reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.  Although
   Mr Parkinson's challenge was largely framed  within  an  argument  as  to
   whether the judge's reasons were adequate, discussion moved on to whether
   the correct test was applied. Mr Parkinson certainly thought the  reasons
   given by the judge were commonplace and something more than this  had  to
   be shown to  succeed.  The  words  of  Lewison  LJ  in  EV  (Philippines)
   supported the view that something more than a desire to pursue  education
   in the UK would be required. I also queried why the private life of high-
   achieving students should be valued any more  highly  than  students  who
   were not so successful in their studies.

22. In my view strong reasons must be shown for finding  that  it  would  be
   reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK after they have reached
   the  seven-year  threshold.  It  is   well-known   to   immigration   law
   practitioners that the provision now found in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  is
   the latest incarnation of a  longstanding  policy  on  the  part  of  the
   Secretary of State to treat seven years as the point at which enforcement
   action would not generally be  pursued  against  children.  There  was  a
   concession called DP5/96 whereby enforcement would "not normally" proceed
   in cases in which a child had been born here or come here at an early age
   and had lived continuously for seven years. So the current IDIs (Appendix
   FM 1.0 Family Life (as a Partner or Parent)  and  Private  Life:  10-Year
   Routes, section 11.2.4, April 2015) recognise that the longer  the  child
   has resided in the UK the more the balance will begin to swing  in  terms
   of it being unreasonable to expect the child to leave the UK  and  strong
   reasons will be required in  order  to  refuse  a  case  with  continuous
   residence of more than seven years.

23. Seen in this context, I do not see that Judge Coutts's decision  can  be
   challenged on the grounds either that he applied too low a  threshold  or
   that the reasons he gave were inadequate  to  reach  that  threshold.  He
   recognised  the  parents  had  achieved  their  long  residence   through
   overstaying, which was not to their credit, but no blame attached to  the
   children for these choices. His reasons in essence explain why he did not
   think the children would find it possible to adapt  to  life  in  Nigeria
   without considerable hardship. They had successfully integrated in to the
   UK, which they naturally regarded as home following ten years' residence,
   and removing them would have an adverse impact on them. In  other  words,
   strong reasons had not been shown why it would be  reasonable  to  remove
   them. I conclude Judge Coutts's decision was one which it was open to him
   to make and his reasons were adequate.

24. Mr Parkinson did not argue that, if Judge Coutts's decision was  correct
   with respect to the third, fourth and fifth appellants, the  decision  to
   allow the appeals of the first  and  second  appellant  were  nonetheless
   erroneous. In other words, he accepted that their appeals would stand  or
   fall with their children's.

25. Accordingly the respondent's appeal is dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

     The First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error on  a  point  of
    law and its decision allowing the appeals shall stand.


    No anonymity direction has been made.


                               Signed                 Date 14 July 2015






                               Judge Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of
                               the Upper Tribunal
