
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33787/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 August 2014                             |On 28 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                IJAZ HUSSAIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Qureshi, Counsel for Ilford Law Chambers, Ilford


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State,  however,
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, born on 01 January 1990, is a citizen of  Pakistan.   He
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent  dated  03  July  2013,
    refusing him leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student migrant under the  points  based  system  and  for  a
    biometric residence permit. His application was found  to  be  invalid.
    His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Britton on  30
    April 2014 and allowed, in a Determination promulgated on 14 May 2014.

 3. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent.  Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Fisher on 24 June 2014.  The grounds of application contend  that
    the appellant had leave to remain in the United Kingdom until 15  April
    2012 and submitted an application on 13 April 2012 for further leave to
    remain but it was returned as invalid because he  had  not  signed  the
    payment section of  the  application  form.   He  submitted  a  further
    application on 11 June 2013. This was refused with no right  of  appeal
    because the Appellant had no extant leave.  The Judge  considered  that
    the failure to sign the payment section of the original application was
    a slip and that something akin to evidential flexibility ought to  have
    been exercised in the Appellant's favour  and  the  application  should
    have been treated as valid.  The Judge went on  to  allow  the  appeal.
    The permission states that it is arguable that the Judge has  erred  in
    law in concluding that there was a valid appeal before him and in going
    on to purport to allow it.

The Hearing

 4. The Presenting Officer referred to the case of Marghia [2014] UKUT 366.
     He referred to the head notes which state that there is a  common  law
    duty of fairness. He submitted that this refers to procedural fairness.
    The head notes go on to state that residual fairness is not referred to
    in the Immigration Rules and so it is a matter  for  the  Secretary  of
    State to decide, not the Tribunal.

 5. The Presenting Officer went on to submit that  he  is  relying  on  the
    grounds of application.  He submitted that the Respondent's position is
    that there was no valid appeal before the First-tier Judge.

 6. I was referred to the case of Basnet [2012]  UKUT  00113(IAC)  and  the
    Presenting Officer submitted that the Respondent has to show failure on
    the part of the Appellant relating to the validity of the  application.
    He submitted that the First-tier Judge found  that  the  Appellant  had
    failed to sign the payment section of the application form.  There is a
    copy of this on file.  The  Judge  goes  on  in  his  determination  at
    paragraph 11, to liken this to the PBS Process  Instruction  Evidential
    Policy, stating that this was a minor omission.

 7. The Presenting Officer submitted that there is no policy of  evidential
    flexibility when validity of applications is considered.

 8. He submitted that with regard to fairness the important issue  is  that
    the application was incomplete and  invalid.   He  submitted  that  the
    actions of the Secretary of State were  not  procedurally  unfair.   He
    referred to the said case of Marghia which  states  that  there  is  no
    discretion under the Rules so he submitted that this is clearly  not  a
    common law fairness case as in the case  of  Patel  (2011)  UKUT  00211
    (IAC)

 9. The Presenting Officer referred to the case of Mahbub Allam and  Others
    [2012] EWCA Civ 960, paragraphs 49-51.  At paragraph 51  it  is  stated
    that the Appellant might not have appreciated the  distinction  between
    an invalid application which would not be considered unless the obvious
    defect was cured and an application that was a  valid  application  but
    nevertheless fell to be rejected because on examination  the  appellant
    had failed to score the required number of points because he had failed
    to supply a specified document.  The paragraph goes on  to  state  that
    the distinction is a real one and in a number of places the  prescribed
    application form makes it clear that all the questions in the  relevant
    part of the form must be completed and if they are not the  application
    will be invalid.

10. The Presenting Officer submitted that  this  point  was  picked  up  in
    Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2 (20 January 2014).  At paragraph 86 thereof
    it is stated that a student will only be considered to have submitted a
    valid application when the specified particular requirements have  been
    complied with.  The Presenting Officer submitted that in  Mr  Hussain's
    case the Secretary of State found  that  the  application  was  invalid
    because a signature was missing.  He submitted that the  Judge  had  no
    jurisdiction in this case and by dealing with the matter as he  did  he
    made a material error of law.

11. The Appellant's Representative submitted that the Appellant came to the
    United Kingdom on a valid student visa and completed  his  course.   He
    then applied for another course just before his visa  expired  but  his
    application was refused as it was found to be invalid  because  of  the
    lack of a signature.  She submitted that the Appellant gave the correct
    details in his  application  about  his  bank  account  and  all  other
    relevant issues.  She submitted that  he  had  no  assistance  when  he
    completed the form and there is a clear omission on his part.   Because
    of this the form was returned to him marked as invalid.

12. I was referred to his witness statement.  In this he refers to the said
    case of Basnet and she submitted that the Secretary of State had a duty
    to check the form and if the signature was  found  to  be  missing  the
    Appellant should have been given an opportunity to rectify  this.   She
    submitted that the Evidential Flexibility Policy applies  here  as  the
    application could have been validated by one small correction which the
    Appellant could have carried out instantly.

13. She submitted that the Appellant made a fresh application but this  was
    refused with no right of appeal because his visa had expired.  In spite
    of this the fee was taken by the Secretary of State.   The  application
    was also refused because the maintenance requirements could not be met.
     She submitted that had the original application been  considered,  all
    the terms of the Rules were satisfied and it is more than likely that a
    visa would have been granted.

14. Counsel submitted  that  the  Appellant  then  submitted  a  pre-action
    protocol letter but the response from the Secretary of State  was  that
    it was out of time.

15. Counsel submitted that the Appellant had made a  fresh  application  as
    advised to do and had the Secretary of State looked at  the  Rules  and
    the Policy the Appellant's application would have succeeded and by  now
    he would have completed his course and gone home.  She  submitted  that
    the Judge found that this was a minor error on the Appellant's part and
    based on fairness, (as referred to in the case  of  Naved  [2012]  UKUT
    14(IAC)) the application should have been allowed.

16. She submitted that the Appellant had paid the full fees for the  course
    which was due to end in December 2014 but because he did not  sign  the
    form he was prevented from doing the course.  She  submitted  that  now
    his college licence has been revoked so the Appellant not only  is  out
    of pocket for his fees but no longer has his college sponsor.

17. She asked me to consider the evidence and the particular  circumstances
    of this case and find that the Judge's decision is fair and correct.

18. She submitted that the application was not  refused  on  a  substantive
    point and the appellant had signed the  form  at  another  place.   She
    submitted that there was no intention on the  part  of  the  Appellant,
    this was just a minor error as was found by the Judge.

19.  The  Presenting  Officer  made  further   submissions   referring   to
    jurisdiction being set down by Statute.  He submitted that although  he
    feels sorry for the Appellant  there  was  no  valid  application.   He
    submitted that there is no near miss and  evidential  flexibility  does
    not apply as this appeal concerns validity.

20. He submitted that the Appellant went on to make a  further  application
    as he was told to do but this was refused.  He then  submitted  a  pre-
    action protocol letter in March 2013  and  the  Respondent  replied  to
    this.

21. The Presenting Officer referred to the 28 days given  to  an  Appellant
    when the Respondent will turn a blind eye to him overstaying but during
    that 28 day period the Appellant  did  not  submit  a  Judicial  Review
    application.  He submitted therefore that the application made  by  the
    Appellant in June 2013 was well outside the 28 day period.

22. He submitted that there were legal routes  which  the  Appellant  could
    have taken but he did not and there was no valid appeal in this case.

Determination

23. The Appellant's case is that the Respondent's  stance  is  unfair.   He
    states that the Evidential Flexibility Policy should have been used and
    that  he  should  have  been  asked  to  remedy  the  omission  on  the
    application form and his leave should have been regularised to give him
    a fair opportunity to continue his studies in the United Kingdom.

24. The First-tier Judge found that the Appellant was  not  an  over-stayer
    when he made his application on 11 June  2013  and  directed  that  the
    application should  be  decided  on  its  merits.   He  refers  to  the
    Appellant's first application containing a minor omission.  This  minor
    omission, however, invalidated the application.  I have considered  the
    said case of Rodriguez which  refers  to  the  distinction  between  an
    application being invalid and an application being  valid  but  refused
    because of lack of evidence.

25. In this case the Appellant  did  not  submit  a  valid  application  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules.  This invalidity does  not  fall
    within the  parameters  of  the  Evidential  Flexibility  Policy.   The
    Secretary of State was right to find that the Appellant  was  an  over-
    stayer when he made his application on 11 June 2013.

26. The Judge made a material error of law in his  Determination.   Because
    the application was invalid the Tribunal had no jurisdiction and should
    not have heard the appeal.

Decision

27. There is a material error of law in the Judge's Determination.

28. I set aside the Judge's decision.

29. There was no valid application before the First-tier Judge and  he  had
    no jurisdiction to hear the case so the appellant's appeal must fail.

30. No Anonymity Direction was made.






Signed                                  Date



Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



