
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33004/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 June 2015                       |On 8 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  JUNFEI HU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of China, born on 24 October  1973.   On  10
    March 2014 he sought indefinite leave to remain in the UK on the  basis
    of ten years lawful continuous  leave.   The  respondent  refused  that
    application by notice and letter both dated 8 August 2014.  The refusal
    was expressed under the long residence  requirements,  under  paragraph
    276ADE of the Rules regarding private life, and found "no factors of  a
    sufficiently compelling or compassionate nature to warrant granting you
    any period of leave to remain  exceptionally  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules".

 2. By determination promulgated on 18 November  2014  First-Tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bradshaw dismissed the appellant's appeal under  the  Rules.   At
    paragraph 95 the  judge  recorded  Mr  Ndubuisi's  submission  for  the
    appellant that there might be "arguably good grounds for  granting  him
    leave to remain in the  UK  in  terms  of  Article  8,  private  life".
    Adopting his other findings, the judge found that there  were  no  such
    grounds and that he therefore did not need to go on to consider whether
    there were compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised  under
    the Rules.

 3. The appellant's grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  rely  on  an
    extract from MM (Lebanon) & Others  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985  at
    paragraph 128 onwards, although they fail to  identify  the  case  from
    which the passage is taken.  The grounds argue that the judge has  gone
    wrong by applying an intermediary test.

 4. Beyond that, the grounds disagree with the judge's  assessment  of  the
    facts.  They submit that the judge has "simply ignored" the appellant's
    mental health condition, but that misrepresents the determination.

 5. On 16 January 2015 a First-Tier Tribunal Judge  granted  permission  to
    appeal, expressing the view that paragraph 128 of MM  "disapproves  the
    use of intermediate arguability tests in Article 8 cases".

 6. In a Rule 24 response dated 6 February 2015 the respondent argues  that
    the grounds misunderstand MM.  In respect of the  contention  that  the
    judge failed to take into  account  the  appellant's  ill  health,  the
    respondent says  that  the  appellant  fell  a  long  way  short  of  a
    successful claim.

 7. Mr Ndubuisi relied on the grounds of  appeal  and  submitted  that  the
    judge failed to carry out the necessary assessment under the ECHR.   He
    said that the concept of a "good  arguable  case"  has  now  also  been
    disapproved in Oludoyi IJR [2014] UKUT 00539; in Khan [2015]  CSIH  29;
    and particularly in Mirza [2015] CSIH 28  where  at  paragraph  22  the
    Court said that the observations at paragraph 29 of MS  (India)  [2013]
    CSIH 52 were obiter and "simply generalised  observations  and  do  not
    elide the need for a specific, individual assessment of the whole facts
    including the degree to which it may be said that  the  status  of  the
    relevant party was truly precarious."

 8. Mr Ndubuisi next rehearsed the facts of the case and submitted that the
    determination should be reversed.

 9. Mrs O'Brien submitted that MS remained authoritative.  She said that on
    any approach there had to be some factor to show that the case was  not
    adequately dealt with by the terms of the Rules and there was something
    unusual or exceptional which required a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
    Rules.  The determination plainly took everything relevant into account
    in its resolution of the long residence and private life claims  within
    the Rules, including full  consideration  of  the  appellant's  medical
    condition.  The judge rightly found that looking  at  the  facts  as  a
    whole there was no need to look  outside  the  Rules  and  it  was  not
    disproportionate to expect the appellant to leave the UK.

10. Alternatively, Mrs O'Brien  submitted  that  even  if  there  were  any
    deficiency in the determination, the appellant's case was  hopeless  on
    reference to Part 5A of the 2002 Act.  The appellant had no expectation
    of settlement other than by complying with the Rules.  His  immigration
    status was always precarious, being dependent upon obtaining a  further
    grant of leave - see AM (S.117B) [2015] UKUT 260.  Part 5A  at  section
    117B(5) required that "little weight should be given to a private  life
    established by a person at a time when the person's immigration  status
    is precarious".  Other factors such as financial independence were also
    against him.  His  medical  condition  was  longstanding  and  had  not
    prevented his return to China in the past.  That matter was fully dealt
    with in the determination, in particular at paragraphs 47 to 53.  There
    was nothing in his circumstances to suggest that  the  public  interest
    might be displaced.

11. Mr Ndubuisi in reply said that he was aware of AM,  but  could  counter
    that by reference to Philipson [2012] UKUT 00039 at paragraph 20  which
    held that an appellant had an expectation of permanent residence in the
    UK if she continued to meet the  conditions  of  her  work  permit,  "a
    legitimate and reasonable one having regard to the nature of the  Rules
    throughout her stay".  As the terms of the Rules  changed  against  her
    the  question  arose  whether  the  interference  was   justified   and
    proportionate.  It was wrong to refer to the appellant's travel back to
    China because the judge misunderstood the circumstances under which  he
    returned, relating to the completion of his degree.  He had  no  option
    but to do so in order to comply with the requirements of his university
    and with the Rules.  His  return  did  not  show  that  he  had  become
    reintegrated in China.  It was not  possible  for  him  to  reintegrate
    there and he therefore met the requirements of the  Rules.   There  was
    evidence that his mental condition would relapse if he were to  return.
    His appeal should therefore have been allowed under paragraph 276ADE.

12. I reserved my determination.

13. Philipson yields no principle which helps the appellant.   It  has  not
    been shown that the appellant was disadvantaged  by  a  change  in  the
    Rules.  Even if he had, his expectation could only be for his  case  to
    be decided under the Rules as at the time of decision and under Part 5A
    of the Act.

14. Macdonald's Immigration Law & Practice 9th ed.,  vol  1,  at  paragraph
    7.96 and footnote 10 remarks that the body of case  law  on  Article  8
    ECHR in the immigration context is now "characterised,  unhelpfully  in
    our view, by  a  proliferation  of  phrases  which  all  simultaneously
    attempt to find thresholds and  legal  tests  for  the  application  of
    Article 8".  The cases continue to multiply.  In Singh [2015] EWCA  Civ
    74  a  synthesis  is  followed  at  paragraph  66  by  comment  on  how
    "practitioners in this field can sometimes seek  to  exploit  even  the
    faintest ambiguity".

15. The debate over the formulation of the test, whether it involves one or
    two stages, and whether it applies in or out of  the  rules  has  often
    turned out to be an empty one with no effect  on  the  outcome  of  the
    particular case.  Even if Mr Ndubuisi had rightly identified some  more
    recently stated formula which the judge ought with  hindsight  to  have
    applied, this case in my opinion would amount to a complaint about form
    and not about substance. The analysis of the case under the Rules  does
    not omit any  consideration  which  might  emerge  or  acquire  greater
    significance in a separate proportionality exercise.   An  intermediate
    hurdle is by definition a lesser one.  The judge would not have thought
    the outcome disproportionate on any further formulation.

16. Judge Bradshaw applied the test  stated  to  him  by  Mr  Ndubuisi.   A
    determination should not lightly be overturned for applying  the  legal
    approach taken by the party who later complains.  But in any  event,  I
    do not think  Mr  Ndubuisi  has  shown  that  the  test  is  no  longer
    authoritative.

17. The appellant relies  on  paragraph  22  of  Mirza  but  that  makes  a
    different point, related to paragraph 29 of MS,  not  to  paragraph  30
    where the Court expressed its conclusions, ending thus:

         "Before it is necessary to embark on  that  second-stage  exercise,
         however,  the  application  for  leave  to  enter  or  remain  must
         demonstrate a good arguable  case  that  leave  should  be  granted
         outside the rules: that a distinct  assessment  of  proportionality
         should be made to determine  whether  removal  would  infringe  the
         applicant's article 8 rights. If that is not demonstrated, it  can
         be assumed that the applicant's article 8 rights will be adequately
         dealt with  by  applying  the  new  rules.  Finally,  the  test  of
         exceptionality should not be used any  longer;  instead,  decision-
         makers should focus on the question of whether  the  applicant  has
         shown a good arguable case that his or her  application  should  be
         dealt with outside the rules."

18. In Upreti [2015] CSIH 45, 4 June 2015, Lord Brodie, refusing permission
    to appeal, said at paragraph 22:

         "An individual might  fail  to  secure  a  right  to  remain  under
         reference  to  the  rules  but  might  nevertheless  succeed  under
         reference to article 8 and a decision-maker must be alive to  that
         possibility.  For Scotland the law is as set out in MS ... "

19. The judge  was  entitled  to  decide  that  there  would  not  be  very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into China,  which
    is his country of nationality and where he has spent most of his  life.
    There is no error in the conclusions that lack of  family  connections,
    poor employment prospects and any stigma attaching to mental ill health
    do not reach that threshold.

20. The Presenting Officer's points on any remaking  of  the  decision  had
    some force.  However, that stage is not reached.

21. The determination of the First-Tier Tribunal shall stand.






                [pic]


                Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
                5 June 2015
