

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA339532014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 7 June 2016                         |On 10 June 2016                     |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                               SAJIN MAHARJAN
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Sabic of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Respondent refused the  Appellant's  application  for  leave  to
       remain on 14 August 2014. His appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Callow ("the Judge") following a hearing on 12 August
       2015.

The grant of permission


    2. Upper Tribunal Judge Blum granted permission  to  appeal  (29  April
       2016), in essence, stating that it is arguable that  the  Judge  had
       applied the wrong test within the Article 8 assessment and  did  not
       consider relevant evidence.

Discussion


    3. Mr Walker, despite the rule 24 notice, accepted  the  aforementioned
       and that this amounted to a material error of law. He conceded  that
       depending on the factual matrix that was accepted and  assuming  all
       relevant facts were considered, compelling circumstances could exist
       such as to mean that Article 8 was engaged, and that those facts (if
       accepted) could meet the reasonableness test required by Article  8.
       He conceded that the decision could not stand and the  mater  should
       be remitted to the reheard de novo  by  a  Judge  other  than  Judge
       Callow in the First-tier Tribunal.  Given  these  concessions,  with
       which I agreed  and  given  Miss  Sabic's  helpful  submissions  and
       observation that  fresh  evidence  was  now  available,  it  is  un-
       necessary for me to recite any of the facts as they will need to  be
       determined afresh.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    The matter shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo
    hearing to be heard by a Judge other than Judge Callow.




Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
9 June 2016
