
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33172/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13th June 2014                               |On 30th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                         MR Kanagasingam Sivachelvan
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Jones of Jein Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1.  The  Appellant,  Mr  Kanagasingam  Sivachelvan,  date  of  birth  29th
    September 1980 is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  On  22nd  October  2012  the
    Appellant made an application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom
    as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the points-based system.  That
    application was refused by a decision  made  on  27th  March  2013.   A
    decision to remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom under  Section
    47 of the 2006 Act was also made.  The Appellant appealed against those
    decisions.

 2. The appeal was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pickup  on  9th
    December 2013.  By a determination promulgated on  11th  December  2013
    Judge Pickup dismissed the Appellant's appeals.

 3. By a decision made on  24th  April  2014  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Allen
    granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pickup.  Thus the matter appeared before me on 13th June
    2014 to determine in the first instance whether  or  not  there  was  a
    material error of law in the original decision by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pickup.

 4. I have considered whether any of the parties to the present proceedings
    requires the protection of an anonymity direction.  Taking  account  of
    all the  circumstances  it  is  not  necessary  to  make  an  anonymity
    direction.

 5. The Grounds of Appeal raised two issues:-

      i) The circumstances in which the application for leave to appeal  may
         have been lodged out of time.  That was dealt  with  by  the  Upper
         Tribunal Judge and is not now subject to review.

     ii) The sole issue left within the  appeal  is  the  submission  of  an
         amended newspaper advertisement was in accordance with  the  Rules.
         It is suggested that the judge is in  error  in  finding  that  the
         Respondent was  not  obliged  to  consider  the  amended  newspaper
         advertisement under paragraph 245AA.  It is also suggested that the
         judge  erred  in  himself  not  taking  account  of  the  newspaper
         advertisement as the document was before the Respondent before  the
         decision was taken.

 6. With regard to the newspaper advertisement one had been submitted  with
    the application but the document did not have the name of the Appellant
    on it. Because of the absence of that information the advertisement did
    not   comply   with   paragraph   41-SD   (c)(iii).   The   appellant's
    representative argued that this was merely  a  document  in  the  wrong
    format and that a  document  in  the  wrong  format  includes  evidence
    missing  specified  information  such  as,   in   this   instance,   an
    advertisement not containing the Appellant's name.

 7. The judge at paragraph 29 has indicated that he does  not  accept  that
    argument.   With  the  original  application   made   in   October   an
    advertisement had been submitted but that advertisement did not contain
    the required information under  the  Rules.   There  was  a  subsequent
    advertisement  submitted  but  that  was  not  until  May  2012.   That
    advertisement did contain the required details.

 8. Paragraph 41-SD(c)(iii) of Appendix A provides as follows:-

         "41-SD   The specified documents in table 4 and paragraph  41,  are
                as follows:

              (c) If the applicant is applying under the provisions  in  (d)
                    in Table 4, he must provide:

                  (iii)    one or more of the following specified documents:



                       (1)  advertising  or  marketing  material,  including
                             printouts of online advertising, that had  been
                             published locally or  nationally,  showing  the
                             applicant's name (and the name of the  business
                             if  applicable)  together  with  the   business
                             activity."

 9. The original advertising materials submitted by the Appellant  did  not
    have his name on it.  The subsequent advertising materials did.

10. The issue between the parties is quite simple.  It is  the  Appellant's
    case that the advertisement submitted was merely  an  error  in  format
    which was rectified by  submission  of  the  further  documentation  or
    second advertisement.  The contention on behalf of  the  Respondent  is
    that the only piece of information required to be in the  advertisement
    as mandatory was the applicant's name and that was not on the  original
    advertisement.

11. With regard to such documentation reference had been made to  paragraph
    245AA which provides as follows:-

         "245AA   Documents not submitted with application

              (a) Where part 6A or any appendices referred  to  in  part  6A
                      stated that specified documents must be provided, the
                      UKBA will only  consider  documents  that  have  been
                      submitted with the application,  will  only  consider
                      documents  submitted  after  the  application   where
                      subparagraph (b) applies.

              (b) The sub-paragraph applies if the applicant has  submitted:



                  (i)  a sequence of documents and some of the documents  in
                           the sequence have been omitted ...;

                  (ii) a document in the wrong format; or

                  (iii)    a document that is a copy  and  not  an  original
                           document, the UK Border Agency will  contact  the
                           applicant or his representative in  writing,  and
                           request the  correct  documents.   The  requested
                           documents must be received by UK Border Agency at
                           the address specified in the request within seven
                           working days of the date of the request.

              (c) The UK Border Agency will not request  documents  where  a
                      specified  document  has  not  been  submitted   (for
                      example an English language certificate is  missing),
                      or where the UK Border  Agency  does  not  anticipate
                      that addressing the omission or error referred to  in
                      sub-paragraph (b) will lead to a  grant  because  the
                      application will be refused for other reasons."

12. On the facts as presented within the case the Appellant  had  with  the
    application  submitted  two  contracts.   As  noted  by  the  judge  at
    paragraphs 18 and 19 of the determination the judge has  accepted  that
    two contracts were submitted with  the  application.   The  judge  also
    accepted that the Respondent should have  considered  those  documents.
    However the judge went on to find that the  advertisement  referred  to
    did  not  contain  the  name  of  the  Appellant  and  as   such   that
    advertisement did not meet the requirements of  the  Rules.   For  that
    reason the Appellant was not entitled to 25 points.

13. I would draw attention to the case of Nasim and Others  (Raju:  reasons
    not to follow? : Pakistan) [2013] UKUT 610  specifically  paragraph  76
    thereof:-

         "76. Accordingly, the Respondent's position, in cases such  as  the
             present, is that (as held in Khatel) Section 85A  precludes  a
             Tribunal, in a points-based appeal, from considering  evidence
             as to compliance  with  the  points-based  Rules,  where  that
             evidence was not before  the  Respondent  when  she  took  her
             decision; but the Section does not  prevent  a  Tribunal  from
             considering evidence that was before the Respondent  when  she
             took the decision, whether or not that  evidence  reached  the
             Respondent only after the date  of  the  application  for  the
             purposes of paragraph 34F.  Although our view of the matter is
             obiter, we concur."

14. I would draw attention also  to  paragraph  34G  of  the  Rules.   That
    provides:-

         "34G.    For the purposes of these Rules, the  date  on  which  the
                application or claim (or  a  variation  in  accordance  with
                paragraph 34E) is made is as follows:-

              (i) where the application form is sent by post,  the  date  of
         posting,

              (ii)     where the application form is  submitted  in  person,
                    the date on which it is accepted  by  a  public  enquiry
                    office of the UKBA,

              (iii)    where the application form is sent  by  courier,  the
                    date on which it is delivered to the UKBA, ...

               (iv)      where  the  application  is  made  via  the  online
                    application process, on the date  on  which  the  online
                    application is submitted."

15. In coming to a decision in this matter I have  also  taken  account  of
    Section 85A(3) and (4) of the 2002 Act.

16. The Rules require that the Appellant submit an advertisement in  proper
    form to show at the date of the application that that advertisement had
    been made.  That required as of October 2012 there was an advertisement
    that complied with the requirements of the Rules set out.

17. What the Appellant  has  shown  that  as  of  May  2013  there  was  an
    advertisement which complied with the requirements of the  Rules.   The
    documentation submitted by the Appellant in any  event  does  not  show
    that the Appellant could meet the requirements of the Rules with regard
    to paragraph 41-SD of Appendix A at the time of  the  application.   It
    merely shows that as of May 2013 having appreciated there was a problem
    with his application  the  Appellant  had  rectified  the  problem  and
    submitted a further document.  That document the second advert does not
    however relate back to the date of the application.

18. In those circumstances the Appellant has not proved that at the date of
    the application he met the requirements of the Rules.

19. Accordingly for the reasons set out the Appellant did not at  the  time
    of the application have the required advertisement in  accordance  with
    paragraph 41-SD  of  Appendix  A.   The  subsequent  production  of  an
    advertisement that did comply with the requirements of  that  provision
    did not show that at the date of the application the Appellant complied
    with the requirements of the Rules but merely showed that  subsequently
    the Appellant had rectified a defect in his case.  That defect did  not
    relate back to the date of the application.   Therefore  the  Appellant
    could not succeed on that basis.

20. For the reasons set out the Appellant did not meet the requirements  of
    the Rules.  There is therefore no material  error  of  law  within  the
    determination of Judge Pickup.  The decision to dismiss this matter  on
    all grounds stands.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure


