
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33725/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 June 2015                       |On 31 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  mr m a b
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Nnamani, instructed by ILAS Solicitors (LLP)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First-tier Tribunal,  that  is  the  Secretary  of
    State as the respondent and Mr Balogun as the appellant.





The Appellant

2.   The appellant is a national of Nigeria born  on  17  August  1966.   He
    came to the United Kingdom in 1999 and at the date  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision was working for King' College Hospital  as  a  Health
    Care Support Worker.  He entered the UK legally in 1999 as  a  visitor.
    He states that he made concerted efforts to bring his family  into  the
    UK and his son H was born in the UK in 2004. The appellant and his wife
    separated in 2008.  He kept contact with his children  until  his  wife
    recently objected to that contact. He maintained  that  he  had  always
    financially supported his children.  His application dated 13 May  2014
    for leave to remain on the basis of family  life  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on 18 August 2014.  The appellant could not meet the
    Immigration Rules by virtue of the "parent route",  in  particular  the
    Immigration Rules E-LTRPT 2.3 and E-LTRPT 2.4 as he did not have access
    rights to see his children.  As he had failed to meet  the  eligibility
    requirements he could not benefit from the criteria set out in EX.1.

3.   The application was also considered under paragraph 276ADE  and  whilst
    the appellant had lived for  fourteen  years  in  the  UK  it  was  not
    accepted he had lived in the UK for twenty years contrary to  paragraph
    276ADE(3) and further it was not accepted that  there  would  be   very
    significant obstacles to  his  integration  into  Nigeria  contrary  to
    paragraph 276ADE(vi).

4.   His application on the  basis  of  his  family  and  private  life  was
    refused  under  paragraph  D-LTRP.1.3,  D-LTRPT.1.3  and   276CE   with
    reference   to   R-LTRP1.1(d)   and   Re-examination-LTRPT.1.1(d)   and
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.

5.    The  matter  was  further  considered  in  relation   to   exceptional
    circumstances outside the Immigration Rules but it was considered  that
    the appellant only had indirect contact  with  his  children  and  this
    contact could continue from overseas by other methods of communication.
     He could apply for appropriate  entry  clearance  should  he  wish  to
    return to the UK to visit his family.

6.   This was considered proportionate to the legitimate aim of  maintaining
    effective immigration control in accordance with the Section 55 duty.

7.   The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Samimi  on  6
    January 2015 and she promulgated  the  decision  on  26  February  2015
    allowing the appellant's appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR grounds.

Application for Permission to Appeal

8.   An application for permission to appeal was made by  the  Secretary  of
    State on the basis that the judge  erred  in  allowing  the  appeal  in
    finding that there  were  exceptional  circumstances  that  would  have
    unduly harsh consequences were the appellant to be removed.

9.   The circumstances at the date of the hearing that  the  access  to  the
    children was limited to indirect  contact  through  sending  cards  and
    letters every two months on their birthdays and Christmas and this  had
    not changed.  The removal would  not  change  this  and  there  was  no
    credible reason why this form of contact  could  not  take  place  from
    Nigeria.  The fact it was submitted that in  allowing  the  appeal  the
    judge speculated as to a possible change in circumstances and  possible
    future outcomes at paragraph 11 of her decision.

10.  There was no evidence to suggest that the appellant  could  not  retain
    the services of  the  solicitor  from  Nigeria  to  make  any  relevant
    applications to the Family Court.

11.  At the hearing before me Mr Jarvis attempted to amend  his  grounds  of
    appeal.  Not only did he argue that the  judge  had  not  set  out  any
    compelling circumstances but he argued that there was adequate coverage
    in terms of Article 8 given by EX.1 and he relied on SS (Congo)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387.  The Secretary of  State  submitted  that  there  was  no
    evidence the appellant could not instruct solicitors from abroad.   The
    appellant could make an application from abroad to enter on  the  basis
    of access rights if he  did  manage  to  establish  the  situation  for
    contact.

12.  The judge had not acknowledged the full coverage  of  the  Rules.   The
    reason why there was no contact was  because  of  the  appellant's  own
    actions.

13.  At paragraph 11 the judge missed the point that there had been a  court
    order precisely because of the psychological effect on the children and
    indeed paragraph 11 bordered  on  the  rationality  whereby  the  judge
    stated:

         "I also note that whilst the children have been described as having
         been affected by having witnessed domestic violence there has  been
         no suggestion in the CAFCASS Report of  the  children  having  been
         directly physically or psychologically harmed by their father".

    If there had been no harm to the children it begged the question as  to
    why there had been a court order restricting contact.

14.  At this point Mr Jarvis also took issue with the  judge's  approach  to
    Section 117.  The judge had ignored the fact  that  the  appellant  had
    unlawful status and had only  received  discretionary  leave  in  2011.
    Between 1998 and 2011 the  appellant  was  in  the  UK  unlawfully  and
    certainly latterly precariously.  To this the judge should  have  added
    no weight.  At this point Mr Jarvis accepted that the  issue  regarding
    the  weight  to  be  attributed  to  factor  would  not  apply  to  the
    appellant's family life.

15.  He argued, however, that it was not lawful for a  judge  not  to  apply
    the Act in respect of the private life and the case of  Dube  (ss.117A-
    117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC) confirmed that Section 117 was not  an  a
    la carte menu and all of it should be applied.  The appellant had a bad
    immigration history and this had not been addressed.

16.  Ms Nnamani submitted that  any  aspects  relating  to  the  appellant's
    private life had not been challenged in the  grounds  of  appeal.   The
    only issue was with the family life and a relationship with  the  minor
    children.

17.  The challenge amount to disagreement  with  the  judge's  findings  and
    even if she were generous that would  be  insufficient  to  unseat  the
    decision.

18.  The judge was obliged to consider the matter  inside  and  outside  the
    Rules and the two stage process.  She  considered  whether  there  were
    exceptional circumstances at paragraphs 14 and 16.

19.   The  judge  noted  that  the  appellant  had  enjoyed  direct  contact
    previously with the children until 2013 and that he  wished  to  resume
    contact.  It was also noted that he provided financial support.

20.  In the event that he would be removed to Nigeria he  would  have  great
    difficulty in resuming contact because of the need  for  meetings  with
    CAFCASS.  Ms Nnamani submitted that this was implicit  in  the  judge's
    findings at paragraph 14 as the judge clearly had those matters in mind
    and took on aboard findings of CAFCASS.

21.  Ms Nnamani dealt briefly  with  the  submissions  of  Mr  Jarvis  under
    Section 117 and directed  her  mind  at  paragraph  17  to  the  public
    interest.  The judge had assessed  the  private  and  public  life  and
    engaged Section 117 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

22.  Mr Jarvis at this point added to his submissions and stated  that  EX.1
    could not avail the appellant, that he could not meet paragraphs 2.3 to
    2.4.  He had no leave to remain as a parent and could not access  EX.1.



23.  At this point he confirmed that the matter  could  only  be  considered
    outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   However,  the  judge  ignored   the
    immigration history of the appellant.   He  could  not  meet  paragraph
    276ADE and she misplaced the weight to be accorded to his private life.
     SS (Congo) was retrospective and it was obvious that the Act should be
    applied.  This was not merely a disagreement with the judge's decision.

Conclusions

24.  The application  for  permission  to  appeal  was  not  extended  to  a
    challenge of the findings in respect of the private life  with  regards
    to Section 117 and was confined  to  a  consideration  of  the  judge's
    consideration of the appeal under Article 8 in relation to his children
    and in effect his family life. The Secretary of  State  has  had  ample
    time to formulate grounds with respect to Section 117 and did not do so
    and I am not inclined to allow any amendment to the grounds of  appeal.
    A key challenge was in  relation  to  whether  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances.  The 'exceptional circumstances' approach as set out  in
    the application for permission to appeal was  specifically  disapproved
    of by the House of Lords in Huang v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2007] UKHL 11 and further in EB  (Kosovo)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 41.

26.  As MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  sets  out
    at paragraph 42 as follows:

         "41. We accept this submission. In view of the strictures contained
             at para 20 of Huang, it would  have  been  surprising  if  the
             Secretary  of   State   had   intended   to   reintroduce   an
             exceptionality   test,   thereby   flouting   the   Strasbourg
             jurisprudence. At first sight, the choice of  the  phrase  "in
             exceptional circumstances" might suggest that this is what she
             purported to do. But the phrase has been used in a  way  which
             was not intended to have this effect  in  all  cases  where  a
             state wishes to remove a foreign national who relies on family
             life which he established at a time when  he  knew  it  to  be
             "precarious" (because he had no right to remain  in  the  UK).
             The cases were helpfully reviewed by Sales J in  R  (Nagre)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  EWHC  720
             (Admin).  The  fact  that  Nagre  was  not  a  case  involving
             deportation  of  a  foreign  criminal   is   immaterial.   The
             significance of the case law lies in the repeated use  by  the
             ECtHR of the phrase "exceptional circumstances".

         42.  At para 40, Sales J referred to a statement in  the  case  law
             that, in "precarious" cases, "it is likely to be only  in  the
             most exceptional circumstances that the removal  of  the  non-
             national family member will constitute a violation of art  8".
             This has been repeated  and  adopted  by  the  ECtHR  in  near
             identical terms in many cases. At paras 41  and  42,  he  said
             that in a  "precarious"  family  life  case,  it  is  only  in
             "exceptional" or "the  most  exceptional  circumstances"  that
             removal of the non-national family member  will  constitute  a
             violation of article 8. In our view, that is not to say that a
             test of exceptionality is being applied. Rather it is that, in
             approaching the question of whether removal is a proportionate
             interference with an individual's article 8 rights, the scales
             are heavily weighted in favour of  deportation  and  something
             very compelling (which will be "exceptional") is  required  to
             outweigh the public interest in removal. In our view, it is no
             coincidence that the  phrase  "exceptional  circumstances"  is
             used in the new rules in the context of weighing the competing
             factors for and against deportation of foreign criminals."

27.  Mr Jarvis appeared to be arguing that the  Rules  which  in  this  case
    included an application of EX.1 moved towards achieving a comprehensive
    scheme for the consideration of Article 8 cases concerning this type of
    case and that even  if  the  consideration  of  Article  8  within  the
    framework of the Rules fell to be dismissed, in effect there was little
    legitimate basis for a further and separate consideration of Article  8
    to succeed outside the Rules because the Rules in this  case  reflected
    the position of Article 8.  I do not  accept  this  for  the  following
    reasons.

28.  The letter of refusal from the Secretary of  State  herself  considered
    the  matter  outside  the  rules  and  in   relation   to   exceptional
    circumstances. As stated in SS (Congo) what  does  matter  is  for  the
    purposes of application of Article 8 is the  degree  of  weight  to  be
    attached to the expression of public policy in the substantive part  of
    the rules in the particular context in question (which will not  always
    be the same) as well as the other factors relevant  to  the  Article  8
    balancing exercise in the particular case "which again  may  well  vary
    from context to context and from case to case" ([48] of SS Congo).   As
    is made clear in SS (Congo) the  term  'exceptional  circumstances'  is
    given a wide meaning in the context of the  instructions  covering  any
    case in which proper analysis under Article 8 of the  second  stage  it
    would be disproportionate to refuse leave.

29.  At paragraph 62 of Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74

         'The Izuazu/Nagre approach has been applied in many  cases  in  the
         Tribunals (though sometimes by reference to its later  re-statement
         by Cranston J in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)
         [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC)).  It  was  endorsed  in  this  Court  in  MF
         (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA
         Civ 1192, [2014] 1 WLR 544 - see para. 46 (p.  561  F-H)  -  albeit
         that it was held not to be applicable in the case of the provisions
         relating to deportation of foreign criminals with which  that  case
         was concerned because  those  provisions  constituted  "a  complete
         code"[7]. Neither party questioned it before us.  The  only  points
         raised relate to the "slight modification" to the  Izuazu  guidance
         offered by Sales J at para. 30 of his judgment in Nagre,  in  which
         he says that if it is clear that all the article 8 issues raised by
         an applicant have been adequately addressed by the consideration of
         the new Rules it is unnecessary  to  proceed  to  a  further  "full
         separate consideration of article 8".

    The key issue is whether the decision is disproportionate, Huang v SSHD
    [2007] UKHL 11 confirmed,

         'In an article 8 case where this question is reached, the  ultimate
         question for the appellate immigration  authority  is  whether  the
         refusal of leave to enter or remain,  in  circumstances  where  the
         life of the family cannot reasonably  be  expected  to  be  enjoyed
         elsewhere, taking full account of all  considerations  weighing  in
         favour of the refusal, prejudices the family life of the  applicant
         in a manner sufficiently serious to  amount  to  a  breach  of  the
         fundamental right protected by article 8'.

    That said, it would appear from paragraph 16 that the judge did  follow
    Iftikhar Ahmed [2014] EWHC 300 (Admin) which  stated  that  exceptional
    means "circumstances in which refusal  would  result  in  unjustifiably
    harsh circumstances for the individual or their family".

32.  The challenge by the Secretary of State was  predicated  on  the  basis
    that at the date of the hearing access to the children was  limited  in
    that contact was to be indirect and removal would not change this.

33.  In fact, as set out at paragraph 9 of the  judge's  determination,  the
    court order of District Judge  Pathak  was  that  the  children  should
    continue to live with their mother and that there be 'no direct contact
    between the children  and  the  appellant  unless  agreed  between  the
    parties and subject always to the wishes and feelings' of the children.

34.  The judge also noted that a previous district  judge  had  granted  the
    appellant supervised contact with his son Habib on 22  July  2013.   In
    fact the contact dates refer  to  contact  between  November  2013  and
    January 2014 and there was a later order dated 19th November 2013 which
    appeared to allow contact as required by the CAFCASS officer.  At  that
    stage it was to be considered whether unsupervised or  staying  contact
    was to be ordered.

35.  Mr Jarvis referred to the  fact  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    appeared to ignore the court order and the fact that  it  only  ordered
    indirect access when finding domestic violence, and that  although  the
    judge stated there was no suggestion  in  the  CAFCASS  Report  of  the
    children having been directly physically or psychologically  harmed  by
    their father it had been  seen  fit  to  restrict  access  to  indirect
    access.  The appellant was cautioned in 2008  for  common  assault  and
    this predates a court  order  for  access  and  leave  granted  by  the
    respondent to enable contact with his children. It  would  appear  that
    the thinking behind the CAFCASS report in part is  the  domestic  abuse
    witnessed by the children.   Although the judge  did  refer  to  future
    contact and leaving the door open to future applications and  the  fact
    that there was no suggestion in the  CAFCASS  of  the  father  directly
    physically harming the children (which is correct it  would  seem  from
    the report) or psychological harm (bearing in mind the  attack  on  the
    mother), the judge had clearly read the report and  bore  in  mind  the
    long term contact previously with the children, I am not persuaded that
    this is perverse or irrational for which the  threshold  is  high,  and
    further the judge noted that the County Court order had been worded  in
    a way to leave the option of the resumption of contact  open  depending
    on the feelings and wishes of the children and  that  indirect  contact
    had been ordered. The judge found that since August 2014  in  fact  the
    appellant had been visiting his children  when  they  left  school  for
    about twenty minutes and also continued to make financial  contribution
    to their upkeep by a standing order of  �100  per  month  for  the  two
    children.  There was no indication that this was challenged.

36.  What is of relevance in this particular determination  is  JA  (meaning
    of access rights) India [2015] UKUT 00225 (IAC) which found at  section
    3 of the head note:

         "The expression 'access rights' in paragraph  E-LTRPT.2.4  (a)  (i)
         may refer equally to parents who have 'indirect' access to a  child
         by means of letters, telephone calls etc as well as  to  those  who
         spend time with a child ('direct' access). A parent may  also  have
         'access rights' where there is no court order at all, for  example,
         where parents agree access arrangements (the 'no order'  principle;
         section 1(5) of the Children Act 1989 (as amended)).".

37.  The judge was fully aware that the appellant  had  not  been  found  to
    meet the eligibility criteria  of  paragraph  276ADE.   On  an  overall
    reading of the judgment the judge took into account the  appellant  had
    become an important part of his aunt and cousin's family life and  also
    built a substantial private life in the form of his  working  at  Kings
    College Hospital.

38.  I note from SS (Congo) that at paragraph 57 there is discussion of  the
    respondent's  referring  to  improvements  in  the  position  of  their
    sponsors being on the horizon such that they would  have  a  reasonable
    prospect, that they  would  in  the  future  be  able  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of the  Rules  and  whether  this  should  be  taken  into
    account.  The court gave short shrift to this  argument,  stating  that
    the applicant should apply again when  the  circumstances  have  indeed
    changed and this reflected a fair balance between the interests of  the
    individual and the public interest.

39. It seemed to be the Secretary of State's position in this instance that
    the appellant could indeed make further applications  from  abroad  and
    that the judge was  not  entitled  to  take  into  account  speculation
    regarding the contact.  That said, as I have pointed out above,  access
    rights may indeed refer to parents who have indirect access by means of
    letters, telephone calls as well as to  those  who  spend  time  direct
    contact time with their children and this did not appear to  have  been
    taken into account. The judge also pointed out that contact between the
    appellant and the children was not prohibitively barred and  was  still
    open to agreement between the parties and subject to the  feelings  and
    wishes of the children. Although  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal submitted that the appellant could conduct his relationship from
    abroad as he only had indirect contact, this observation was in  itself
    couched in future terms and it was open to the judge to  consider  this
    option which she did.

40. Overall,  the judge took into account that

         "The appellant has shown commitment to his children  by  virtue  of
         his  continued  financial  contribution  and  efforts  at  resuming
         contact with them  through  repeated  applications  to  the  Family
         Court.  The appellant's removal to Nigeria  would  deprive  of  any
         chance of resuming contact in the future even if  the  children  do
         recover and their wishes to have contact and the relationship  with
         him changed."

41. However, I do not  consider  that  she  can  be  criticised  for  these
    findings as the judge observed, as stated above, and did  specify  that
    the court order was open to contact dependent on the children's wishes.

41.  I turn to the challenge made by Mr Jarvis to Section 117  and  although
    I am not inclined to accept an amendment at  this  late  stage  to  the
    challenge to the decision. I make these  remarks.   I  accept  that  AM
    (Malawi) confirms that the fact that an appellant can speak English and
    is not a financial burden should not necessarily be taken as a positive
    element but this was not the main basis of the judge's findings.

42.  Although it was argued that the judge had not given  sufficient  weight
    to the public interest consideration, it is clear that  the  judge  was
    not oblivious to the immigration history of the appellant and  although
    little weight was to be given to a private life formed at a  time  when
    the person is in the UK  unlawfully,  the  fact  is  however  that  the
    Secretary of State granted the appellant discretionary leave on 15 June
    2011 in full knowledge of that immigration  history.   His  immigration
    history was not a fact which was  challenged  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.

43.  It is clear from a reading of the determination that the  judge  placed
    weight on the family life of the appellant,  albeit  factoring  in  the
    private life and as Mr Jarvis acknowledged Section 117B does not enjoin
    the judge to attribute no weight to a private life or little weight  to
    a family life when the person's immigration status is  precarious.   In
    particular I note Section 117(6) which states that in  the  case  of  a
    person who is not liable to deportation the public  interest  does  not
    require the person's removal where -

    (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
         the qualifying child, and

    (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
         Kingdom.

    There was no question as to whether the child should leave  the  United
    Kingdom and the question of parental relationship is not defined.   The
    appellant had hitherto until 2013 had contact  with  his  children  and
    according to JA that the appellant  does  have  access  rights  to  the
    children.

Notice of Decision

46.  On the basis of these considerations I find that the challenge  by  the
    Secretary of State is merely a disagreement with the  findings  of  the
    judge which, albeit generous, disclose no material  error  of  law  and
    will stand.

Direction regarding anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Date 27th July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
