
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33944/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision and Reason Promulgated      |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                     yaq
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Garrod, instructed by Justice and Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Preliminary

    The appellant has requested and I consider it appropriate  to  make  an
    order in the Upper Tribunal under Procedural Rule 14(1) to prohibit the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead members  of  the
    public to identify the appellant.  To give effect  to  this  order  the
    appellant is to be referred to by the initials above.

 1. The appellant challenges the decision and reasons statement  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Birk that was promulgated on 6 July  2015.   Having
    heard from both representatives and having considered  the  grounds  of
    application, the rule 24 response and other  documents  on  the  appeal
    file, I am aware that the outcome of this appeal will depend  in  large
    part as to whether Judge Birk had proper regard to the cross-government
    definition of domestic violence and abuse.

 2. The definition has not been static.  An earlier version  was  discussed
    in Ishtiaq v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 386,  although  that  did  not  apply
    across all government departments and  was  applicable  to  immigration
    matters.  It was further considered by the Administrative  Court  in  R
    (Balakoohi) v SSHD [2012] EWHC 1439 (Admin).

 3. The cross-government definition itself was introduced on 26 March  2013
    and was last updated on 27 March 2015. Its current version is the  same
    as when Judge Birk heard the appeal and provides:[1]
         Domestic violence and abuse: new definition
         The cross-government definition of domestic violence and abuse is:
         any incident or pattern  of  incidents  of  controlling,  coercive,
         threatening behaviour, violence or abuse between those aged  16  or
         over who are, or have been, intimate  partners  or  family  members
         regardless of gender or sexuality. The abuse can encompass, but  is
         not limited to:
            . psychological
            . physical
            . sexual
            . financial
            . emotional
         Controlling behaviour
         Controlling behaviour is a range of acts designed to make a  person
         subordinate and/or dependent by  isolating  them  from  sources  of
         support, exploiting their resources  and  capacities  for  personal
         gain,  depriving  them  of  the  means  needed  for   independence,
         resistance and escape and regulating their everyday behaviour.
         Coercive behaviour
         Coercive behaviour is an act or  a  pattern  of  acts  of  assault,
         threats, humiliation and intimidation or other abuse that  is  used
         to harm, punish, or frighten their victim.
         This is not a legal definition.

 4. Although this definition is not a legal definition, since it is part of
    Home Office policy it is relevant to the  consideration  of  whether  a
    person benefits from paragraph 289A of the  immigration  rules  and  to
    that extent is material to assessing whether Judge Birk's  approach  to
    the appellant's evidence  of  domestic  violence  in  relation  to  the
    application of the immigration rules is legally flawed.

 5. Having set out the context of this appeal, I turn to the submissions of
    Mr Garrod and Mr Mills.

 6. Mr Garrod provided a  detailed  skeleton  argument  which  records  his
    submissions.  His amplification sought to persuade me that  Judge  Birk
    had failed to give adequate reasons for  her  findings  and  decisions,
    primarily because she had not given sufficient detail to show that  she
    had full regard to the appellant's documentary and oral  evidence.   In
    this context, Mr Garrod drew my attention to the evidence from  Women's
    Aid, the appellant's GP and communications between  the  appellant  and
    her relatives that revealed the history of domestic  abuse  as  claimed
    and argued that the evidence was  not  adequately  addressed  by  Judge
    Birk.

 7. Mr Garrod also submitted that Judge Birk had misdirected herself in the
    inferences she drew from the evidence  relating  to  financial  support
    from  the  appellant's  sister  and  the  apparent  apology  from   the
    appellant's husband because she appeared to  be  looking  for  evidence
    against the appellant rather than evaluating the evidence in the round.
    Mr Garrod suggested that such misdirection was the result of Judge Birk
    not setting out the definition of domestic violence and abuse and  that
    there was no guidance as to how its terms should be applied.  I mention
    at this juncture that Mr Garrod admitted to being unable to obtain  the
    current definition and he relied on the definition set out in Ishtiaq.

 8. Mr Mills argued the converse to both grounds.  He reminded me that much
    of the evidence post dated the reasons  for  refusal  letter  and  that
    undermined the weight it could be given.  There was no explanation  why
    the appellant first reported domestic abuse to her GP  and  to  Women's
    Aid in September 2014 and not earlier.  Mr Mills pointed out  that  the
    medical notes went back to  2011.   The  communication  between  family
    members was weak evidence and the alleged apology from the  appellant's
    husband was equivocal.  As such, it was open to Judge Birk to find that
    the evidence did not show the appellant was a victim of domestic abuse.
     Mr Mills argued that the grounds of appeal were mere disagreement with
    legitimate judicial findings.

 9. Both representatives indicated that there is difficulty in appeals such
    as this since there is no objective threshold or test which  identifies
    when there has been domestic violence or abuse.  It is for the Tribunal
    to decide for itself what  evidence  is  acceptable  and  although  the
    burden of proof lies on the appellant to show what is more likely  than
    not to have happened, leeway has to be given because of the  difficulty
    of obtaining corroborating evidence.

10. My findings and conclusions are as follow.

11. Both representatives are  not  correct  in  saying  that  there  is  no
    guidance about how the terms set out  in  the  definition  of  domestic
    violence and abuse are to be  understood.   As  I  have  set  out,  the
    definition contains explanations of controlling and coercive behaviour.
     Threatening behaviour and violence are not explained in the definition
    but there is no need to provide an  explanation  since  they  are  more
    obvious.  In any event, in the appeal before Judge Birk  the  appellant
    was not alleging that she had been the victim of threatening  behaviour
    or violence but that she  had  suffered  psychological,  financial  and
    emotional abuse, as is clear from her original  application  and  later
    witness statement.

12. I am satisfied that Judge Birk understood the nature of the appellant's
    claim because of her observations in paragraphs 6, 7, 11 and  16.   The
    judge's examination of the claim at paragraphs 12 to  15  confirm  that
    she was aware of  the  claim  and  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant.

13. I am also satisfied from these paragraphs that Judge Birk was aware  of
    the context of the appeal and examined  the  appeal  in  terms  of  the
    definition of domestic violence and abuse.   I  reach  this  conclusion
    because in paragraph 11 Judge Birk refers directly to the  five  listed
    examples of abuse set out in the  definition.   Mr  Garrod's  complaint
    that it was not clear what Judge Birk was doing  is  unfounded  because
    what is clear from his submissions is that he - unlike Judge Birk - was
    not aware of the cross-government definition.  There was  no  need  for
    Judge Birk to set out the definition in full because it was  reasonable
    for her to assume that both parties would be aware of  the  definition.
    It is enough, therefore, that she shows that she applied  the  relevant
    definition.

14. From the findings Judge Birk made in paragraphs 12  to  16  I  am  also
    satisfied that Judge Birk had in mind the explanations  of  controlling
    and coercive behaviour in the definition.  The appellant  claimed  that
    she was abandoned by her husband and that was accepted by  Judge  Birk.
    But, as Judge Birk found, that does not establish a history of domestic
    violence or  abuse.   The  appellant's  husband  did  not  isolate  the
    appellant or deprive her from the means to be independent as is evident
    from the fact the appellant was able  to  contact  her  sister  and  to
    receive financial support from her.

15. Judge Birk was aware of the appellant's mental health issues but it was
    open to her to find that these were not caused by her  husband  because
    there were other significant factors as she explained in paragraphs  14
    and 15.  Judge Birk concluded that the appellant's evidence  showed  an
    acrimonious marital breakdown and nothing more.

16. Judge Birk was aware of the letter of support from Women's Aid but when
    looking at the other evidence, particularly the  medical  records,  she
    was unable to give it significant weight.  On this point I accept Judge
    Birk could have been clearer, but as Mr Mills submitted, the point  was
    obvious particularly as the appellant did  not  report  any  issues  of
    abuse to Women's Aid until after her application for  indefinite  leave
    to remain was refused.  The information contained  in  the  letter  was
    merely that provided by the appellant and did not  sit  well  with  the
    detailed medical records which were silent on the issue of abuse  until
    after the date of refusal.

17. In light of these considerations, I find  that  there  is  no  material
    legal error in Judge Birk's decision and therefore it is upheld.

Decision

The decision and reasons statement of Judge  Birk  does  not  contain  legal
error and is upheld.




                               Signed   Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
-----------------------
[1] Taken from https://www.gov.uk/guidance/domestic-violence-and-abuse.
The same definition can be found at page 10 of the Home Office guidance
Victims of domestic violence - version 13.0 (Published for Home Office
staff on 29 May 2015) available at
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/48
9203/Victims_of_domestic_violence_v13_0_EXT_clean.pdf

