
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA330562015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 August 2017                      |On 30 August 2017                    |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                       mr Sivaramalingam Jeyapiragash
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin, Counsel instructed by Indra Sebastian
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Sri Lanka, date of  birth  16  July  1988,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 2  October  2015,  to
    refuse to vary leave to remain having entered the UK on 11 October 2008
    with entry clearance as a student until 20 February 2011.

2.   The Appellant was granted further leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  as  a
    student from 4 March 2011 to 20 June 2013.  On 30 July 2012 he  applied
    as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) which was varied to an FLR(FP)  application.
    On 20 October 2014 he was served with a form IS151A.

3.   The Appellant's appeal against that  decision  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Swinnerton who, in a decision promulgated on 30 November
    2016, dismissed the Appellant's appeal.  The appeal was dismissed  with
    reference to the Immigration Rules, but also with reference to  Article
    8 ECHR.  Permission to appeal that decision  was  given  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Brunnen on 16 June  2017.       There  was  no  Rule  24
    response by the Respondent.

4.   The position is that the grounds essentially argue,  or  at  least  the
    way Mr Martin has carefully explained them,  in  that  he  accepts  the
    appeal could not succeed under the  Immigration  Rules,  but  says  the
    Judge in considering the Article 8 issues, failed to properly take into
    account and/or  explain  why  various  factors  which  were  pertinent,
    summarised in a skeleton  argument  provided  to  the  Judge,  or  were
    explained or why they did not  materially  affect  the  proportionality
    assessment which the Judge made.

5.   Mr Wilding argued that the decision is to be  looked  at  as  a  whole.
    The various issues  relating  to  the  Article  8  considerations  were
    effectively taken into account and he  rejected  that  certain  aspects
    would necessarily have had any bearing, or that any different  Tribunal
    taking those matters into account  was  likely  to  reach  a  different
    decision.
6.   In particular, he highlights the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    found to have relied upon documents which were not  authentic  and  the
    reliance on false documentation, whilst  not  leading  to  a  mandatory
    refusal, nevertheless was a significant  and  material  factor  if  any
    discretion was to be exercised.
7.   He also asserted that in  effect  the  various  issues  raised  in  the
    grounds, and in particular in  the  skeleton  argument,  were  actually
    dealt with, either directly or indirectly by  the  Judge  or  were  not
    material, so as to demonstrate no material error of law by  the  Judge.
    Mr Martin said this is all very well, but there was a lack of reasoning
    and the parties are entitled  to  expect  the  issues  to  be  properly
    addressed.

8.   It seemed to me that there was merit in both sides' general  criticisms
    of the decision, but I find, looking at the evidence as  a  whole,   in
    particular taking into account what the Appellant and his wife had said
    in the statements that were before the Judge, that  the  issue  of  the
    wife being on a 'clear route to settlement'  is  a  fair  point  taken:
    However,  it does not deny the Appellant's conduct, or diminish  it  to
    the point where it was no longer are material.  Rather, it seemed to me
    that  the  Appellant,  relying  upon  his  wife's   'clear   route   to
    settlement', was seeking to side-step the consequences of  his  actions
    and the deception which he sought to rely upon.

9    Those were matters that the Judge was entitled to  take  into  account,
    and did.  For my own part I might not have reached the  same  decision,
    but that is neither here nor there to the point.  I  find,  looking  at
    the decision as a whole, the Judge did enough to  show  why  the  claim
    failed with reference to the issue  of  Article  8  ECHR  in  terms  of
    proportionality.

10   It is fair to say, although Mr Martin  was  relatively  understated  in
    his criticism, but the Judge's explanation of the conclusions  was  not
    particularly fulsome.  The Judge did  not  seem  to  have  specifically
    addressed the arguments raised, albeit they are in  effect  taken  into
    account. To that extent it seemed   to me  Mr  Martin  was  right,  but
    even so it did not seem to me that any other  Tribunal  with  the  same
    material before it would be likely to reach a different decision.

11.   Decision.

     For these reasons the appeal is dismissed.
ANONYMITY

No anonymity direction was made nor is one required.

Signed                                  Date 25 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date25 August 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey









