
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33876/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 August 2017                       |On 22 August 2017                    |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                           olayinka agboola james
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms O Ogundipe of Fountain Gate Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmed of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  25  December  1975.   He
    claims to have entered the United Kingdom  in  1991.   He  has  a  long
    immigration history and ultimately  on  3  November  2014  applied  for
    indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  compassionate  grounds  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Appellant's claim is based on his private  life
    and his relationship with fellow church members: see  paragraph  37  of
    his statement of 1 November 2016 and the letter of 19 August 2014  from
    the Appellant's solicitors sent under cover of a letter of  3  November
    2014 from the solicitors supporting  the  application  leading  to  the
    decision currently under appeal.  In the  Appellant's  form  SET(O)  he
    referred to extended family in Nigeria and a wife in the United Kingdom
    as well as family members, church members, friends and  an  "evangelism
    group".

The Appellant's Immigration History

 2. The Respondent gives the following history:-

      a) 12 July 2007: application for indefinite leave  to  remain  on  the
         basis of fourteen years' residence, rejected and re-made on 25 July
         2007.

      b) 1 April 2008: long residence application refused.

      c) 1 July  2008:  appeal  dismissed  and  appeal  rights  subsequently
         exhausted.

      d) 23 July 2014: three serial applications  for  indefinite  leave  on
         compassionate grounds rejected.

      e) 3 November 2014: application re-made.

The Respondent's Original Decision

 3. The Respondent noted there was no evidence of the right of any  partner
    or child of the Appellant to reside in the United  Kingdom.   She  then
    referred to the Appellant's 2007 application and asserted the Appellant
    had made false representations,  identifying,  in  particular,  various
    payslips, Forms P60, and an NHS medical card and  a  diploma  from  the
    University  of  Leicester.   Reference   was   made   to   a   previous
    determination of an Adjudicator who supports the assertion  that  these
    documents amounted to false representations.  No specific reference was
    made but it would appear from the copy in the Tribunal file  that  this
    was a determination of Immigration Judge T Jones promulgated on 30 June
    2008  under  Tribunal  reference  IA/07544/2008.    Consequently,   the
    Respondent refused the application by reference to paragraph 322(10) of
    the  Immigration  Rules  which  provides  that  the  making  of   false
    representations for the purposes of  obtaining  leave  to  enter  or  a
    previous variation of leave or in order to obtain  documents  from  the
    Secretary of State is a ground for refusal.  The Appellant had supplied
    false documents  with  his  application  of  25  July  2007  to  obtain
    indefinite leave to remain.

 4. The Respondent considered the Appellant's application by  reference  to
    paragraph  A277C  and  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Appellant had continued to  rely  on  some  or  all  of  the  documents
    previously submitted in 2007 which had been found to  amount  to  false
    representations and he had not provided the requisite documentation  to
    show how he maintained and accommodated  himself  and  because  of  the
    previous use of false documents his presence was not conducive  to  the
    public good.

 5. The Respondent noted the far-reaching lack  of  information  about  the
    Appellant's partner or any information about any children and a lack of
    evidence to show Section EX of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules was
    engaged.

 6. The Respondent did not  accept  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  been
    continuously in the United Kingdom since January 1991 but  accepted  he
    had been present since April 2004.  She noted he did not  meet  any  of
    the critical requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1).  She  considered  the
    Appellant had retained  some  ties  with  Nigeria  and  there  were  no
    insuperable obstacles to his return.  Reference was made to the duty to
    consider the best interests of any children under  Section  55  of  the
    Immigration, Citizenship and Borders Act 2009.  There  was  little,  if
    any, information about any children.  The Respondent concluded that  in
    all the circumstances the need to maintain proper  immigration  control
    outweighed all other interests and refused the application.

 7. On 5 November 2015 the Appellant through his solicitors  lodged  notice
    of appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002  as  amended  (the  2002  Act).   The  grounds  are  that  the
    Respondent did not give due weight to the length of time the  Appellant
    had been in the United Kingdom and that her consideration of his  claim
    based on the obligation to respect his  private  and  family  life  was
    inadequate.  Reference was also made to  the  circumstances  which  the
    Appellant claimed had forced him to come to the United Kingdom  in  the
    first place and that he would be at risk of inhuman treatment on return
    which would place the United Kingdom in breach of its obligations under
    Article 3 of the European Convention.  There were references  to  other
    papers  which  related  to  different  and  unrelated  cases   in   the
    Respondent's decision and which therefore indicated a lack of attention
    in her consideration of the application.

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 8. By a decision promulgated on 8 December 2016, Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Miller  dismissed  the  appeal.   He  made  extensive  adverse
    credibility findings against  the  Appellant  relying  greatly  on  the
    adverse findings made by Immigration Judge T Jones  in  2008,  applying
    the principles enunciated in Devaseelan *[2002] UKAIT  00702.  He  also
    found there  were  no  compassionate  circumstances  advanced  for  the
    Appellant whom he found to have no family in the United Kingdom such as
    to tip the balance of the proportionality of the Respondent's  decision
    in favour of the Appellant.

 9. By a notice dated 16 December 2016 the Appellant sought  permission  to
    appeal.  The grounds are rambling.  They seek to re-open the  issue  of
    the false representations by way of documents settled in  2008  without
    providing reasons why the matter should  be  re-opened  other  than  to
    assert simple disagreement with both  Judges  Jones  and  Miller.   The
    grounds assert the Appellant has been in the United Kingdom since  1991
    and suggest that  the  Judge  was  at  fault  in  finding  against  the
    Appellant on  this  point  because  he  failed  to  take  into  account
    documents dating from 1995.   They  re-iterate  the  Appellant's  claim
    never to have received a copy of the  2008  determination  but  do  not
    explain why the Judge's finding to the contrary  was  not  sustainable.
    References to the number  of  times  the  application  leading  to  the
    present decision was rejected are immaterial.  The grounds also  repeat
    the Appellant's claim based on Article 3 of the European Convention.

10. On 20 June  2017  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Landes  granted
    permission to appeal because it was arguable that if the Appellant  had
    been using a bank account in 1995 he might  have  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for more than twenty years but the Judge had not addressed  the
    point.  He had also not taken account of the evidence on  the  face  of
    the University of Leicester certificates that they were not  issued  by
    the University of Leicester but by another college  on  behalf  of  the
    university.  She found that Judge Jones in the 2008  determination  had
    meant:

         "Only that the Appellant had not shown that he  had  been  resident
         for the necessary period  [29]  and  that  he  did  not  find  that
         documents could be  relied  upon.   The  Respondent  did  not  make
         positive allegations of forgery in 2008 nor did the Respondent need
         to prove forgery nor is Judge  Jones'  language  at  [30]  or  self
         direction at [6] such as to indicate that the Respondent had proved
         forgery."

    She found that arguably Judge Miller should have considered  the  issue
    of false representations afresh in the context of all  the  documentary
    evidence and  the  Appellant's  explanations  rather  than  relying  so
    extensively on the findings in Judge Jones's determination.

11. She noted there was no argument before Judge Miller about any  children
    of the Appellant and that although he did not  expressly  consider  the
    claim under Article 3 his  factual  findings  indicated  the  Appellant
    would have no difficulty re-integrating in Nigeria.

Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal

12. On 12 July 2017 the Respondent lodged a response under Rule 24  of  the
    Practice Rules.  The response asserts no document  verification  report
    (DVR) was issued in  connection  with  the  present  decision  but  the
    Respondent's claim was that the false documents  had  been  used  in  a
    previous application and in its decision of 3 March 2008 the Respondent
    had explained why those documents were considered to be false. Further,
    Judge Miller was entitled to use the findings of  Judge  Jones  in  his
    2008 determination as a starting point and Judge  Miller's  conclusions
    were open to him.

13. The Appellant attended  the  hearing.   I  explained  the  purpose  and
    procedure to be adopted at the hearing to determine whether  there  was
    an error of law in Judge Miller's decision.  He confirmed his address.

Submissions for the Appellant

14. Ms Ogundipe relied on the grounds for  appeal.   She  re-iterated  that
    Judge Miller had based his decision on the determination of Judge Jones
    and the Respondent had never supplied a DVR.  I enquired  why  one  was
    necessary in view of the analysis contained in paragraphs 13 and 14  of
    the determination of Judge Jones.  These showed that the documents were
    by virtue of their contents evidence of their own falsity. I noted  the
    problems identified by the Respondent in 2008 with the  documents  were
    not untypical from presented in a large number of cases heard at Taylor
    House at around about the same time. 15.  Ms  Ogundipe  then  submitted
    that Judge Jones had been in error in finding the tax codes referred to
    were invalid.  I asked for evidence to show  they  were  valid  at  the
    relevant time but none was  produced.   I  was  referred  to  the  bank
    statements at pages 87, 88, 93  and  96  of  the  Appellant's  original
    bundle.  I enquired how these bank statements would show that  the  tax
    codes submitted by the Appellant in 2008 were valid.  Ms  Ogundipe  did
    not seek to continue her submission on the point.

15. I expressed the view that it appeared the Appellant had  little  or  no
    evidence to support the assertions in  the  grounds  for  appeal  which
    related to documents historically submitted by the  Appellant.   I  was
    however concerned about paragraph 6 of the  grounds  for  appeal  which
    referred to the Appellant's child to which reference had been  made  in
    the Respondent's Reasons for Refusal Letter at pages  6-7.   The  Judge
    had made no reference to the Appellant's child or to Section 55 of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009,  Section  117(B)(vi)  of
    the 2002 Act or paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules.  While no
    argument may have been put to the Judge  at  the  hearing,  he  was  on
    notice there was a child and consequently the duty imposed  by  Section
    55 of the 2009 Act arose.

16. There was a further discussion and the parties agreed  that  the  Judge
    Miller's findings on the Appellant's claim for long residence  and  his
    findings on the documentation before Judge Jones in 2008  should  stand
    but that Judge Miller had erred in law in his failure to deal with  the
    question of the  Appellant's  child  and  that  the  matter  should  be
    remitted for hearing afresh limited to issues based on the  Appellant's
    private and family life and the circumstances of any child.

17. Having regard to the matters agreed between the  parties  and  for  the
    reasons already given, I find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal contained a material error of law  in  its  treatment  of  any
    claim the Appellant may have based on his relationship with  his  child
    and on the  State's  duty  to  respect  his  private  and  family  life
    protected by Article 8 of the European Convention should be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal for consideration afresh.  The findings made or
    relied upon by Judge Miller  in  respect  of  documentation  previously
    submitted by the Appellant and referred  to  in  the  determination  of
    Judge Jones and on the length of time the Appellant  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom should stand.

Anonymity

18. There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  heard  the
    appeal I find that none is required.


NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is to the limited extent specified set aside  and  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

    Anonymity direction not made.


Signed/Official  Crest                                                  Date
21. viii. 2017




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

