
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33983/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th March 2016                            |On 15th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                Sedin Sahman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Manning, instructed by Hasan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Bosnia and Herzogovina, born on  7th
    March 1982.  The Appellant first arrived in the United Kingdom  on  7th
    December 2002 when he was given leave to enter as a student until  31st
    October 2006.  That leave was subsequently extended until  31st  August
    2007.  However, on 10th July 2007 the Appellant returned to Bosnia  and
    Herzogovina, returning to the UK on 12th August 2007 when he was  given
    leave to enter as a Minister of Religion until 23rd July  2009.   Later
    the Appellant applied  unsuccessfully  for  leave  to  remain  in  that
    capacity, and left the  UK  on  11th  February  2010.   Thereafter  the
    Appellant made an unsuccessful application for leave to enter as a Tier
    4 (General) Student, but then the Appellant was granted leave to  enter
    in that  capacity  until  30th  January  2012  which  was  subsequently
    extended until 26th March 2014.   On  24th  March  2014  the  Appellant
    applied for indefinite leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence.  That  application  was  refused  for  the
    reasons given in the Respondent's  letter  of  8th  August  2014.   The
    Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Broe sitting at Birmingham on 26th November 2014.  He  allowed
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules for the  reasons  given  in  his
    Decision dated 11th December 2014.   The  Respondent  sought  leave  to
    appeal that decision, and on 16th February  2015  such  permission  was
    granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge found that the Appellant did not succeed under the provisions
    of paragraph 276A of the Statement of Changes in Immigration  Rules  HC
    395 because his residence in the UK had not been continuous.  This  was
    a matter not in dispute before him at the hearing.  However, the  Judge
    decided to allow the appeal because he decided that the Respondent  had
    not exercised properly her residual discretion and had not followed her
    own Policy Guidance  whereby  the  Respondent's  discretion  should  be
    exercised in favour of the Appellant  where  there  were,  inter  alia,
    particularly difficult family circumstances.  In this  case,  both  the
    Appellant's grandparents had died  during  the  Appellant's  return  to
    Bosnia and the Judge was satisfied that such amounted to a particularly
    difficult family circumstance.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Mills argued that the Judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    coming  to  that  conclusion.   Following  the  decision   in   Marghia
    (procedural fairness) [2014] UKUT 00366 (IAC), the Tribunal should only
    have interfered with the Respondent's exercise of her discretion if  it
    had fallen foul of the Wednesbury test.  The Judge had made no decision
    in this respect, but instead had  found  that  there  was  a  difficult
    family circumstance pertaining to the Appellant for which he had  given
    inadequate reasoning.  If the Judge had  been  right  to  make  such  a
    finding, his decision  should  have  been  that  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent was not in accordance with the law for failing to follow her
    own Policy Guidance.  The Judge should have remitted the  case  to  the
    Secretary of State for her  to  consider  again  the  exercise  of  her
    discretion.  Instead, he had allowed the appeal under  the  Immigration
    Rules which was an error of  law.   In  addition,  the  Judge  had  not
    considered at all the Appellant's rights under Article 8, ECHR.

 5. In response, Ms Manning referred to her Rule 24 response  and  said  it
    was apparent that the Judge had allowed the appeal because he had found
    the Respondent's refusal decision not to be in accordance with the law.
     He was satisfied that the Secretary of State had  not  considered  her
    own Policy Guidance properly.  The Judge had given adequate reasons for
    finding that the Secretary of State had not considered her  own  Policy
    sufficiently, being the death of the Appellant's grandparents  and  his
    own ill-health.

 6. I find a number of errors of law in the decision of the Judge  which  I
    therefore set aside.  Quite apart from the issue of whether  the  Judge
    had  given  sufficient  reasons  for  his  finding  that   there   were
    particularly difficult family circumstances, in the Decision under  the
    heading Notice of Decision the Judge wrote:

         "The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules."

    This is despite the Judge writing at paragraph 18 of the decision  that
    the Appellant's "application could not  meet  the  requirement  of  the
    Rules" and writing further at paragraph 21 of the Decision:

         "Therefore the Respondent's decision is not in accordance with  the
         law and the applicable Immigration Rules."

    These contradictions amount to an error of law.  Further, if it was the
    case that the Judge allowed the appeal because he  found  the  original
    decision of the Respondent to be not in accordance with the  law,  that
    decision was not made in accordance with the  requirements  of  Marghia
    which are not referred to at all.

 7. Having announced my decision at the hearing, I acceded to  the  request
    of the parties to return the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    remake the decision in the appeal.  This was because the Judge had made
    no decision about the Appellant's Article 8, ECHR rights, an  error  of
    law in itself because those rights were argued before the Judge  as  he
    recorded at paragraph 17 of the Decision.  The appeal  is  returned  to
    the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with the provisions of  paragraph
    7.2(a) of the Practice Statements.

Notice of Decision

 8. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside that decision.

    The decision is to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.







Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and  I  find  no
reason to do so.






Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

