
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/33980/2015
     IA/33984/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th November 2018                         |On 6th February 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                 nirmani [K]
                                  Ravi [G]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E Anyene, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Sri  Lanka  born  respectively  on  14th
    September 1986 and 30th September 1981.  The Appellants had applied for
    residence cards to confirm a right of residence in the United  Kingdom.
    That application had originally been refused on 20th April 2014 and the
    appeal was reconsidered.  It was accepted that the parties  married  in
    2005 in Sri Lanka and that  they  have  a  son  born  in  2009.   Their
    contention was that they had dependency on an EEA national  Sponsor  in
    Italy and by Notice of Refusal dated 30th October 2015 it was held that
    they had not provided any evidence that they were dependent upon an EEA
    national Sponsor immediately prior to entering the  United  Kingdom  as
    required under Regulation 8(2)(a) and  in  addition  the  Secretary  of
    State had not received  any  evidence  that  the  Appellants  had  been
    dependent upon their EEA national Sponsor  since  entering  the  United
    Kingdom.  It was noted that  they  contended  that  they  had  provided
    evidence of cohabitation with their Sponsor in Italy  during  2007/2008
    but no evidence of dependency had been produced.

 2. The Appellants appealed.  The appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Wellesley-Cole on the papers at Taylor House in  December
    2016.  In  a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  in  March  2017  the
    Appellants' appeal was dismissed for want of prosecution.

 3. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Alis  granted  permission  to  appeal
    noting that the grounds challenged the decisions to apply  Sala  (EFMs:
    right of appeal) [2016] UKUT IAC and raised Article ECHR issues.  Judge
    Alis considered that there was no merit to the  Article  8  Grounds  of
    Appeal as case law had established that  there  was  no  set  right  of
    appeal  arising  in  EEA  appeals  but  that  Sala  had  recently  been
    overturned by the  Court  of  Appeal  and  consequently  there  was  an
    arguable error of law.   The  appeal  then  came  before  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Murray sitting at Field  House  on  10th  January  2018.
    Judge Murray found  there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision but as Sala had  been  overturned  the  appeal  was
    required to be reheard.  He consequently sent the matters back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal  for  rehearing  taking  into  account  all  issues
    including the Article 10 issue raised by Counsel.

 4. That rehearing then  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Burnett at Taylor House on 4th July 2018.  It is important to note that
    that appeal was conducted on the papers at the specific request of  the
    Appellant's  instructing  solicitors.   The  Appellants'   appeal   was
    dismissed under the EEA Regulations in a decision promulgated  on  26th
    July 2018.

 5. Thereafter on 7th August 2018 Grounds of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Those  grounds  contended  that  the  Appellants  were
    family members of an EEA national and that the judge had erred  in  law
    in failing to recognise that the permanent residence  cards  issued  in
    Italy were on the basis of the relationship and dependency on  the  EEA
    national and that this evidence established the relationship.

 6. On 10th October 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey granted permission
    to appeal.  Judge Povey noted that the primary issue under  appeal  was
    whether the Appellants were extended family members  of  their  Italian
    aunt, as defined by Regulation 8(2).  At the request of the Appellants,
    the appeal was determined without a hearing and that the judge  clearly
    addressed the Italian residence cards and reached conclusions on  their
    validity and relevance which were open to him.   He  provided  detailed
    reasons of those findings.  However, Judge Povey considered that it was
    arguable that  the  judge  had  fallen  into  error  in  not  providing
    sufficient reasons for why, after accepting  that  the  Appellants  had
    lived with their aunt in Italy between 2007 and 2008 and  finding  that
    they had continued to share the same household in the  UK  since  2011,
    that the Appellants could not meet the requirements  of  Regulation  8.
    Consequently, despite having reservation on the merits of all  but  one
    of the grounds, Judge Povey considered that all grounds were arguable.

 7. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there are material errors of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellants appear by  their  instructed
    Counsel, Mr Anyene.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Mr Whitwell.

Submissions/Discussions

 8. Mr Anyene submits that this case turns on the issue  of  the  residence
    cards to the Appellants, exactly what was issued  and  when  they  were
    issued.  He takes me to paragraphs 20 to 30 of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision.  He submits  that  the  Appellants  have  provided  a
    substantial volume of bundles of documents setting out their  movements
    and the cards that were issued albeit that he concedes that it had  not
    been made clear if the cards issued were an  electronic  version  of  a
    card issued in 2004 in Italy as  family  members  of  their  aunt.   He
    submits that the Appellants would not have been given cards without any
    limitation imposed upon them in Italy unless it had been accepted  that
    they were family members and that the judge had erred in his assessment
    of the evidence (particularly that set out at  paragraphs  26  and  31)
    with regard to purported gaps in the evidence as to whether or not  the
    Appellants were dependent on a family  member  of  the  EEA  national's
    household.   He  submits  that  the  bundle  has  not   been   properly
    considered.

 9. Mr Whitwell reminds me that this was a paper appeal  and  he  does  not
    know what exactly was in the bundle and indeed that the judge has  made
    no reference to an earlier residence card within it.  He  asked  me  to
    look at paragraph 26 of the decision and to note that  it  is  possible
    that the Appellants may have returned to Italy between  2008  and  2011
    but there is nothing to suggest that the case that is now being put  is
    the case that was put to the Tribunal.  He refers me to  the  authority
    of Oboh and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 1525 and the paragraphs  that  follow  in  the  discussion  at
    paragraph 45 thereafter, in particular  emphasising  that  there  is  a
    requirement in pursuing a case of this nature to  show  an  element  of
    continuance in the residence.  He asked me to find that  there  are  no
    material errors of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

12. This matter has a long history and in  some  respects  the  submissions
    made by  Counsel  for  the  Appellants  amounts  to  little  more  than
    disagreement.  However, I am persuaded that in the interests of justice
    this matter should be reheard and that  there  are  errors  within  the
    decision that are material.  The actual point that needs to be  decided
    is a very clear and specific one as to whether or  not  the  Appellants
    meet the requirements of having a valid residence card issued in  Italy
    which is still valid on the  basis  upon  which  they  can  make  their
    application.  It was found by the First-tier Tribunal Judge that  there
    was a gap between 2008 and 2011 when he considered that neither of  the
    Appellants were dependent  on  nor  a  member  of  the  EEA  national's
    household and that although the Respondent accepted that the Appellants
    had lived with the EEA national in Italy between 2007 and  2008,  there
    was no evidence of dependency.

13. It is the contention of Mr Anyene that this is in direct  contradiction
    to the documents that were available before the Tribunal and  he  seeks
    to explain them to me.

14. The difficulty with which both I and Mr Whitwell are placed is that the
    only documents we have before us are those attached to  a  letter  from
    Chancery Solicitors received at Taylor  House  on  28th  June  2018  in
    readiness for  the  hearing  on  4th  July  in  which  they  submit  an
    additional bundle which they contend is in addition to  the  previously
    submitted bundle running to 230 pages dated 14th December  2016.   That
    bundle is not before me.  Neither is that bundle  before  Mr  Whitwell.
    What unfortunately is not clear is whether it was before the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  This case has a long history.  It is possible that the
    bundle has gone astray.

15. The situation of course would not have risen  had  the  Appellants  not
    chosen for the appeal to be dealt with on the papers albeit  that  that
    was their prerogative.  However, it is possible that having  looked  at
    the papers that were before him the judge came to the wrong  conclusion
    based merely on the fact that she should have been  in  a  position  to
    have considered the previous papers, to make a paper trail of the  full
    history and to give due consideration to  Counsel  skeleton  arguments.
    Had she done so it is the submission of Mr Anyene that  she  must  have
    come to a different conclusion.

16. I do not know if that is the case but if it is clear that it is  likely
    - as seems to be the case here - that all the relevant bundles were not
    before the judge hearing this matter then as a matter of fairness it is
    only appropriate that the decision be  set  aside  and  the  matter  be
    reheard.  I emphasise that that is in no way a criticism of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.

Decision and Reasons

17. On the basis that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not have before her
    all  the  relevant  papers  upon  which   to   make   the   appropriate
    consideration and  bearing  in  mind  that  the  letter  from  Chancery
    Solicitors received  at  Taylor  House  on  28th  June  2018  makes  it
    specifically clear that a previous bundle had been submitted  and  made
    available, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contains  a
    material error of law and is set aside.  The following  directions  are
    given.

      1) That the matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at
         Taylor House on the first available date 28 days hence with an  ELH
         of two hours.

      2) That the appeal is to be heard before any Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal other than Immigration Judge  Burnett,  Immigration  Judge
         Wellesley-Cole, or Immigration Judge Murray.

      3) That the restored hearing be an oral hearing and the Appellants  do
         personally  attend  that  hearing  for  the   purpose   of   cross-
         examination.

      4) That there be leave to either party to file an up-to-date bundle of
         objective and/or subjective evidence upon which they seek  to  rely
         at  least  seven  days  prior  to  the  restored  hearing.   It  is
         emphasised that it is the requirement of the Appellants' instructed
         solicitors to ensure  that  a  complete  and  full  bundle  of  all
         documentary evidence upon which they seek to rely is made available
         both to the Tribunal on the  rehearing  and  to  the  Secretary  of
         State.

      5) That any skeleton  arguments/authorities  upon  which  the  parties
         intend to rely be served and filed at the Tribunal at  least  seven
         days prior to the restored hearing.

      6) That in the event of the Appellants requiring an  interpreter  then
         the Appellants' instructed solicitors must notify the  Tribunal  of
         this fact and of  the  language  requirements  of  the  interpreter
         within seven days of receipt of these directions.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 2 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
