
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33342/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28th  April 2014                           |On 30th May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                 SUMAN BANDA
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V Onipede instructed by Morgan Hall Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India  born  on  5th  June  1986  and  he
    appealed against a decision dated 22nd July 2013 to refuse to vary  his
    leave in the UK and to remove him from the  UK  by  way  of  directions
    under Section 47 (Removal: person with statutorily extended  leave)  of
    the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  His application  was
    made on 2nd May 2012, his leave having  been  previously  curtailed  on
    26th May 2012.

 2. His appeal was heard and dismissed under the Immigration Rules  and  on
    human rights grounds by Judge Kaler on 23rd December 2013.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 3. An application for permission to appeal was made on the basis that  the
    appellant lodged his application prior to the introduction of  Appendix
    FM and yet the respondent applied the 'new rules' in  force  after  9th
    July  2012.   Further  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    circumstances that led to the revocation  of  the  appellant's  college
    licence and its impact on the appellant.

 4. The application was refused by First Tier Tribunal Judge Kelly but  was
    renewed to the Upper Tribunal.

 5. Permission to appeal was then granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Chalkley
    but in relation  to  the  Section  47  issue  alone.   The  application
    regarding the Article 8 issue was dismissed.

The Hearing

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Wilding submitted that Judge Kaler  had  in
    error recorded the decision as having been made  in  July  2012  rather
    than July 2013.  This had caused confusion but otherwise  the  decision
    contained no error of law.

 7. Mr Onipede submitted that the  merits  of  the  case  with  respect  to
    Article 8 should be revisited.

Conclusions and Findings

 8. I declined to revisit the issue of  Article  8.   The  application  for
    permission to appeal with regards to human rights has been the  subject
    to consideration by two  previous  judges,  one  from  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal and one from the Upper Tribunal.  Both refused the application
    and nothing was submitted before me to cause me to  depart  from  their
    decisions.

 9. Section 51 of The Crime and Courts Act 2013 came into force on 8th  May
    2013 by virtue of Statutory Instrument 2013 No. 1042.  Section 51(3) in
    effect confirms that where the Secretary of State gives written  notice
    of a pre-removal decision to the  person  affected,  the  Secretary  of
    State may, in  a  document  containing  that  notice,  in  a  documents
    enclosed in the same  envelope  as  that  document,  otherwise  on  the
    occasion when that notice is given to the person or at any  time  after
    that occasion but before an appeal against the pre-removal decision  is
    brought, also give the person written notice that they may  be  removed
    from the UK under this section.  The Section 47 decision was  therefore
    is accordance with the law.

10. I therefore find there is no error of law in the determination of Judge
    Kaler and the determination shall stand.




Signed                                             Date 29th May 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
