
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: IA/33144/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 September 2015                          |On 6 October 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                               MICHAEL ARTHUR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr P. Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Okech, Solicitor

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen of Ghana born
   on 25 December 1985. In a decision promulgated on 6 March 2015, the First-
   tier Tribunal allowed the claimant's appeal against a decision of the
   appellant (hereinafter "the Secretary of State") to refuse him an EEA
   Residence Card as the family member of a Belgian national.

2. The Refusal Letter, dated 5 August 2014, stated that the reason the
   claimant was being refused a residence card was because his marriage to
   an EEA national, which took place by proxy in Ghana on 10 April 2013, was
   considered to be a marriage of convenience. This decision was made
   following an interview with the claimant and his Belgian national sponsor
   where, accordingly to the Secretary of State, there were significant
   inconsistencies.

First-tier Tribunal Decision

3. The claimant appealed and the appeal was heard by First tier Tribunal
   Judge Courtney ("the judge"). The Secretary of State was not represented
   at the hearing.


4. It is clear from the decision that the judge carefully considered the
   issue of whether the marriage was one of convenience. Having heard oral
   evidence from the claimant and his sponsor, and considered the papers,
   the judge determined that the marriage was not one of convenience and
   therefore that the claimant was entitled to be issued with a residence
   card as a family member under Regulation 17 of the Immigration (EEA)
   Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").

5. There was no consideration of, or even reference to, whether the
   marriage, which was between a national of Ghana and a national of Belgium
   by proxy in Ghana, was a recognised and valid marriage.

Submissions

6. Mr Nath, for the Secretary of State, referred to Kareem (proxy marriages
   - EU law) [2014] UKUT 24 and TA and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana
   [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC), and submitted that the law, as set out in these
   cases, is clear that the relevant question, and the question the judge
   should have (but failed to) consider was whether the marriage between the
   claimant and his Belgian national sponsor was in accordance with the laws
   of Belgium.

7. Mr Nath recognised that the Refusal Letter focused on whether there had
   been a marriage of convenience but argued that because the letter
   referred to the marriage being by proxy it also raised the issue of the
   validity of the marriage.

8. Mr Okech, for the claimant, submitted that under Kareem the relevant
   question is whether the marriage was valid in either Belgium or Ghana,
   and the evidence was clear that the marriage was valid in Ghana. He
   referred to paragraph [68(g)] of Kareem, which makes reference to the
   relevant laws being those of the EEA country and/or those where the
   marriage took place. He also referred to, and provided a copy of, an
   unreported decision, which I note was promulgated after Kareem but before
   TA and Others, where it was held there was no need to consider whether a
   marriage is recognised in the home state of the sponsor unless there is
   difficulty over whether it is recognised in the state where the marriage
   was contracted.

9. He further submitted that there is no law in Belgium stating marriage by
   proxy is not acceptable and if the marriage was acceptable in Ghana,
   which in his view it was, then it would also be acceptable in Belgium.

Consideration

10. It is understandable that the judge did not consider the issue of
   whether the proxy marriage between the appellant and his sponsor was
   valid as this issue was not raised at the hearing (which was not attended
   by a Home Office Presenting Officer) or in the Secretary of State's
   Refusal Letter.

11. However, the validity of the marriage was clearly relevant to the
   question of whether a residence card should have been issued to the
   claimant as a family member of an EEA national under regulation 17(1) of
   the 2006 Regulations. The judge knew the marriage was by proxy and
   therefore should have considered its validity in accordance with Kareem
   and TA and Others. The judge's failure to do so was a material error of
   law.

12. In remaking the decision my starting point is TA and Others which makes
   it clear that the relevant law is that of the sponsor's country of
   citizenship, which in this case is Belgium, and not the law of the
   country in which the marriage took place.  At paragraph [20] of TA and
   Others, it is stated:

      When consideration is being given to whether an applicant has
      undertaken a valid marriage for the purposes of the 2006 Regulations,
      such consideration has to be assessed by reference to the laws of the
      legal system of the nationality of the relevant Union citizen.

13. TA and Others makes clear that this is the same approach as required by
   Kareem and any alternative reading of Kareem is misconceived and born out
   of a failure to read the decision as a whole.

14. Mr Okech referred to a decision that had not been reported and which
   predates TA and Others. Although I have read the decision, I do not rely
   on it as it would not be appropriate for me to do so. See AO (unreported
   decisions are not precedents) [2008] UKAIT 00056. In any event, the legal
   issues considered in the unreported decisions are more than adequately
   addressed in the reported decisions of Kareem and TA and Others.

15. The burden of proof is on the claimant to show that the marriage to his
   sponsor is valid in Belgium. Mr Okech submitted that if the marriage is
   valid and acceptable in the country where it took place (ie Ghana) it is,
   in consequence, acceptable in Belgium. However, he has not provided any
   evidence to show the validity under Belgian law of the marriage and
   Kareem makes it clear that independent and reliable evidence about the
   law in a particular EEA country is required.
16. Accordingly, I find that the claimant and his sponsor are not to be
   treated as married for the purposes of Regulation 7 of the 2006
   Regulations and therefore the Secretary of State is not required to issue
   the claimant with a residence card under Regulation 17.

17. However, although there is not a valid marriage between the appellant
   and sponsor, the judge's factual findings, which are not in dispute,
   strongly indicate that the claimant and sponsor are in a genuine and
   durable relationship. Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations provides
   that a person will be considered an "extended family member" of an EEA
   national if they are in a "durable relationship". The unchallenged
   factual findings of the First-tier Tribunal lead me to the conclusion
   that the claimant and sponsor satisfy the requirement of being in a
   durable relationship under Regulation 8(5) such that the claimant should
   be considered as an "extended family member" for the purposes of the 2006
   Regulations.

18. Under Regulation 17(1) of the 2006 Regulations the Secretary of State
   must issue a residence card to a "family member". In contrast, under
   Regulation 17(4) the Secretary of State may issue a residence card to an
   "extended family member". In other words, with respect to extended family
   members, such as the claimant, the Secretary of State has a discretion.
   That discretion has not yet been exercised.  The position was clarified
   in Ihemedu (OFM's - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC):

        Regulation 17(4) makes the issue of a residence card to an
        OFM/extended family member a matter of discretion. Where the
        Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion the most
        an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow the appeal as
        being not in accordance with the law leaving the matter of whether
        to exercise this discretion in the appellant's favour or not to
        the Secretary of State.

Decision

19. The First tier Tribunal's decision contains an error on a point of law
   and is set aside.


20. The decision I substitute is to allow the claimant's appeal to the
   extent that his application for an EEA residence card as an extended
   family member remains outstanding before the Secretary of State to
   exercise discretion under Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations.

21. No anonymity order is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated                                |




