

                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33899/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination Promulgated   |
|On June 24, 2014                     |On July 23, 2014            |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                            MR MIRZA HAFIJUR BEIG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Timpson, Counsel, instructed by Maya Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Interpreter:     Mr Rahman


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born June 12, 1982, is a citizen of Bangladesh.  On  May
    9, 2005 the appellant was issued with entry clearance as the spouse  of
    a person settled in the United Kingdom. He entered the  United  Kingdom
    on June 20, 2005 and was granted leave to enter until May 8,  2007.  On
    March 15, 2011 the appellant was detained as an overstayer  and  served
    with form IS151A as  a  section  10  overstayer.  On  May  3,  2011  he
    submitted an application for indefinite leave to remain as a victim  of
    domestic violence but as he  was  an  overstayer  his  application  was
    refused without a right of appeal on July 11, 2011. On July 8, 2013  he
    submitted a fresh application for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a
    victim of domestic violence. The  respondent  refused  the  application
    having considered it under paragraph  298A  HC  395,  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE HC 395.  The  respondent  also  found  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances that would persuade her to allow  the  appeal
    outside of the Immigration Rules under article 8 ECHR.

 2. On August 28, 2013 the appellant appealed under Regulation  26  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 3. The matter came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  VA  Osborne
    (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on March  26,  2014  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on April 11, 2014 she found the appellant did
    not satisfy the EEA Regulations because she was  neither  satisfied  he
    was living in a relationship akin to a marriage nor  that  the  sponsor
    was a qualifying person. She  went  on  to  dismiss  his  appeal  under
    article 8 on the basis the appellant did not meet the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  she
    further found there were no exceptional  circumstances  that  persuaded
    her to consider the appellant's family life/private claims  outside  of
    the Immigration Rules. The appellant was offered an in-country right of
    appeal after a decision had been taken to remove him on August 5, 2013.



 4. The appellant appealed that decision on August 16, 2013  under  section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 5. The appeal was listed before Judge if the First-tier Tribunal  Tribunal
    Pickup (hereinafter referred to as the FtTJ)  on December 3,  2013  and
    in a determination promulgated on December 6,  2013  he  dismissed  his
    appeals under the Immigration Rules and article 8 ECHR.

 6.  The  appellant  appealed  this  decision  on  December  16,  2013  and
    Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  MacDonald  considered  the
    matter on December 23, 2013. He refused  the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal finding the grounds amounted to nothing more but a disagreement.
    The grounds of appeal were renewed to the Upper Tribunal on January 10,
    2014 and on January 30,  2014  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul  granted
    permission to appeal finding the FtTJ may have erred in his approach to
    what constituted domestic violence.

 7. The matter was listed before Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on April 28,
    2014 for an error of law argument. At that hearing he found  there  had
    been an error of law and he issued directions for the future conduct of
    the matter.

 8. A transfer order was made on May 24, 2014 releasing this appeal  to  be
    heard by any Deputy or Upper Tribunal Judge and the matter  was  listed
    before me on the above date.

 9. The appellant's solicitors indicated through their counsel they had not
    received the directions but confirmed that they had read all statements
    to their witnesses in a language they understood and no amendments were
    needed to any of them and each witness would be  adopting  his  or  her
    statement.

10. At the outset of the hearing I raised with the representatives  whether
    the respondent had considered this under the correct rule. As this  was
    an application submitted after July 9, 2012 and the appellant's  extant
    leave had expired in 2007 I indicated that this application  should  be
    dealt with under Section DVILR of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.
    The respondent had considered the application under paragraph  298A  HC
    395 but in my opinion this was not applicable to  this  appeal  because
    firstly the application had been made after July 2012 and secondly  the
    appellant's extant limited  leave  had  expired  and  the  transitional
    arrangements would not apply to his appeal. Mr Timson  agreed  my  view
    was correct albeit nobody had previously dealt with  this  and  he  was
    content to proceed on that basis.

11. I have taken into account all of the evidence that was submitted to the
    FtTJ and I have also had  regard  to  my  record  of  proceedings,  the
    relevant IDI, case law and the submissions of the two representatives.

    THE APPELLANT'S CASE

12. The appellant adopted his statement and gave oral evidence. He was then
    cross-examined by Ms Johnstone and he also answered  questions  put  to
    him by myself.


13. The appellant's claimed his uncle arranged his marriage to Akima  Bibi,
    a British citizen. Their marriage had taken  place  in  Bangladesh  and
    shortly afterwards he had applied for entry clearance as a  spouse  and
    that this application had been granted. He had to  pay  a  large  dowry
    prior to the marriage and this money was still outstanding.


14. He stated that he and his wife originally  lived  in  London  for  four
    months and then they moved into her father's house in  Hyde,  Cheshire.
    They lived there together for about six months and then moved into  her
    brother's house.

15. The appellant claimed his marital  difficulties  began  whilst  he  was
    living in her father's house. He  described  his  wife  as  being  hot-
    tempered and under the control  of  her  father.  She  and  her  father
    insisted he handed over his wages to her father, as he was the head  of
    the family. The appellant resented this because he had earned the money
    and felt he should not have to pay all of his wages to  his  father-in-
    law. However, in order to maintain peace and harmony he agreed to  hand
    over his wages. His father-in-law would give him money back, which  the
    appellant described as pocket-money.

16. After the appellant and his wife moved into his brother-in-law's  house
    there were still problems because his brother-in-law was on  drugs  and
    was quite violent at times because of the drugs. The appellant did  not
    elaborate on this during his oral evidence.

17. The appellant confirmed that the marital strife with his  father-in-law
    continued over money and his wife always backed her father rather  than
    him. In answer to a question posed by myself he agreed  that  prior  to
    any allegation of domestic  violence,  his  marriage  was  experiencing
    problems because his wife and father-in-law took all his money and this
    made him feel bad. In  response  to  a  question  "So  were  the  money
    problems the cause of the breakdown of  your  marriage"  he  responded,
    "Yes it was a major problem and she was a very angry person. I did  not
    do anything without her permission. She wanted control."

18. The appellant referred in his witness statement to  being  hit  by  his
    father-in-law in an argument about money and  he  stated  this  shocked
    him. He said this prompted him to speak to his wife about  leaving  the
    Hyde area but  she  wanted  to  remain  where  they  were  living.  The
    appellant believed this was because she was under her father's control.



19. He then described two incidents that he now relies on  as  evidence  he
    was the victim of domestic abuse. In his statement, confirmed in cross-
    examination, he stated that both his wife and father-in-law  physically
    beat him. He reported this to his sister's husband,  Shahed  Ahmed,  by
    calling him. He suffered redness to his cheek but this injury would not
    have been visible to Shahed because  he  did  not  see  him  until  the
    following day. He suggested any discrepancy between  this  account  and
    what he told Shahed was possibly a typing error.

20. In his witness statement he claimed that a few  days  later  a  further
    incident took place. During cross-examination he suggested the incident
    occurred two to three months  later  and  when  challenged  about  this
    discrepancy he stated the incident had occurred a long time ago  (eight
    years ago). He described contacting Shahed and telling him that he  had
    been locked out of his own house. Shahed and a number  of  others  (all
    witnesses at today's hearing) turned up at the house and they all  went
    inside to try and resolve the  problems.  During  this  discussion  the
    appellant stated both in his written statement and  his  oral  evidence
    that his father-in-law, brother-in-law and wife had assaulted  him.  He
    told me that his wife and in-laws had punched, slapped and  kicked  him
    to his face and body. He had no marks but the blows caused him pain.

21. They left the house and since that date he has not personally spoken to
    his wife. He felt shocked and hurt by her  actions  and  in  particular
    that his wife had slapped him in front of  other  people.  In  2010  he
    became aware that his wife had remarried but  maintained  that  he  had
    never received any divorce papers.

22. He believed that his marriage had broken down because of  her  violence
    and believed the marriage may have survived if they had moved away from
    the area as he had suggested.

23. He did not report the matter to the police because he was ashamed about
    what had happened

24. Ms Johnstone cross-examined him on the following matters:

     a. Whether his wife  had  re-married-He  replied  that  he  had  never
        received any papers but a man who lived in Hyde, Abdul Majid,  told
        him that she had remarried in 2010. He was unaware where she  lived
        now or what her current circumstances were.


     b. He blamed any inconsistencies on the fact  the  events  occurred  a
        long time ago or possibly a typing error.

     c.  He did not keep a diary but may have kept notes of events. He  had
        not made a note of the incident when he was assaulted in front of a
        number of witnesses.

     d. In so far as the witnesses were concerned he confirmed prior to the
        incident detailed above he did not know Ali Choudhury and he  knew,
        through marriage, Shahed (wife's husband),  Khalid  Miah  (Shahed's
        brother-in-law), Helena Begum Khan (Mr Miah's  wife)  and  Mussamat
        Lovely Begum (Appellant's sister). With the exception  of  Mussamat
        and Shahed he had little to do with the other witnesses.

     e. He confirmed in his oral evidence he had worked for  two  to  three
        years in the United Kingdom. According to his witness statement  he
        had given up work around March 2011.

     f. He had not applied to remain between 2006 and 2011 because his wife
        had his passport. He accepted he made his first  application  after
        the police had arrested him as an overstayer.

     g. He feared he would face problems if returned to Bangladesh  because
        he owed money.

25. In re-examination the appellant clarified he  did  not  keep  a  formal
    diary but he was sure he wrote things down. He had not been  to  see  a
    doctor because he was not fully confident in English and  he  also  saw
    the same doctor as his wife  had  been  seeing.  He  had  not  reported
    matters to the police because his wife kept an eye on him.

    WITNESS EVIDENCE


    Shahed Ahmed's evidence


26. Shahed Ahmed adopted his witness statement and stated he  first  became
    aware of the appellant's marital problems when he received a call  from
    the appellant. He confirmed that he had  visited  the  appellant's  in-
    law's house on two  separate  occasions.  On  the  first  occasion  the
    appellant told him that his wife had assaulted him in front of his  in-
    law. He went round to their property and spoke to her  parents  and  he
    stated that the in-laws told him they would look into the incident  and
    try and resolve things between the appellant and his wife. Under cross-
    examination he stated that he had called the appellant's in-laws to try
    and resolve matters and when challenged by Ms Johnstone about why  this
    was not in his original statement he stated that he told the  solicitor
    what had happened.

27. Turning to the second incident, in his statement  he  stated  that  two
    weeks later he received another call from the  appellant  in  which  he
    stated he had been "kicked out" of his  in-law's  property  so  he  and
    others went around to the house to try and talk to his wife and his in-
    laws.  He also explained that they all went to the house  to  help  him
    because as Muslims that what they did. At the hearing he stated it  was
    two to three months after the first incident. Regardless of the date he
    maintained that the appellant and his wife were arguing  and  she  then
    went towards him and slapped him and the  only  person  to  strike  the
    appellant was his wife.

28. He did not see any injuries on either occasion although he  did  notice
    the appellant was upset.

29. When questioned about  whether  the  appellant  worked  he  stated  the
    appellant had not worked since he left his wife although  he  made  the
    point that he went to work himself.

30. He confirmed the appellant had lived with him since 2006. He had  never
    asked him if he had had any contact with his wife. He had  allowed  him
    to remain, despite his leave having expired, because  he  had  a  large
    debt in Bangladesh.

    Mussammat Lovely Begum's evidence

31. She adopted her witness statement and gave oral evidence. She had  only
    met the appellant's wife on one occasion apart from the time  she  went
    to the appellant's in-law's house. She was aware that he  had  problems
    because her husband had told her but prior to seeing an incident at the
    appellant's in-law's house she had been unaware of  the  problems.  She
    had not told her brother to return to Bangladesh because he owed  money
    and had massive debts in Bangladesh. She stated that  her  brother  had
    lived with her since leaving his wife and during that time he  had  not
    worked. With regard to the incident at the appellant's  in-law's  house
    she confirmed that her brother's wife approached him and  slapped  him.
    Nobody else hit him and her father suggested they all leave because his
    daughter was becoming restless. She had no  further  contact  with  the
    appellant's wife or her family.

    Ali Choudhury's evidence

32. He provided a witness statement and gave oral evidence. He confirmed he
    had little contact with the appellant, as he was  Shahed's  friend.  He
    last saw the appellant at the original  hearing  before  the  FtTJ.  He
    confirmed the appellant's wife slapped him once in his presence. No one
    else hit him and he was certain it was only one slap.

    Khalid Miah's evidence

33. He provided a witness statement and gave oral evidence. He confirmed he
    had little contact with the appellant and had not seen him since  apart
    from at court. He confirmed he saw her slap him.

    Helena Begum Khan's evidence


34. She provided a witness statement and gave oral evidence. She stated she
    had met both the appellant and his wife when they visited her  property
    shortly after the appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom. The next
    time she saw them was at the appellant's wife's house. She did not  see
    the appellant very much. She confirmed that when she saw  them  at  the
    appellant's wife's house the appellant was physically assaulted.

    SUBMISSIONS


    Ms Johnstone

35. Ms Johnstone relied on the refusal letter. She submitted the  appellant
    had failed to satisfy Section  E-DVILR.  1.3  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The appellant has failed to  provide  evidence  that
    during the last period of limited leave as a partner  his  relationship
    with his wife broke down permanently as a result of domestic  violence.
    Ms Johnstone submitted the evidence did not support his claim that  his
    marriage had broken down due to domestic violence.  She  submitted  the
    following factors undermined the appellant's claim:-


     a. The appellant delayed making his application  for  five  years  and
        only attempted to make this claim after the police arrested him for
        being an overstayer.


     b. Although he called evidence to support his claim  their  statements
        were provided almost five years  after  the  date  of  the  alleged
        incident. Additionally, all of the witnesses are either  family  or
        friends of the family.

     c. No weight should be  attached  to  the  letters  from  the  Greater
        Manchester Bangladesh Association and  Community  Centre  (B34)  or
        Akeeda Community Project (B35) or the Jabez Group (B36) because the
        letters are based on what he told them and no one from any  of  the
        organisations attended to give evidence.

     d. The letter from the Akeeda Community Project  contains  information
        that is not supported by any  evidence.  For  instance  the  letter
        alleges the appellant's wife had  remarried  but  did  not  explain
        where that information  came  from  and  it  also  claimed  he  was
        suffering from depression but there  was  no  medical  evidence  to
        support this claim.

36. Ms Johnstone further submitted there were numerous  inconsistencies  in
    the evidence and these undermined the  credibility  of  the  claim.  In
    particular:-


     a. There were differences in evidence about when the  second  incident
        occurred. Both the appellant and Shahed Ahmed gave  different  oral
        evidence to that contained in their written statements.


     b. The appellant's evidence about what happened on the second incident
        differed greatly from that of the other witnesses. He alleged  that
        he had been punched, kicked and slapped by all of his wife's family
        whereas the other witnesses claimed he had only been slapped.


     c. The letter at page B35 referred to a diary of events. The appellant
        in cross-examination stated that he had  not  diarised  the  second
        incident and when challenged claimed initially he did not keep  any
        diary but then claimed he kept a record of some matters. He did not
        produce this  record  either  to  this  Tribunal  or  the  original
        Tribunal.

     d. The appellant made a statement in March/April 2011 and stated  that
        he worked until shortly before the statement. In his oral  evidence
        he suggested that he gave up work 18 months after he split from his
        wife, which  would  be  around  October  2007.  This  evidence  was
        inconsistent and undermined  the  appellant's  credibility.  Shahed
        Ahmed and his wife both said the appellant lived with them and both
        said he had not worked since he left his wife.  There  is  a  clear
        inconsistency between what the appellant has said  and  what  these
        close relatives said in their evidence. The  clear  inconsistencies
        undermine the credibility on other issues.

     e. The appellant's brother-in-law and  sister  knowingly  allowed  and
        encouraged the appellant to break the law by  overstaying.  Neither
        encouraged him to contact the respondent or to seek  to  regularise
        his position despite his  purported  claim  that  he  had  suffered
        domestic violence.

     f. The fact the witnesses had little to do with the appellant makes it
        less credible that they would have been invited to a family meeting
        between the appellant, his in-laws and his wife.

37. The appellant failed to contact the police about the domestic abuse and
    despite two letters (B35 and B36) referring to medical  problems  there
    was no evidence he had attended at the doctors at all.


38. His claim about being at risk was not supported by  any  evidence  from
    Bangladesh and this undermined his claim that he would be at risk.

39. The respondent disputes he suffered any domestic violence but  even  if
    the Tribunal accepted he had been "slapped" Ms Johnstone  submitted  it
    is clear that this  was  not  the  reason  for  the  breakdown  in  the
    marriage. The appellant resented having to hand over his wages  to  his
    father-in-law and the fact his wife was controlled by her  father.  The
    evidence from the appellant was he had been "kicked" out of  the  house
    before the alleged slapping incident and Ms Johnstone submitted that it
    was the financial issues and other matters that led  to  the  permanent
    breakdown of the relationship and the "slap" was not the reason for the
    ending of the marriage.

40. The appellant does not meet either Appendix FM or paragraph  276ADE  of
    the  Immigration  Rules.  He  has  family  in  Bangladesh  and  he  has
    overstayed more than seven years. There  is  nothing  exceptional  that
    would require this appeal to be considered outside of the Rules.

41. The appeal should be dismissed.

    Mr Timson

42. Mr Timson submitted  there  was  plenty  of  evidence  to  support  the
    appellant's claim that his wife in or around April 2006  had  hit  him.
    Applying the respondent's own guidelines and the case law set out in JL
    (Domestic violence: evidence and procedure) India  [2006]  UKAIT  00058
    and Ahmed Iram Ishtiaq 2007  EWCA  Civ  386  Mr  Timson  submitted  the
    appellant had made out he had suffered domestic violence and that  this
    behaviour was part and parcel of the breakdown of the relationship.


43. The witness evidence on the second incident was consistent and most  of
    the witnesses had little or no connection to the  appellant.  Some  had
    only seen him at the last court hearing. They were  credible  witnesses
    and if  there  had  been  any  inconsistency  in  their  evidence  then
    allowance should be made for the fact they were giving  their  evidence
    many years after the event.  None  of  the  witnesses  "over-egged  the
    pudding" and claimed in their witness statements  they  had  seen  more
    than they had seen. This makes their accounts more credible.

44. Whilst the letter at B35 had been submitted by the appellant in support
    of his case Mr Timson agreed little weight  should  be  placed  on  it.
    Whether the appellant kept a diary or not  his  evidence  was  that  he
    recorded some events.

45. The fact the appellant did not attend either his doctors or the  police
    station was explained in evidence. This should not be held against him.



46. The appellant has been here a long time and during  this  time  he  has
    established a private life. He has  no  real  ties  to  Bangladesh  and
    accordingly he should be granted leave under paragraph 276ADE HC 395.





    ASSESSMENT OF EVIDENCE AND FINDINGS

47. This is an application for indefinite leave to remain  on  the  grounds
    that the  appellant's  marriage  ended  due  to  the  appellant's  wife
    assaulting him.


48. Mr Timson kindly supplied me with a copy  of  the  UKBA's  guidance  on
    applications for indefinite leave to remain as a  victim  of  violence.
    However the copy he handed was out of date and had been replaced by new
    guidance  on  January  28,  2014.  This  guidance  considered  the  new
    Immigration Rules whereas the document provided by Mr Timson considered
    what was needed to satisfy paragraph 298A  HC  395  and  pre-dated  the
    change in the Rules for domestic violence cases. I have  therefore  had
    regard to the correct guidance in  assessing  whether  the  appellant's
    claim, if accepted on the balance of probabilities, amounts to domestic
    violence within the Rules.

49. The January 2014 guidance states:


         "The government introduced a new definition  of  domestic  violence
         from 31 March 2013. The definition of domestic violence  and  abuse
         is:


        Any incident or  pattern  of  incidents  controlling,  coercive  or
        threatening behaviour, violence or abuse between those aged  16  or
        over who are or have  been  intimate  partners  or  family  members
        regardless of gender or sexuality. This can  include,  but  is  not
        limited to, the following types of abuse:


            . psychological
            . physical
            . sexual
            . financial
            . emotional.
         (2) Controlling behaviour is a range of acts designed to make a
         person subordinate and/or dependent by:
            . isolating them from sources of support
            . exploiting their resources and capacities for personal gain
            . depriving them of the means needed for independence
            . resistance and escape, and
            . regulating their everyday behaviour.




         (3) Coercive behaviour is:
            . an act or a pattern of acts of assault, threats, humiliation
              and intimidation, or
            . other abuse that is used to harm, punish, or frighten their
              victim.
         (4) Family members, whether directly related, in-laws or step-
         family, are defined as:
       . mother
       . father
       . son
       . daughter
       . brother
       . sister, and
       . grandparents.
         (5) The legal definition of injury is when any harm is done to a
         person by the acts or omissions of another."
50. The guidance confirms  that  where  the  relationship  broke  down  for
    reasons other than reasons of domestic violence  the  applicant  cannot
    benefit from this Rule.


51. Where an application is made outside of the  probationary  period  (the
    appellant's limited leave) the guidance states:-
         "If an application is received from a person without valid leave to
         remain in the UK, you must consider the reason they were out of
         time and must make a judgement on whether this affects the
         assessment of the evidence submitted in support of the application.


         You must consider:
            . The age of evidence being relied upon. This may impact
              verifying the evidence.
            . How the applicant has been financially supported.
            . When the relationship permanently broke down.
            . If there are any official reports, for example from the
              police that show passports and travel documents were withheld
              and the police had to retrieve them.
            . The time between the breakdown of the marriage and the
              application."
52. To prove domestic violence  has  occurred  the  appellant  must  submit
    supporting documents and where there are no police or  court  documents
    the appellant should support any  medical  report  detailing  injuries,
    letter from social services confirming they are involved in a  domestic
    violence incident  and  a  letter  from  a  domestic  violence  support
    organisation.


53. Witness statements from friends or family  and  letters  from  official
    sources that relay unfounded  reports  by  the  applicant  but  do  not
    confirm the incident must be treated with caution.

54. I have considered both JL (Domestic violence: evidence  and  procedure)
    India [2006] UKAIT 00058 and Ahmed Iram  Ishtiaq  2007  EWCA  Civ  386.
    These cases pre-date the changes in the Immigration Rules but  some  of
    the principles clearly survive the changes in the Rules.

55. The appellant's immigration history is set out above in paragraph  [1].
    Having read the papers and listened to a number of witnesses give their
    evidence I am satisfied that the appellant's marriage  was  an  unhappy
    one. His marriage was arranged  by  a  man  lived  in  London  and  the
    appellant had to pay a dowry and in  order  to  do  this  it  seems  he
    borrowed money that he was expected to repay. I was  provided  with  no
    evidence of this debt or any  other  evidence  such  as  statements  or
    letters to support his claim that he was unable to  return  because  he
    owed money. I accept a dowry would have been paid but I  am  unable  to
    comment on the amount of the dowry, as no papers were included  in  the
    court  bundle.  Shortly  after  marrying  the  appellant  applied   for
    permission to enter as a spouse.

56. There are a number of inconsistencies in the  evidence  and  these  are
    matters I have taken into account. These include:

     a. The appellant claimed that when he arrived in the United Kingdom he
        and his wife went to live in London for the first four  months  but
        this is contradicted by the evidence of his sister (Mussammat)  and
        her husband (Shahed) who both stated that  since  arriving  in  the
        United Kingdom the appellant has lived with his wife and her family
        in Hyde, Cheshire.


     b. The appellant's account  of  both  alleged  incidents  of  violence
        differs from those  of  all  the  other  witnesses.  The  appellant
        claimed in his statement that he told Shahed that his father-in-law
        and wife had attacked him whereas Shahed's evidence  was  clear  on
        this issue that the appellant  had  told  him  only  his  wife  had
        assaulted  him  (paragraph  [6]   of   Shahed's   statement).   The
        appellant's oral and written evidence about the second incident was
        that he had been attacked his father-in-law, brother-in-law and his
        wife whereas five other witnesses had  stated  only  his  wife  had
        slapped him. The appellant's claim was he had been punched,  kicked
        and slapped by all of the family members.

     c. The appellant's  evidence  of  when  the  incidents  occurred  also
        contained inconsistencies. In his witness statement he claimed  the
        first and second incident occurred within a couple of days of  each
        other whereas in his oral evidence he  claimed  they  were  two  to
        three months  apart.  Shahed's  evidence  in  both  incidents  also
        contained inconsistencies. In his written statement he stated  they
        were two weeks apart whereas in his oral evidence he  claimed  they
        were two to three months apart. The fact they both claimed  at  the
        hearing  that  the  incidents  were  two  to  three  months  raises
        questions about the reliability and credibility of their  accounts.
        I have taken into account the incidents occurred some time ago  but
        there is a big difference between two days and three months.

     d. In his oral evidence the appellant stated in  cross-examination  he
        had not kept  a  diary  but  this  was  contradicted  in  a  letter
        submitted by the appellant to support his claim  and  contained  at
        B35. That letter specifically recorded, "he wrote  down  everything
        in his diary". When challenged during the hearing the appellant  he
        firstly claimed he could not remember if he kept a diary  and  then
        he stated he was not keeping a diary and then in re-examination  he
        stated he believed he wrote something down. He  failed  to  produce
        any such document.

     e. The appellant claimed  he  had  no  knowledge  of  the  appellant's
        whereabouts and had not had any contact since  mid  2006.  However,
        the letter had page B35 referred  to  the  appellant  going  to  an
        advice surgery from 2008 until January 2011 regarding his  domestic
        violence problem. The letter stated he was the victim of emotional,
        financial,  physical  constant  torture.  This  letter  was  wholly
        inconsistent with the appellant's account as he said he had not had
        any contact since 2006. If the appellant's account was correct then
        by the time he went to the Akeeda Community Project he had not seen
        his wife for around two years. The account he appears to have given
        to them differs significantly even to the extent that the author of
        the letter referred  to  him  being  forced  to  sell  property  in
        Bangladesh-something he never referred to anywhere in his evidence.



     f. The appellant claimed in his written evidence that he worked  until
        shortly before he made his witness statement in  March/April  2011.
        In oral evidence he claimed he only worked for three years from the
        date of entry. This evidence  was  contradictory.  The  appellant's
        sister and brother-in-law both claimed he had not worked since 2006
        despite living with  him  since  that  date.  Regardless  of  which
        version of the appellant's evidence is correct the evidence of both
        his sister and brother-in-law contradicted it.

57. In addition to these inconsistencies there are a number of  credibility
    issues  that  the  UKBA  guidance  states  should  be  considered.  The
    appellant claimed he suffered domestic violence in 2006 and  his  leave
    to enter ended on May 8, 2007. He therefore was out of time to  firstly
    extend his leave and secondly he was out of time to bring  this  claim.
    The fact he was out of time to bring it does not mean  his  application
    has no merit but the guidance makes clear that the decision  maker  and
    ultimately myself must consider carefully that delay and  whether  this
    affects what he is claiming. In that regard I note the following:-


     a. The evidence from the appellant and his witnesses  was  five  years
        old although each witness says they witnessed the second  incident.
        The remainder of their evidence is based in what the appellant told
        them.
     b. There are no official reports about the alleged domestic  violence.
        There are letters from persons in the community from 2011.
     c. He submitted his first application (no right of appeal) five  years
        after the alleged incidents and only after the police had  detained
        him as an overstayer.
     d. His family, according to the evidence, were aware of his claim  and
        chose not to assist him in regularising his stay and also chose  to
        financially support him (on their evidence) since 2006.
     e. The relationship broke down after the appellant was "kicked out" of
        the family home.  The  relationship  had  broken  down  because  of
        financial arguments and because the appellant's wife would not move
        away from her parents-something confirmed in oral evidence  by  the
        appellant.
     f. The appellant claims that his wife and others assaulted him  during
        this period but this is not supported by the other  witnesses  save
        with regard to the alleged slap on the second occasion.

58. I also have had regard  to  the  appellant's  failure  to  produce  any
    evidence that he had been seeing a doctor or produce his written record
    of events despite being aware of the observations of the FtTJ.  Letters
    submitted speak of his medical problems and I do not find  it  credible
    that  the  appellant  produced  no  evidence  to  support  his  medical
    condition. His failure on two occasions (both hearings) to produce  his
    contemporaneous notes of what had been happening is a factor I have had
    regard to.


59. The inconsistencies and the factors I have set out in  paragraphs  [56]
    to [58] above adversely affect the credibility of the appellant's clam.




60. However, against this background I still have to consider the  evidence
    of all of the witnesses who claim they saw the  appellant's  wife  slap
    him. Their evidence whilst consistent to each other  is  undermined  by
    three important factors:-

     a. The delay in making these statements.
     b. There is no credible explanation why all these people turned up  at
        his wife's house. With the exception of the appellant's sister  and
        brother-in-law none of the others had had anything to do  with  the
        couple and have not since. Bearing in mind the appellant  had  been
        thrown out of his family home I do not find it credible that his in-
        laws would have welcomed not only the appellant back into the house
        and five complete strangers.
     c. Inconsistencies in relation to the  appellant's  sister's  and  her
        husband's evidence as highlighted above.

61. So  whilst  I  take  on  board  Mr  Timson's  submissions  about  their
    independence and the fact they have not  exaggerated  what  happened  I
    have to balance their evidence against all of the other matters I  have
    referred to above. Telling facts in this whole appeal are:

     a. The appellant did nothing until he was  arrested  and  served  with
        form IS151A (notice of removal).
     b. He only made an application for  domestic  violence  after  he  was
        arrested.
     c. His failure to provide any reliable supportive documents.


62. I accept this  marriage  broke  down  but  from  the  appellant's  oral
    evidence and written evidence I am satisfied this marriage  broke  down
    because the appellant was unhappy with his wife  and  her  family.  The
    feeling appeared to be mutual because following an argument in mid 2006
    he was told to  leave  the  family  home.  In  his  oral  evidence  the
    appellant accepted as much.

63. I am not satisfied there was a meeting as claimed by the witnesses.   I
    accept there may have been efforts made to resolve  their  difficulties
    but I do not accept the five witnesses, who  claim  to  have  attended,
    went to a meeting. I do not accept the appellant was  assaulted  and  I
    find this marriage broke down for reasons other than domestic violence.



64. I therefore dismiss the appellant's claim for  indefinite  leave  under
    Section DVILR of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

65. Mr Timson has also submitted that if I found against the  appellant  on
    this issue then I should consider the  appellant's  claim  for  private
    life under paragraph 276ADE HC 395. In order to succeed he  would  have
    to demonstrate the appellant satisfied  subsection  (vi)  of  paragraph
    276ADE namely "he is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in
    the UK for less than 20 years (discounting any period of  imprisonment)
    but has no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country
    to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK."

66. The decision of Ogundimu [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC) should be  considered  as
    the Tribunal provided guidance on the correct approach to be taken. The
    Tribunal found-

         "120. In approaching our consideration of the meaning of this  rule
         we remind ourselves of the  guidance  given  by  Lord  Hoffmann  in
         Odelola v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]  1  WLR
         1230:


             "[4] Like any other question of construction, this [whether  a
             rule change applies to all undetermined applications  or  only
             to subsequent applications] depends upon the language  of  the
             rule, construed against the relevant background. That involves
             a consideration of the immigration rules as a  whole  and  the
             function which they serve in the administration of immigration
             policy."


         121. In Mahad v ECO [2009] UKSC 16, Lord  Brown,  when  considering
         the question of construction of  the  Immigration  Rules,  said  as
         follows:


             "[10]  The  rules  are  not  to  be  construed  with  all  the
             strictness applicable to the construction of a  statute  or  a
             statutory instrument  but,  instead,  sensibly  according  the
             natural and ordinary meaning of the  words  used,  recognising
             that  they  are  statements  of  the  Secretary   of   State's
             administrative  policy.  The  respondent's   counsel   readily
             accepted that what she  meant  in  her  written  case  by  the
             proposition "the  question  of  interpretation  is...what  the
             Secretary of State intended his policy to  be"  was  that  the
             court's task is to discover from words used in the Rules  what
             the Secretary of State must be taken to  have  intended...that
             intention is to be discerned  objectively  from  the  language
             used,  not   divined   by   reference   to   supposed   policy
             considerations.  Still  less  is  the  Secretary  of   State's
             intention to be discovered from the  Immigration  Directorates
             Instructions"


         122. We take note of the fact that the use of the phrase  "no  ties
         (including social, cultural or family) with the country to which he
         would have to go if required to leave the UK" is not  exclusive  to
         paragraph 399A of the Rules; it is also used in paragraph 276  ADE,
         in the context of the requirements to met by an applicant for leave
         to remain based on private life in the  United  Kingdom  when  such
         person has lived in the United Kingdom for less than 20 years.


         123. The natural and ordinary meaning of the word  'ties'  imports,
         we think, a concept involving something more than merely remote and
         abstract links to the country of proposed deportation  or  removal.
         It involves there being a continued  connection  to  life  in  that
         country; something that ties a claimant to his or  her  country  of
         origin. If this were not the case  then  it  would  appear  that  a
         person's nationality of the country of proposed  deportation  could
         of itself lead to a failure to meet the requirements of  the  rule.
         This would render the application of the rule,  given  the  context
         within which it operates, entirely meaningless.


         124. We recognise that the text under the rules is an exacting one.
         Consideration of whether a person has 'no  ties'  to  such  country
         must involve a rounded assessment of all the relevant circumstances
         and  is  not  to  be  limited  to  'social,  cultural  and  family'
         circumstances. Nevertheless, we are satisfied  that  the  appellant
         has no ties with Nigeria. He is a  stranger  to  the  country,  the
         people, and the way of life. His father may have ties but they  are
         not ties of the appellant or any ties that could result in  support
         to the appellant in the event of his return there.  Unsurprisingly,
         given the length of the appellant's residence here, all of his ties
         are with the United Kingdom.  Consequently  the  appellant  has  so
         little connection with Nigeria so as to mean that the  consequences
         for him in establishing private life there at the age of 28,  after
         22 years residence in the United Kingdom, would  be  'unjustifiably
         harsh'.


         125. Whilst  each  case  turns  on  its  own  facts,  circumstances
         relevant to the assessment of whether a  person  has  ties  to  the
         country to which they would have to go if  they  were  required  to
         leave the United Kingdom must include, but are not limited to:  the
         length of time a person has spent in the country to which he  would
         have to go if he were required to leave the United Kingdom, the age
         that the person left that country, the exposure that person has had
         to the cultural norms of that country, whether that  person  speaks
         the language of the country, the extent of the  family and  friends
         that person has in the country to which he  is  being  deported  or
         removed and the quality of the relationships that person  has  with
         those friends and family members."

67. Paragraphs [123] to [125] of Ogundimu are of particular  importance  as
    these highlight  the  matters  that  a  Tribunal  should  have  regard.
    Applying this guidance to these  facts  I  find  the  majority  of  the
    appellant's family lives in Bangladesh. He has lived here legally for a
    maximum of twenty-three months and since then he has been  living  here
    illegally and on his evidence  he  had  been  working  illegally  until
    possibly 2011. He has spent the majority of his life in Bangladesh  and
    his only basis for being here was his marriage, which he states is  now
    over because his wife has remarried. The appellant has  cultural  ties,
    family and friends in Bangladesh. There is no suggestion he ahs  fallen
    out with his family. I do not accept he has any problems over  borrowed
    money as no evidence was presented.

68. The appellant's claim under paragraph 276ADE HC 395 fails. The Court in
    MMM (AP) v The Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  COSH
    43 re-affirmed that approach the court took in R (on the application of
    Onkarsingh Nagre) 2013 EWHC 720 namely the appellant has to show  there
    is a good arguable case in order to have his case considered outside of
    the Rules and I do not find any good arguable  case  for  dealing  with
    this case outside of the Immigration Rules for the reasons set  out  in
    paragraph [67] above.

69. No submissions were made for family life under Appendix FM or article 8
    ECHR.

    DECISION

70. There was a material error of law.


71. I have remade the decision and I dismiss the appellant's  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules (Section  DVILR  of  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE HC 395).


72. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.

Signed:                                 Dated:


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no fee award I dismissed the appeal.

Signed:                                 Dated:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
