
IAC-AH-CJ-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33305/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 9th January 2015                   |On 16th January 2015                  |
|                                      |......................................|
|                                      |.                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                           Mohammad Sirajul Islam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the determination of Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Rowlands promulgated on 23rd July 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Bangladesh born 1st January 1982 who
    on 5th September 2013 was refused leave to enter the United Kingdom and
    his existing leave was cancelled.

 3. It appears that the Appellant was returning to the  United  Kingdom  on
    5th September 2013 when he was questioned about documentation  that  he
    had used in order to have his leave  extended.   The  Respondent  noted
    that the Appellant had been granted leave to remain in order to  follow
    a course at Westlink College and that he had  submitted  a  Provisional
    Certificate and Consolidated Marks Memorandum dated 31st December  2012
    issued by London College of Law  and  Management  (LCLM)  in  order  to
    enable him to study at Westlink College.   The  Respondent  noted  that
    LCLM's licence had been suspended in 2010, and revoked in  March  2012.
    The Sponsor licensing unit of the Home Office had  confirmed  that  the
    college was not teaching courses although the certificate was  said  to
    have been issued on 31st December 2012.  The Respondent contended  that
    the Appellant's claimed course dates at LCLM were 12th January  2012  -
    December 2012.  The  certificate  contained  numerous  grammatical  and
    syntax errors, was poorly indented, and the titles of three of the  six
    modules were spelt incorrectly.  A detailed examination of the document
    resulted in it being declared  a  forgery.   The  refusal  notice  also
    recorded that the Appellant's spoken English was so bad that he had  to
    be interviewed in Bengali, and his knowledge of his previous course  of
    study in the United Kingdom  was  described  as  being  close  to  non-
    existent.

 4. Because the Respondent believed the Provisional  Certificate  to  be  a
    forgery, paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules was relied upon  by
    the Respondent in refusing leave to enter.

 5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal contending that he is
    a genuine student and that the decision to cancel his visa was  against
    the law and the Immigration Rules.  There was  also  reference  in  the
    Grounds of Appeal to Articles 2 and 3 of the 1950  European  Convention
    on Human Rights.

 6. The Appellant initially requested an oral hearing  of  his  appeal  but
    subsequently notified the Tribunal that he did not wish to have an oral
    hearing, and wished his appeal to be determined on the papers.

 7. The appeal was determined on the papers by Judge Rowlands  (the  judge)
    on 12th July 2014.  The judge found that the  certificate  produced  by
    the Appellant was false and had been used by the  Appellant  to  enable
    him to study at Westlink College.  The judge was satisfied  that  leave
    to enter had been properly refused under paragraph 320(7A).  The  judge
    found no substance in the Appellant's reliance upon Articles 2  and  3.
    The appeal was dismissed.

 8. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was contended that the judge had  erred  in  paragraph  7
    when mistaking the date on which teaching at the college ended and  the
    date on which the Appellant's course began.  The Appellant's  case  was
    that he had completed all required modules by March 2012 and  thus  was
    entitled to the certificate, even though the certificate was not issued
    until 31st December 2012.  It was not disputed  that  teaching  at  the
    college had ended in March 2012.   However  the  judge  had  mistakenly
    assumed, as was stated in the Respondent's  refusal  notice,  that  the
    Appellant's course had begun on 12th January 2012, whereas it had begun
    on 12th January 2010 and tuition had continued until  March  2012  when
    the college licence was revoked.

 9. It was further contended that the judge had erred  in  paragraph  7  in
    finding that the Appellant  had  obtained  the  certificate  from  LCLM
    authorities when those authorities were not in a  position  to  confirm
    the contents thereof.  It was submitted that the  judge  had  erred  by
    failing to  state  what  evidence  was  relied  on  for  reaching  this
    conclusion, as the certificate was issued by the  same  college,  which
    still held academic records on the Appellant.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Simpson who stated in paragraph 3 of the grant;

         "3.  The Provisional Certificate from the  London  College  clearly
             states that the course duration was from 12th January 2010  to
             December 2012; consequently, both the Immigration Officer  and
             the judge were in error  when  they  referred  to  the  course
             duration  being  12th  January  2012  -  December  2012.   The
             Provisional Certificate contained numerous spelling  mistakes,
             but that by itself is  not  sufficient  evidence  of  forgery.
             Moreover, in [7] the judge makes an incorrect assumption  that
             an assessment board had not been convened because  'there  was
             no teaching done in 2012' and also  refers  to  the  Appellant
             having done all the necessary modules in that year i.e.  2012,
             which is not the case.  In those circumstances it is  arguable
             that the judge ought not  to  have  been  satisfied  that  the
             para.320(7A) refusal was made out."

11. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending, in summary, that the judge had not erred  in  law  and
    that the grounds contained within the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal amounted to a disagreement with the findings made by the  judge.
    It was contended that the judge had given detailed consideration to the
    Provisional Certificate and had given  reasons  why  the  document  was
    considered unreliable and counterfeit.

12. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal  to  decide  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

13. There was no attendance by or on behalf of the Appellant.  I considered
    rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, and  was
    satisfied that both the  Appellant  and  his  representative  had  been
    notified of the time, date and place of the hearing by notice issued on
    5th December 2014.  There was no explanation for the absence,  nor  any
    application for an adjournment.

14. As I was satisfied that the Appellant had been notified of the hearing,
    I decided that it was in the interests of justice  to  proceed  in  his
    absence.

15. Mr Kandola relied upon the rule 24  response  and  submitted  that  the
    findings made by the judge were sustainable and  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence.  I was asked to conclude that the determination disclosed  no
    material error of law.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. I find no material error of law in the determination of the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I find   that the judge took into account all the  documents
    placed before him, including the Appellant's  witness  statement  dated
    14th February 2014.  The judge dealt with the appeal on the  papers  at
    the specific request of the Appellant.

17. The judge demonstrated that he was aware  of  the  correct  burden  and
    standard of proof, in that the burden on proving that paragraph 320(7A)
    is satisfied rests upon the Respondent, and  the  judge  recorded  that
    clear evidence was needed, and that a mere assertion by the  Respondent
    was insufficient.

18. The judge was entitled to take into account the basic spelling mistakes
    in the Provisional Certificate and the other errors referred to in  the
    Respondent's refusal notice.  Although the  judge  may  have  erred  in
    paragraph 7 in assuming that the Appellant had contended  that  he  had
    done all the necessary modules in 2012, whereas  the  Appellant's  case
    was that the course duration was  between  January  2010  and  December
    2012, that error is not material.  The judge noted that the certificate
    referred to a recent assessment and that it  was  dated  31st  December
    2012.  The Appellant's own account according  to  paragraph  3  of  his
    witness statement was that he had completed all modules prior to  April
    2012, and that the college licence was  revoked  in  March  2012.   The
    judge was therefore entitled to conclude that there had been no  recent
    assessment board as referred to in the certificate dated 31st  December
    2012.

19. The contention of the Respondent, contained in the refusal notice, that
    the college had not carried out any teaching after  revocation  of  the
    licence was not disputed in the Appellant's witness statement.

20. The judge was also entitled to take into account that the Appellant had
    not contested in his witness statement the Respondent's  conclusion  in
    the refusal notice that the Appellant's spoken English was  of  such  a
    poor standard, that he had to be interviewed in Bengali.  The judge was
    entitled to find that if he had  successfully  gained  the  diploma  in
    tourism and  hospitality  management,  as  stated  in  the  Provisional
    Certificate, then he should have been able  to  speak  English  and  be
    interviewed in English.

21. Overall, I conclude that the  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    document was false, and that he gave adequate and  sustainable  reasons
    for his findings, and the grounds submitted on behalf of the  Appellant
    for permission to appeal, do not disclose a material error of law,  but
    amount to a disagreement with findings made by the judge.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  a  material
error of law.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity, and the Upper Tribunal makes no  anonymity  order.




Signed        Date 12th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.



Signed        Date 12th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

