
[pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33708/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 October 2017                     |On 3 November 2017                   |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                    L a A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms S Parsons, of DJ Webb & Co, solicitors.
For the Respondent:     Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the respondent's decision  dated
    15 September 2015 refusing her further leave to remain on human  rights
    grounds.


Background

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  [  ]  1981.  She  first
    arrived in the UK in September 2004 with entry clearance as a  student.
    She met her partner, also a citizen of Nigeria, in the UK late in  2004
    and they now have four children, all born in the UK on 8  August  2005,
    31 August 2007, 20 June 2012 and 17 September  2013  respectively.  The
    children are Nigerian citizens and the  eldest  child  is  now  also  a
    British citizen.

3.    The appellant's leave  to  remain  was  curtailed  to  28  April  2012
    following the revocation of the sponsor licence of  the  college  where
    she had been studying. On 25 September  2012,  the  appellant  made  an
    application on behalf of herself, her partner and children for leave to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules. The application was refused on 17
    June 2013 with no right  of  appeal.  She  lodged  an  application  for
    judicial review which was resolved by a consent order  withdrawing  the
    application on the respondent agreeing to reconsider her claim. It  was
    reconsidered but again refused with no right of  appeal.  There  was  a
    further application for judicial review which was again settled on  the
    basis of the application being reconsidered. On 17 September 2015,  the
    respondent refused the application but  with  an  in-country  right  of
    appeal, the subject of these proceedings.

4.    The respondent was not satisfied that the  appellant  could  meet  the
    requirements of appendix FM under either  the  partner  or  the  parent
    route or of para 276 ADE as there were no very significant obstacles to
    her integration into Nigeria on return.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

5.    The judge considered the best interests of the  children  and  whether
    it would be reasonable for them to leave the UK. At [53] he  said  that
    on the totality of the evidence before him, he was  satisfied  that  it
    was reasonable, despite the fact that the eldest child  was  a  British
    citizen, for her to return to Nigeria with  her  younger  siblings  and
    their parents. The fact that she was a British citizen was clearly  not
    a trump card but merely one factor which required to be weighed in  the
    balance in favour of the appellant.

6.    The judge  then  considered  the  public  interest  question  and  the
    provisions of s. 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002. He noted that the appellant was now unlawfully present in the  UK
    and that her partner had also been unlawfully present since about  2002
    save  possibly  for  the  first  six  months,  although  there  was  no
    documentary evidence to support his assertion that he  had  entered  on
    the basis of a valid visit visa. He also noted that the  appellant  and
    her partner were not financially independent  but,  on  their  account,
    they relied on handouts from a mosque and her partner's uncle.  Further
    the children had been educated at public expense when there had been no
    legitimate entitlement to such expense save that the eldest child would
    have been so entitled since becoming a British citizen.

7.    In summary, the judge was not satisfied that the appellant could  meet
    the  requirements  of  the  Rules  or  that   there   were   compelling
    circumstances to warrant further consideration of  the  appeal  outside
    the Rules. The appeal was accordingly dismissed.

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

8.    In the grounds of appeal, it is argued that the judge erred in law  by
    failing to give proper weight to the fact that  the  eldest  child  had
    become a British citizen and the second child had been living in the UK
    since her birth in 2007, therefore for more  than  seven  years.  These
    factors were not properly taken into account, so  it  is  argued,  when
    considering the best interests of the  children  and  the  analysis  of
    proportionality should have been carried out on the basis that it would
    be unreasonable to expect the children to leave the UK. It  is  further
    argued that the judge failed to  take  into  account  the  respondent's
    policy guidance on the approach to be taken when a decision would force
    a British child to leave the EU.

9.    The grounds then argue that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  make  adverse
    credibility findings against the appellant based at least in part on  a
    misunderstanding of the evidence.  In  [32]  the  judge  had  commented
    adversely on the fact that the appellant's partner was not a  dependant
    in her application and had not given oral evidence. He regarded this as
    "little more than a misconceived tactical ploy, undoubtedly to  attempt
    to cause delay in a final resolution of the family's status".

10.    Ms  Parsons  adopted  these  grounds  arguing  that  there  had  been
    insufficient consideration of whether it would be  reasonable  for  the
    children to leave the UK particularly in the light of the  approach  to
    assessing children's best interests set out  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]
    UKSC 4 and to the fact the eldest child was a British citizen  and  the
    next child had been living in the UK for over seven years. The  judge's
    assessment of the appellant's credibility  had  been  affected  by  his
    misunderstanding of whether her partner was a dependant or  whether  he
    had his own outstanding application.

11.   Mr Deller indicated that he did not seek to resist the appeal. He  was
    concerned that the British citizenship of the  eldest  child  had  been
    treated with diminished importance and that the judge had been wrong to
    proceed on the basis that the appellant's partner was not  a  dependant
    in the application when he had been named as such in  the  respondent's
    decision. In these  circumstances,  it  was  his  submission  that  the
    decision could not be regarded as safe.

The Error of Law

12.   I accept that the concession is rightly made and that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law as set out in the grounds.  Both  representatives
    accepted, and I agree, that the errors  were  such  that  the  decision
    should be set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  full
    rehearing.

Decision

13.   The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the decision set  aside.  The
    decision is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for reconsideration  by
    way of a full rehearing before a different judge.




Signed:     H J E Latter                          Dated:  1 November 2017



Upper Tribunal Judge Latter






