
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33084/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25 August 2017                     |On 19 September 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                           Miss Sharofat Nazarova
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Uzbekistan who was born on 5 April  1975.
    The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  9  January  2005  on  a
    student visa valid until 14 February 2005.   Thereafter  she  submitted
    various applications for leave to remain as a student.   On  29  August
    2009 the appellant applied in time for a  further  grant  of  leave  to
    remain as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student.   On  29  August  2012  that
    application was rejected.  On 26 September 2012 she again submitted  an
    in time Tier 4 (General) Student application and was granted  leave  to
    remain until 1 December 2014.  On 1  December  2014  she  submitted  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the
    basis of ten year long residence grounds.

 2. The respondent refused the appellant's application on 5  October  2015.
    The basis of the  respondent's  refusal  was  that  the  appellant  had
    obtained  her  TOEIC  certificate  from  Educational  Testing  Services
    fraudulently  and  therefore  that  she  had  used  deception  in   her
    application.  The respondent also refused the application on the  basis
    that the appellant failed to  satisfy  the  continuous  residence  test
    because the number of absences from the UK during the  relevant  period
    totalled 721 days.  Additionally the appellant's absence  from  the  UK
    between 20 July 2008 and 6 February 2009 amounted to 200 days, which is
    in excess of the total absence of 180 days.

    The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated on 17  November  2017  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Cameron dismissed the appellant's appeal.  Although
    the judge found that the appellant had not used deception to obtain her
    TOEIC certificate the judge found that the appellant failed to meet the
    ten year continuous residence requirement.  He considered that although
    the appellant was unable to travel due to a medical  condition  of  the
    relevant period she was absent  for  721  days  whereas  the  permitted
    absence is 540 days in total.  The appellant's medical issues  in  2008
    were not sufficient to amount to the considerable period of  time  that
    she is above the limit of 540 days.

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against that decision to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  On 12  May  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Foudy refused  the  appellant  permission  to  appeal.   The  appellant
    renewed her application for permission to appeal and  on  6  July  2017
    Upper Tribunal Judge Finch granted the appellant permission to appeal.

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The grounds of appeal state that the appellant was  permitted  to  stay
    outside the United Kingdom for 540 days or less  during  the  last  ten
    years.   The  respondent's  own  stated  policy  allows   exercise   of
    discretion in cases where the appellant has lived outside  the  UK  for
    more than 540 days due to compelling and  compassionate  circumstances.
    Reference is made  to  the  respondent's  guidance  "Long  residence  -
    Version 13.0" at page 14.   It  is  asserted  that  in  this  case  the
    appellant had stayed outside the UK for 721 days during the  qualifying
    period.  The judge erred  in  calculating  the  period  of  absence  by
    failing to discount the absence of 200 days which, as the  judge  held,
    was due to compelling and compassionate circumstances.  It is submitted
    that this absence should have been discounted  before  calculating  the
    total absence during the last ten years.  Once the absence of 200  days
    is discounted the appellant's stay outside the  UK  is  less  than  540
    days.  The Home Office Presenting Officer did not provide a copy of the
    abovementioned  policy  guidance.   Therefore,  the  judge   erred   in
    dismissing the appeal without  judicial  scrutiny  of  relevant  policy
    guidance.  The respondent to discharge her duties towards the  Tribunal
    - the recent decision of the Supreme Court  in  the  case  of  Mandalia
    (appellant) v  SSHD  (respondent)  [2015]  UKSC  59  is  relied  on  at
    paragraph 19.

 6. In oral submissions Ms Jones submitted  that  the  absence  related  to
    medical  reasons  and  that   the   judge   accepted   the   compelling
    circumstances.  She submitted that at paragraph 59 the judge  made  the
    crucial findings. The judge's findings  were  contradictory  as  having
    found that the absence was as a result of the  medical  conditions  the
    judge ought to have deducted the 200 days from the total of  721  days.
    The purpose  of  the  trip  was  to  receive  medical  treatment.   The
    appellant's condition worsened while she was outside the United Kingdom
    and her recovery took considerably longer  than  she  had  anticipated.
    Both the fact that the appellant was unable to  return  and  compelling
    circumstances apply in this case.

 7. The point of the Rule  was  that  if  a  person  could  establish  long
    residence in the UK they were entitled to settlement.  The  reason  for
    the absence criteria is because the appellant needs to demonstrate that
    they have their life primarily in the United Kingdom.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision was inconsistent and not rational as  having  found
    that the appellant was unable to travel and that her  reason  for  that
    amounted to compelling circumstances the judge ought to  have  deducted
    the whole of the period of time.

 8. Mr Tarlow relied on the Rule 24 response.  It  was  asserted  that  the
    maximum period that could be deducted was 20 days i.e.  the  number  of
    days in excess of the 180 permitted. Mr Tarlow referred to the guidance
    at page 14 and submitted that the respondent has a discretion and  that
    clearly the guidance indicates only  that  it  may  be  appropriate  to
    exercise discretion.  He submitted that where discretion  is  exercised
    any leave that might be granted is outside the Rules,  not  within  the
    Rules.  There is no discretion where an applicant has been outside  the
    United Kingdom beyond the 540 days.  He  submitted  that  this  is  the
    total amount of days that  a  person  can  be  outside  of  the  United
    Kingdom.  There is no discretion to be exercised  in  that  case.   The
    discretion arises only in relation to single absences of over 180 days.
     He referred to the guidance where it sets out "for overall absences of
    540 days in the  ten  year  period",  submitting  that  this  does  not
    indicate for periods in excess of 540 days.

 9. He submitted that the Secretary of State did  consider  exercising  her
    discretion.  He referred to the Reasons for Refusal Letter on  page  4.
    The  Secretary  of  State  did  not  consider  that  the  circumstances
    justified the exercise of discretion.  If an appellant goes abroad  and
    then cannot return within the 180 days that is no reason for  requiring
    the Secretary of State  to  exercise  discretion.   He  submitted  that
    discretion in any event is only in respect of the six month  period  of
    absence.   Absences  of  540  days  plus  are  not  to  be  taken  into
    consideration.

10. In reply Ms Jones submitted that the guidance in the  second  paragraph
    at page 14 does not separate out that discretion  cannot  be  exercised
    when considering the eighteen month total.

11. The issues in this case are whether or not the total period of  absence
    over  the  whole  10  year  period  cannot  exceed  540  days  in   any
    circumstances as the respondent argues or whether  the  discretion  set
    out in the respondent's guidance includes total absences  of  over  540
    days and whether the whole 200 days absence should be deducted from the
    total number of days of  absence.  The  Home  Office  Guidance  -  Long
    Residence version 13.0, which was applicable at the time, (I note  that
    the guidance on this point remains the same in the latest version) sets
    out at page 14:

         If the applicant has been absent from the UK for more than 6 months
         in one period or more than 18  months  in  total,  the  application
         should normally be refused.  However,  it  may  be  appropriate  to
         exercise  discretion  over  excess  absences   in   compelling   or
         compassionate circumstances, for example where  the  applicant  was
         prevented  from   returning   to   the   UK   through   unavoidable
         circumstances.

         This must be decided at senior executive officer (SEO) level with a
         grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules being the  appropriate
         outcome.

         Things to consider when assessing if the absence was compelling  or
         compassionate are: Page 11 of 43 Published for Home Office staff on
         03 April 2017

         . for all cases - you must consider whether the individual returned
         to the UK within a reasonable time once they were able to do so

         . for the single absence of over 180 days:

             o you must consider  how  much  of  the  absence  was  due  to
             compelling circumstances and whether the applicant returned to
             the UK as soon as they were able to do so

             o you must also consider the reasons for the absence

         . for overall absences of 540 days in the 10 year period:

             o you must consider whether the  long  absence  (or  absences)
             that pushed the applicant over the limit happened towards  the
             start or end of the 10 year residence  period,  and  how  soon
             they will be able to meet that requirement

             o if the absences were towards the start of that  period,  the
             person may be able  to  meet  the  requirements  in  the  near
             future, and so could be expected to apply when they  meet  the
             requirements o however,  if  the  absences  were  recent,  the
             person will not qualify for a  long  time,  and  so  you  must
             consider   whether   there   are    particularly    compelling
             circumstances

    All of these factors  must  be  considered  together  when  determining
    whether it is reasonable to exercise discretion.

12. The guidance clearly envisages the possibility of exercising discretion
    when there has been  a  total  absence  of  more  than  540  days.  The
    structure sets out things to consider and then describes what  must  be
    considered 'for all cases'. It then separates 2 sets of  circumstances.
    Firstly 'single absences over 180' days and secondly 'overall  absences
    of 540 days'. It cannot mean overall absences that are 540 days or less
    because there would be no need to exercise discretion. It cannot be the
    case that these are further factors to consider after  considering  the
    single absence in excess of 180 days. That is clear  from  the   bullet
    points below where it  sets  out  various  factors  that  can  only  be
    relevant to absences in excess of the 540 day period, such  as  whether
    the absences (this could be several absences  so  clearly  not  just  a
    single absence of over 180 days) that pushed the person over the  limit
    (this must refer to the 540 day limit) happened towards  the  start  of
    the 10 year period

13. When considering the evidence the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  set  out
    from paragraph 59:

         "59. As indicated I have heard oral evidence from the appellant and
             I find her to be a credible witness.  I  accept  the  evidence
             available to me that the appellant was unable to travel due to
             a medical condition and that this led to her being absent from
             the UK for in excess of the 180  days  permitted  on  any  one
             occasion.

         60.  It is however the case that the appellant in  total  over  the
             relevant period was absent for 721 days whereas the  permitted
             absence is 540 days in total.  The appellant's medical  issues
             in 2008 are not  sufficient  to  amount  to  the  considerable
             period of time she is above the limit of 540 days.

         61.  Although it is submitted on the appellant's behalf that  there
             were other reasons for her being absent  such  as  her  mother
             being ill I do not accept the submission that  simply  because
             if it were not for those absences that she would be within the
             continuity provisions.  That  argument  could  be  adopted  by
             anyone and would make having the Rule itself unworkable.

         62.  Taking into account the evidence overall  I  accept  that  the
             appellant has  given  a  reasonable  explanation  of  why  she
             remained beyond the normal 180 days in 2008/2009 however I  am
             not satisfied that she has given a reasonable explanation  for
             the fact that she spent 721 days  absent  from  this  country.
             This may be made up of a number of shorter absences  but  that
             does not give a reasonable explanation as to why she would  be
             absent beyond the 540 days permitted to enable her to meet the
             requirements of the Rules.

         63.  Taking into account all of the evidence  available  I  am  not
             satisfied therefore that the appellant is  able  to  meet  the
             requirements of the Immigration  Rules  in  relation  to  long
             residence  under  paragraph  276D  and   I   find   that   the
             respondent's  decision  to  refuse  her  application  was   in
             accordance with the law and the applicable Immigration Rules."

14.  The judge accepted that the reason for the absence that was in  excess
    of 180 days (200 in total) was due to a medical condition  and  that  a
    reasonable explanation had been given for the absence. I note from  the
    evidence that the appellant returned as soon as she was allowed to  fly
    so returned as soon as she was able to do so.  I  also  note  that  the
    appellant travelled for the purpose of obtaining medical treatment  but
    her condition worsened whist she was aboard such that form the  medical
    reports (which were accepted by the First-tier Tribunal)  she  was  not
    permitted to fly until 30 January  2009.  The  judge  appears  to  have
    miscalculated the period of absence as he considered  that  appellant's
    medical  issues  in  2008  were  not  sufficient  to  amount   to   the
    considerable period of time she is above the limit of 540 days. However
    if the 200 days absence is deducted from the 721 days total absence the
    appellant would have been absent for  521  days  out  of  the  10  year
    period. The judge did not appear to consider  that  discretion  can  be
    exercised for absences of over 540 days  in  total  over  the  10  year
    period.  As I set out above the guidance indicates that the exercise of
    discretion should be considered in these circumstances as well  as  for
    single absences in excess of 180 days. I do not  accept  that  only  20
    days in excess of the 180 days can be deducted. The guidance  does  not
    indicate that such an approach should be taken. The guidance  sets  out
    that the decision maker must consider how much of the absence  was  due
    to compelling circumstances. In this case  the  appellant  visited  her
    doctor within a week of arrival and has medical evidence  (accepted  by
    the judge) that indicated that she was  unable  to  return  to  the  UK
    because of her illness which prevented her  from  flying.  She  retuned
    very shortly after being declared fit to fly. In any event as I set out
    above the guidance is clear - the decision maker has a discretion  when
    considering absences in excess of 540 days. The judge  had  found  that
    the reason for her absence was because she was unable to travel due  to
    a medical condition which led to her being absent from the  UK  for  in
    excess of the 180 days. The judge ought to have deducted the  200  days
    from the total and  also  considered  the  respondent's  discretion  to
    assess whether there were compassionate and compelling circumstances in
    relation to absences over 540 days in total. Having  found  effectively
    that there were compassionate circumstances then either as a result  of
    deducting  the  200  days  or  considering   the   same   compassionate
    circumstances should have been applied to the total  period  the  judge
    ought to have allowed the appeal.

15. The First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law  for  the  reasons
    given above. I set that decision aside pursuant to section 12(2)(a)  of
    the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

16. I re-make the decision allowing the appeal  for  the  reasons  set  out
    above.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  is
allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 19 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

