
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33627/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd December 2015                        |On 19 May 2016                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between


                           MS. ROSE WAMBUI KARIBA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr W M Rees, Instructed by Stanley Richards
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell,  Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1.  This is an appeal against a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Ghani promulgated on  15th  June  2015  in  which  he
       dismissed an appeal against a decision  made  by  the  Secretary  of
       State on 6th August 2014, to refuse to issue the  appellant  with  a
       residence card as the family member of an  EEA  national  exercising
       treaty rights in the UK.


 BACKGROUND


    2. The appellant is a Kenyan national who entered the UK in 2007  as  a
       student nurse.  On 12th July 20107,  the  appellant  applied  for  a
       certificate of approval to marry her sponsor, Bruno Jorge  Da  Silva
       Pina ("Mr Pina"), a Portuguese national.  That was approved on  24th
       July 2007.  On 7th September 2007, the appellant married Mr Pina  at
       Luton  Registry  Office  and  on  17th  March  2008,  the  appellant
       submitted an application for a residence card.  A residence card was
       issued to her on 16th June 2009.


    3. On 26th January 2010, the respondent received an application  for  a
       residence card by Stella Okorode, a Nigerian national who  submitted
       a marriage certificate showing she had married the same  sponsor  as
       the appellant, Bruno Jorge Da  Silva  Pina,  at  Greenwich  registry
       office on 12th December 2009.


    4. On 12th June 2014, the respondent received yet another  application.
       This time from Judith Chinecherem Ibenne  Ukandu,  another  Nigerian
       national who submitted a marriage certificate showing she  had  also
       married the same sponsor as the  appellant,  Bruno  Jorge  Da  Silva
       Pina, this time at Luton registry office on 4th February 2013.


    5. On 24th June 2014, the appellant applied for a  permanent  residence
       card as the family member of her husband Mr  Pina,  who  claimed  to
       have exercised Treaty rights for a continuous period of 5  years  in
       the UK in accordance with the Immigration (European Economic  Areas)
       Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 EEA Regulations").


    6. The application was refused for the reasons set out  in  a  'Reasons
       for Refusal' letter dated 6th August 2014.  The respondent  was  not
       satisfied that the appellant and her sponsor  have  resided  in  the
       United  Kingdom  for  a  five-year  period  without  any  breaks  in
       accordance with the 2006 Regulations. The respondent also  concluded
       that there  was  compelling  evidence  undermining  the  appellant's
       credibility because of the evidence that the appellant's sponsor was
       involved  in  two  other  marriages,  and  had  submitted  identical
       evidence, and identification documents in other applications.


 The decision of First-tier Tribunal Jude Ghani


    7. At paragraphs [5] to [9] of  his  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge refers briefly to the respondent's decision and the reasons for
       it.  At paragraphs [10]  to  [14]  he  notes  the  evidence  that  he
       received from  both  the  appellant  and  her  husband.  The  Judge's
       findings and conclusions upon the appeal, are said to be set  out  at
       paragraphs [15] to  [22]  of  the  decision  under  the  heading  "My
       Findings".


    8. It is uncontroversial that at paragraph 15 of his decision, the Judge
       correctly directed himself as to the  2006  Regulations.   The  Judge
       states:


             "15. The Appellant's application was submitted  on  24th  June
             2014.   Under Regulation 15(1)(b), as a family member  of  her
             husband, she has to establish that she has resided in  the  UK
             with the EEA national in accordance with the 2006  Regulations
             for a continuous period of 5 years.   In other words  she  has
             to establish that  her  husband  has  been  exercising  Treaty
             rights for a continuous period  of  5  years.     She  has  to
             provide evidence from June   2009 up till  June  2014  of  her
             husband's employment, self-employment, as a Job Seeker or as a
             student."


    9. At paragraphs [21] and [22], the Judge states:


             "21. As far as the various applications which  were  submitted
             with the  Appellant's husband's identity having been used  and
             the application by Miss Judith Ukandu, both the Appellant  and
             her husband confirmed that they were not aware of these.   The
             Respondent has failed to confirm as to what transpired as  far
             as these applications are concerned.   Both the Appellant  and
             her husband confirm that her husband's identity documents  had
             been lost.      It is quite possible  that  his  identity  has
             been used in these other applications.


             22.  I  find  with  the  evidence  before  me  that  there  is
             insufficient evidence to make a finding that the Appellant and
             her EEA sponsor have resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
             continuous 5 year period in accordance with 2006  Regulations.
             Although the Appellant's husband has  been  in  employment  at
             various times during the 5 year period, there is  insufficient
             evidence to make a finding that this has been continuous and I
             therefore find that the Appellant cannot  succeed  under  2006
             Regulations."


The Grounds of Appeal


   10. The appellant appeals on three grounds.  First, the Judge  erred  in
       his finding at paragraph [22] that although the appellant's  husband
       has been in employment at various times during  the  5-year  period,
       there is insufficient evidence to make a finding that this has  been
       continuous.  The appellant submits that the Judge erred in  focusing
       upon whether the appellant had established that her husband had been
       in continuous employment because that is not what is required  under
       the 2006 Regulations.  The appellant submits that the  Judge  should
       have focused upon whether the  appellant's  husband  was  exercising
       treaty rights.   The  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  was  that  at
       different times he had been a 'worker', 'self-employed'  or  a  'job
       seeker' in accordance with the 2006 Regulations.


   11. Second, the Judge failed to make any finding as to the  matters  set
       out in the statement of HMRC dated 10th  June  2014  that  had  been
       relied upon by the  respondent.   The  appellant  submits  that  the
       information provided by HMRC was factually incorrect  or  incomplete
       with regard to Mr Pina's employment history in material respects.


   12. Third, the Judge failed at paragraph [21] of his decision,  to  make
       any finding as to whether the appellant's husband had indeed married
       three times.  The appellant submits that given the serious nature of
       the allegation, the Judge should have made a finding as  to  whether
       or  not  the  appellant's  husband  played  a  part  in  the   other
       applications made to the respondent.


   13. Permission to appeal was granted on 23rd  September  2015  by  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Perkins.  The matter  comes  before  me  to  consider
       whether or not the decision of the Tribunal involved the making of a
       material error of law, and if the decision is set aside, to  re-make
       the decision if appropriate.


   14. At the hearing before me, Mr Rees adopted the appellant's grounds of
       appeal.  He submits that  although  the  Judge  may  have  correctly
       directed himself as to the 2006 Regulations at paragraph [15] of his
       decision, the Judge failed to engage with the  requirements  in  the
       following paragraphs. He submits that at paragraphs [16] to [20] the
       Judge simply refers to the evidence before him, and failed  to  make
       any findings as to  the  periods  during  which  the  appellant  was
       employed, self-employed or in receipt of benefits.  Mr Rees  submits
       that the only finding made by the Judge is that which is set out  at
       paragraph [22] of the decision, but in  that  paragraph,  the  Judge
       erroneously focuses upon whether the appellant' husband has been  in
       employment  at  various  times  during  the  five-year  period   and
       erroneously concludes that there is insufficient evidence to make  a
       finding that this employment has been continuous.


   15. The respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 6th  October  2015
       that was adopted by  Mr  Whitwell.     The  respondent  opposes  the
       appeal and submits that the Judge  directed  himself  appropriately.
       The respondent submits that the Judge acknowledges that  there  were
       periods where the appellant's husband was in receipt  of  jobseekers
       allowance and that having carefully considered the  evidence  before
       him, it was open to the Judge to find that  there  was  insufficient
       evidence to show that the sponsor came within Regulation 6  and  had
       been continuously exercising treaty rights for a period of 5 years.


   16. Mr Whitwell submits that the determination must be read as  a  whole
       and that it is clear that at paragraph [15]  of  the  decision,  the
       Judge correctly directed himself as to the requirements of the  2006
       Regulations. He submits that the question is therefore  whether  the
       Judge applied that  self-direction  properly.  He  submits  that  at
       paragraphs [16] to [20] of the decision, the Judge sets out, and has
       regard to the evidence that was before him.   He  submits  that  the
       finding made at paragraph [21] is one that is made in favour of  the
       appellant, and that the Judge appears to accept the account given by
       the appellant  and  her  husband,  that  the  appellant's  husband's
       identity documents had been lost, and it is therefore quite possible
       that his identity has been used in the other  applications  referred
       to by the respondent.


 Discussion


   17. I have carefully read through the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Ghani.  At paragraph  [22]  the  Judge  found  that  there  was
       insufficient evidence to make a finding that the  appellant  and  her
       EEA sponsor have resided in the UK for a continuous 5 year period  in
       accordance  with  the  2006  Regulations.   The  Judge  then   states
       "Although the appellant's husband has been in employment  at  various
       times during the 5 year period, there  is  insufficient  evidence  to
       make a finding that this has been continuous  and  I  therefore  find
       that the appellant cannot succeed under the 2006 Regulations".


   18. At paragraphs [16] to [20] of his decision, the Judge refers  to  the
       information that is set out in the letter from HMRC dated  10th  June
       2014 setting out Mr. Pina's employment history.  The Judge  sets  out
       in each of those paragraphs, the evidence given by the appellant  and
       the other evidence before him, but fails to make any findings  as  to
       the periods during which the appellant was employed, self-employed or
       in receipt of benefits.  The Judge might  well  have  been  satisfied
       that in respect of each period, there was  insufficient  evidence  to
       establish that the appellant's husband  has  been  exercising  treaty
       rights but what is set out in those paragraphs is a rehearsal of  the
       evidence, and one cannot discern from what is set out, any findings.


   19. I accept that in those paragraphs, the Judge refers to  the  evidence
       before him relating to the earnings from employment,  self-employment
       and the receipt of job-seekers allowance.   If  the  Judge  had  made
       findings as to whether the appellant's husband was exercising  treaty
       rights in the UK during  those  periods,  I  would  have  had  little
       hesitation in deciding that the overall conclusion at paragraph  [22]
       is an unfortunate oversight because it would be clear that the  Judge
       had engaged with the correct test.  However,  in  my  judgement,  the
       lack of findings in paragraphs [16] to [20]  support  the  submission
       made by Mr Rees that the Judge has erroneously focused  upon  whether
       the appellant's husband has been continuously employed during  the  5
       year period, rather than whether the  appellant's  husband  has  been
       exercising treaty rights during that 5 year period.


   20. This amounts to an error of law.  The judge has not made findings  or
       adequately explained his  reasons,  so  that  the  appellant  can  be
       satisfied that the  Judge  had  the  correct  requirements  in  mind.
       Paragraph [22] of the  decision  suggests  that  the  Judge  confused
       "exercising  treaty  rights"  with  "being   employed".    In   those
       circumstances in my view there is a material error  of  law  and  the
       decision is set aside with no findings preserved.


   21. The decision needs to be re-made  and  I  have  decided  that  it  is
       appropriate to remit this appeal back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       having taken into account paragraph 7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
       Practice Statement of 25th September 2012 which states;


          '7.2     The Upper Tribunal is likely on  each  such  occasion  to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier  Tribunal,  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
             satisfied that;


              (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


              (b) the nature or extent of any  judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                  re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.'


   22. In my view the requirements of paragraph 7.2(b) apply,  in  that  the
       nature and extent of any judicial  fact-finding  necessary,  will  be
       extensive. The parties will be advised of the date of the  First-tier
       Tribunal hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


   23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making  of  an
       error of law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the
       extent that it is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


   24. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date 19 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


As the appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal,  there  was  no  fee
award. I have remitted the appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal.   No  fee
award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  This is to be considered by the First-
tier Tribunal.


Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

