
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: IA/33496/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 7th June 2017                             |On 15th June 2017              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             mr simranjit singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Malhotra instructed by Tennyson Monroe
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a national of India, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 14th October 2015 to
    refuse his application for leave to remain in the UK on  the  basis  of
    his private and family life.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  S  J  Clarke
    allowed the appeal and the Secretary  of  State  now  appeals  to  this
    Tribunal with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on
    2nd May 2017.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant entered the  UK  on
    23rd January 2010 with leave to remain as a student  valid  until  30th
    August 2013 when he submitted an application for leave to remain  as  a
    Tier 4 Student. That application was refused on 6th November 2013.  The
    Appellant appealed against the decision but the refusal was upheld  and
    appeal rights were exhausted on 3rd June 2014.  On  1st  July  2014  he
    submitted a further application for leave to remain in the UK as a Tier
    4 Student, the application was initially refused in November  2013  but
    was reconsidered and the decision to refuse was upheld on 23rd February
    2015.  The Appellant then applied for leave to remain on the  basis  of
    his relationship with  his  partner  who  he  met  in  June  2012.  The
    Appellant's partner has a child from a previous  relationship  who  was
    born on 4th September 2009.

 4. In the reasons for refusal the Secretary  of  State  decided  that  the
    Appellant  could  not  meet  the  suitability   requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules because he had  provided  a  TOEIC  certificate  from
    Educational Testing Services (ETS) along with the application submitted
    on 30th April 2013 for leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  Student.   The
    Secretary of State says that the certificate had been cancelled by  ETS
    on the basis that it was fraudulently obtained and that  the  Appellant
    therefore used deception in his applications in August  2013  and  July
    2014.  As  the  Appellant  was  found  not  to  be  able  to  meet  the
    suitability requirements his application under  the  partner  route  of
    Appendix FM was refused as was his application under the  parent  route
    of Appendix FM.  In terms of paragraph 276ADE the  Secretary  of  State
    did not accept  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's integration in India.  It was considered that there were no
    exceptional circumstances and the application was refused.

 5. In her decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge  firstly  considered  the
    suitability requirements in the context of the evidence about  the  ETS
    test.  The judge examined the documentation provided in relation to the
    English language test  and  the  CAS.  The  judge  concluded  that  the
    evidence relied on  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  show  that  this
    Appellant used deception to obtain his TOEIC certificates issued by ETS
    is unreliable [13]. The judge noted  that  there  were  inconsistencies
    between the documents submitted by the Secretary of  State  which  show
    that there were entries for two candidates bearing the same name as the
    Appellant, there were two different dates of birth on the  certificates
    submitted and two different dates on which the tests were  said  to  be
    held. There were also differences in the passport numbers  set  out  in
    different documents.

 6. The judge went on to say at paragraph 13;

         "SM and Qadir is authority that the generic evidence relied upon by
         the  Respondent  in  that  case  is  sufficient  to  discharge  the
         evidential burden.  I conclude that  the  inconsistencies  in  this
         specific evidence is such that either this evidential burden is  no
         longer discharged, or if I am wrong, based upon SM and  Qadir,  the
         Respondent  has  not  discharged  the  legal  burden  because   the
         discrepancies within the evidence".







    The judge concluded at paragraph 14;

         "Drawing the strands together, I do not  find  the  evidence  which
         contains different dates of birth of the Appellant to be  reliable.
         The  Appellant  presented  his  passport  for  the  test  and   his
         application form shows it is [            ].   The  Respondent  has
         access to the evidence to make the case, and has elected to produce
         evidence which is not reliable because of the reasons  I  have  set
         out".

 7. In the Grounds of Appeal the Secretary of State contends that the judge
    cannot make a finding that the evidential burden  has  been  discharged
    but then for the same reasons find that the legal one has not.   It  is
    contended that the evidential burden has been discharged in this  case.
    The Secretary of State relied on the decision in Secretary of State for
    the Home Department v Shehzad  and  Another  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  and  in
    particular paragraph 22 where Lord Justice Beatson said

         "I have stated, the question in these  appeals  only  concerns  the
         initial stage and whether, with the evidence of Mr  Millington  and
         Ms Collings, the evidential burden on the  Secretary  of  State  is
         satisfied.  If it is, it is then incumbent on the individual  whose
         leave has been curtailed to provide evidence in response raising an
         innocent explanation".

 8. Whilst accepting that there are errors in the ETS spreadsheet  in  this
    case, the Secretary of State contends that it does give the Appellant's
    details as being the holder of an invalid test.  It is submitted  that,
    properly read, the witness statement and the spreadsheet extract showed
    that the Appellant's English language test had been invalidated because
    of evidence of fraud in  the  test  taken  by  the  Appellant.   It  is
    submitted that the Secretary of State's evidential burden was  met  and
    that the individual burden fell upon the Appellant to offer an innocent
    explanation.  It is contended that it is not clear  how  the  deception
    allegation has been  rebutted  by  the  Appellant  and  it  is  unclear
    therefore how the legal burden has shifted back  to  the  Secretary  of
    State to disprove.  It is contended that the judge materially erred  in
    law in failing to follow the Court of Appeal guidance in Shehzad.

 9. In granting permission  to  appeal  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes
    concludes that the grounds are arguable as the judge  appears  to  have
    overlooked or misapplied the findings of  the  Court  of  Appeal.   The
    judge also expresses concerns about the findings  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's stepchild as if he can remain in the UK with a parent  then
    there is no question of his being expected to leave the UK  and  it  is
    stated  that  Sanade  and  others  (British  children  -   Zambrano   -
    Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048(IAC) and Dereci C-256/11 are clear on that.

10. At the hearing before me Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds of appeal  and
    in particular on paragraph 22 of the decision of Shehzad.  He submitted
    that the burden shifts to the Appellant and the judge made an error  in
    failing to recognise that.

11. Ms Malhotra relied on paragraphs 13 of the judge's decision  submitting
    that the judge made two alternative findings in that she  finds  either
    that the evidential burden had not been discharged on  the  basis  that
    the tool kit was flawed or alternatively, if she was wrong in  relation
    to that, based on SM and Qadir v SSHD  (ETS-Evidence-Burden  of  proof)
    2016 UKUT 00229, the legal  burden  had  not  been  discharged  due  to
    discrepancies in the evidence.  Ms  Malhotra  submitted  that,  if  the
    burden had shifted, there had been an innocent explanation put  forward
    by the Appellant in his witness statement  and  in  his  oral  evidence
    which gave the Appellant's reasons for disagreeing with  the  Secretary
    of State's assertions.  Therefore, in her submission, if the burden had
    shifted the Appellant has put  forward  an  innocent  explanation.   In
    these circumstances she submitted that there was no material error.

Error of Law

12. I have considered the judge's findings in the context of  the  guidance
    given in the case of Shehzad.  As well as paragraph 22 I also note  the
    contents of paragraph 30 were Lord Justice Beatson said;

         "... The Tribunal might be open to criticism in  its  treatment  of
         the Millington/Collings evidence at the  initial  stage.   But,  in
         circumstances where the generic  evidence  is  not  accompanied  by
         evidence showing that the individual under consideration's test was
         categorised as "invalid", I consider that the  Secretary  of  State
         faces a difficulty in respect  of  the  evidential  burden  at  the
         initial stage."

    In my view this supports Ms Malhotra's submission  that  the  Court  of
    Appeal did not say in the case of Shehzad that the burden always shifts
    on the basis of the generic evidence.  The evidence referred to by  the
    Court of Appeal in relation to the  appeal  of  Mr  Chowdhury  included
    specific evidence on top of the generic evidence and relating  to  that
    particular Appellant. The Court of Appeal noted that the evidence in Mr
    Shehzad's appeal differed from that  in  Mr  Chowdhury's  in  that  the
    Secretary of State did not identify Mr Shehzad's test as invalid.   The
    Court of Appeal went on to reach the conclusion set out  above  to  say
    that the Secretary  of  State  faced  a  difficulty  in  terms  of  the
    evidential burden at the initial stage where the generic  evidence  was
    not accompanied by evidence showing  that  the  individual's  test  was
    characterised as invalid.

13. In her analysis of the evidence in this appeal the judge concluded that
    the inconsistencies in the specific evidence submitted in  relation  to
    this Appellant was such that the evidence submitted by the Secretary of
    State was not sufficient to discharge the initial burden. The Secretary
    of State's Grounds imply that the judge  misunderstood  the  documents.
    However Mr Tarlow made no specific submissions to that effect.  On  the
    basis of the evidence before me I cannot conclude that the judge in any
    way misread the documents before her. The judge  examined  all  of  the
    documents and concluded that there were inconsistencies in the evidence
    such as to render them unreliable.  In these circumstances it was  open
    to the judge to conclude  that  the  evidential  burden  had  not  been
    discharged.

14. In any event the judge made an alternative finding that  the  Secretary
    of State had  not  discharged  the  legal  burden  upon  her  to  prove
    dishonesty on the Appellant part.  Ms Malhotra submitted that this  was
    a sufficient alternative finding.  I agree with that  submission  given
    the findings by the judge at paragraph 13 and 14  in  relation  to  the
    unreliable evidence.  I am therefore satisfied that, even if the  judge
    was wrong to conclude that the evidential burden had not been met,  the
    alternative finding is sufficient to deal with all of the evidence  put
    forward  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the  Appellant.  In  these
    circumstances I accept it was open to the judge in the  alternative  to
    find that the legal burden had not been discharged.

15. Although mentioned in the permission to appeal the Secretary  of  State
    did not specifically challenge the findings in relation to Appendix FM.
     Having found that the Appellant met the suitability  requirements  the
    judge went on at paragraph 15 to conclude that there are insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with the Appellant's partner  in  India.   The
    Secretary of State does not specifically challenge  this  finding.   At
    paragraph 16 the judge considered the Appellant's relationship with his
    partner's child and concluded that  the  Appellant  could  not  have  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with the child  because  the  child
    had such a relationship with his  biological  father  but  went  on  to
    conclude that it was not reasonable to expect the  Appellant's  partner
    and child to leave the UK.  It is clear from reading paragraphs  15  to
    18 that, rather than finding that the Appellant met the  parent  route,
    the judge has found that there are insurmountable obstacles  to  family
    life continuing outside the UK because of  his  partner's  relationship
    with the child and the fact that it is not reasonable or  in  the  best
    interests of the child to leave the UK because of the contact he enjoys
    with his biological father. There is no challenge to these findings.

16. In these circumstances for the reasons set out above  I  conclude  that
    there is no material error in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

There is no material error in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date: 15 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date: 15 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
