
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33564/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 January 2016                   |On 8 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR OLALEKAN ADEYI
                          (no ANONYMITY order MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs A Everett, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Symes of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  We  shall  refer  to  the
    respondent as the claimant.  This is our joint decision,  both  members
    of the panel have contributed to the writing of this decision.





Background

 2. The claimant is a national of Nigeria, born on 15 November  1993.   The
    claimant and his family, that is his mother and younger  brother,  were
    granted  visit  visas  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  in  2004.   The
    claimant's mother and brother arrived in the UK in March/April 2004 and
    the claimant arrived on his own aged around 10 to 11 years in  November
    2004.  The claimant and his family remained in the UK  unlawfully  when
    their visas expired.

 3. In 2006 the  claimant's  mother  travelled  to  Nigeria  and  left  the
    claimant and his younger brother alone at home. The  claimant  and  his
    brother were placed in the care of Social Services. On return to the UK
    the claimant's mother was charged with, and convicted  of,  two  counts
    of, child cruelty and neglect  and  was  sentenced  to  twelve  months'
    imprisonment on 3 July 2006.  On 12 June  2007  the  claimant's  mother
    resumed care of the claimant and his brother under a supervision order.



 4. On 11 August 2006 the claimant's mother made an application  for  leave
    to remain in the UK for herself and her two children.  This application
    was refused on 10 June 2009.  On 9 October 2009 the  claimant's  mother
    was served with a notice of liability to deportation. The claimant  and
    his  brother,  being  named  as  dependants,  were  also  served   with
    deportation  notices.  The  claimant's  mother  appealed  against  that
    decision on 29 October 2009. Her appeal was dismissed on 13 April 2010.
    The Tribunal found that the claimant,  his  mother  and  brother  could
    return to Nigeria as a family  unit  and  that  the  claimant  and  his
    brother were young enough to adapt to life in  Nigeria.  Permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused on 11 May 2010 and on  1  June
    2010 appeal rights became exhausted. The  deportation  orders  for  the
    claimant's mother the claimant and his brother were signed on  13  July
    2010. On 8 November 2011 removal directions were  set  for  2  December
    2011. They were subsequently cancelled on receipt of an application  to
    revoke the deportation orders.  The claimant's deportation order  as  a
    dependant of his mother was revoked on 9 January 2012, as he  was  over
    the  age  of  18  years  and  no  longer  a  dependant.   His  mother's
    application for revocation of the deportation order was refused  on  20
    January 2012 and no appeal was lodged.

 5. On 14 September 2012 the claimant was arrested by the  Police.  He  was
    served with  an  IS.151A  notice  as  an  overstayer  and  released  on
    temporary admission with reporting conditions.

 6. In October 2012 the claimant's mother  died  unexpectedly  of  a  heart
    attack at the age of 48 years.

 7. On 10 April 2014 the claimant's solicitors made written representations
    on behalf of the claimant requesting leave to remain in the UK  on  the
    basis that he had been in the UK since the age of  8,  his  mother  had
    brought him to the UK, she had been charged with child abandonment, the
    claimant had been placed in care under a police protection  order,  his
    mother had passed away recently and his brother  was  in  foster  care.
    This application was refused for the reasons set out in a letter  dated
    29 July 2014.

 8. The reasons for refusal were that the  Secretary  of  State  considered
    that the claimant did  not  meet  the  suitability  requirements  under
    Section S-LTR, in particular 1.5, of  the  Immigration  Rules  395  (as
    amended) (the 'Immigration Rules') on the basis that  the  presence  of
    the claimant in the UK is not conducive to the public good  because  he
    is a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the  law.
    The Secretary of State referred to  the  fact  that  the  claimant  had
    received ten convictions for fourteen offences  in  the  UK  between  9
    February 2010 and 13 June 2013.  The Secretary of State  believed  that
    the claimant had and would continue to  pose  a  serious  risk  to  the
    community  and  that  refusal  of  leave  to  remain   and   subsequent
    requirement to leave the UK was an appropriate measure.  The  Secretary
    of State considered  the  claimant's  claim  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights ('Article 8') in respect of  family
    life and considered that the claimant's removal would  not  breach  his
    rights under Article 8 on the basis of  family  life.   In  respect  of
    private life, the Secretary of State considered that the  claimant  had
    not made a positive contribution to society  during  his  time  in  the
    United Kingdom and had shown a complete disregard for the laws  of  the
    UK.  The Secretary of State considered that any interference  with  the
    claimant's private life was proportionate  when  balanced  against  the
    pursuit of effective immigration control, the  prevention  of  disorder
    and crime and the protection of rights and  freedoms  of  others.   The
    Secretary of State also considered whether there were  any  exceptional
    circumstances in the claimant's case, finding that there were none.  It
    is this decision that is the subject of the appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

9.   The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  Secretary
    of State's decision. In a decision promulgated on 14 July  2015  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre allowed the claimant's appeal.  The  judge
    found that the claimant did not fall within paragraphs 398(b)  and  (c)
    of the Immigration Rules, the claimant was not  a  persistent  offender
    and that his offending had not caused serious harm. The judge  accepted
    that in the past he had shown a disregard for the law. When considering
    Article 8, and in undertaking the proportionality  balancing  exercise,
    the judge found that the seriousness of the claimant's offences was not
    that great, gave particular weight to the fact that he had  never  been
    sentenced to any period of imprisonment, noted the comparative leniency
    of all the  sentences  imposed,  gave  weight  to  the  length  of  the
    claimant's stay in the UK, that he had had a  difficult  childhood  and
    that he had not committed any offences  since  May  2013.  When  taking
    account of the factors set out in section 117B of the  Nationality  and
    Immigration Act  2002  (the  '2002  Act')  the  judge  considered  that
    although little  weight  should  normally  be  given  to  private  life
    established when the claimant was in the UK  unlawfully  this  was  set
    against the fact that it was the conduct of his parent that resulted in
    the claimant being in the UK unlawfully.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

10. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ransley  granted  permission  to
    appeal on 23 October 2015. The grant of permission states  that  it  is
    arguable that, i) the judge erred by considering paragraph 398  of  the
    Immigration Rules, ii) that the judge's finding that  the  claimant  is
    not a persistent offender is irrational and iii) that the  judge  erred
    in failing to consider the  financial  requirements  in  section  117B,
    whether  there  would  be  significant  obstacles  to  the   claimant's
    integration in Nigeria and in applying Maslov v  Austria  [2009]  INLR.
    Thus the appeal came before us.

Submissions of the Parties

11. The grounds of appeal set out three grounds.

Ground 1 - making a material misdirection of law.

12. The Secretary of State submits that the First-tier Tribunal  materially
    erred in law because the judge assessed the claimant's appeal under the
    deportation  provisions  in  the  Immigration  Rules.  No   deportation
    decision has been made.  The claimant's application was refused by  the
    Secretary of State because she  considered  that  his  case  falls  for
    refusal  under  the   suitability   grounds   specifically   S-LTR.1.5.
    Directions for removal were given under section 10 of  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999.  It was submitted that the Tribunal has considered
    the claimant's case incorrectly under the wrong Immigration Rules.

13. In her oral submissions Ms Everett submitted in relation  to  ground  1
    that the error of law was  material  because  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge refers  throughout  to  deportation,  it  is  very  difficult  to
    ascertain from the decision what the judge's reasons  are  because  the
    judge considers them through the lens of deportation.  Ms  Everett  did
    accept however that the claimant would have a higher hurdle to overcome
    in relation to deportation, rather than  removal  and  the  suitability
    requirements under the Immigration Rules.

Ground 2 - irrational findings and failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
findings on material matters

14. It is submitted that the Tribunal's findings, at paragraphs 52  to  61,
    that the claimant's offending has not caused serious harm nor is  he  a
    persistent offender is wholly inadequate and the judge  has  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons.   It is asserted that it  is  irrational  for
    the Tribunal to find  that  the  claimant's  offending,  i.e.  fourteen
    offences in a period between February 2010 and June 2013, does not meet
    the definition of a persistent offender.  The Secretary of State relies
    on the case of R v G (TT) [2004] EWCA CRIM 3086 and asserts  that  this
    judgment clarifies that there is no  rigid  baseline  when  considering
    what constitutes persistence of offending.  It must be a fact  specific
    exercise.  The Tribunal have completely  failed  to  give  any  reasons
    whatsoever as to why the claimant's offending does not fall within  the
    category of being a persistent offender.  The fact  that  the  claimant
    has received so many convictions for a large number of offences over  a
    sustained period of time, the evidence of the police  demonstrates  his
    undesirable conduct and his probation officer has found that he has the
    potential to cause  serious  harm  if  he  re-offends  is  all  clearly
    evidence that the claimant is  a  persistent  offender.  Further,  when
    considering that the claimant has not offended since 2013 the  Tribunal
    fails to note that the claimant would have been on his  best  behaviour
    as he was then fully aware that he could face  deportation  or  removal
    because of his conduct.

15. In relation to ground 2 Ms Everett  submitted  that  the  Tribunal,  at
    paragraph 56, applauds the claimant for not being stopped by the police
    and that there is a tension between the findings in this paragraph  and
    the findings of the judge in paragraph 60 where the  judge  appears  to
    accept that part of the claimant's problems arose as a  result  of  him
    being a young black male known to the  police.   Ms  Everett  submitted
    that the judge has not taken into consideration the fact that  lack  of
    offences committed by the claimant recently could have been because  he
    was aware of the potential for removal.  She asserted that there were a
    very large amount of convictions in a relatively short space  of  time.
    In response to a question from Judge Lindsley regarding the  claimant's
    assertion that the requirement for a persistent offender is  that  they
    are currently a persistent offender.   Ms  Everett  did  not  have  any
    submissions on this point.

Ground 3 - making a material misdirection of law.

16. The Secretary of State submits that given the claimant's case falls for
    refusal under the suitability grounds  this  overrides  any  Article  8
    considerations.   It  is  also  submitted  that  when  considering  the
    claimant's Article 8 rights within the Immigration  Rules  and  outside
    the Rules the Tribunal has erred as to why he would meet these and  why
    it would be disproportionate to remove the claimant.   It  is  asserted
    that the Tribunal has failed to fully consider Section 117B of the 2002
    Act and has failed to consider  whether  the  claimant  is  financially
    independent.  The Secretary of State  asserts  that  the  claimant  has
    funded himself from his criminal activities and that it is unclear that
    the claimant will be able to support himself and not  be  a  burden  on
    taxpayers.  Further the Tribunal failed to consider that  the  claimant
    has been a  burden  on  the  taxpayer  as  a  result  of  his  criminal
    activities.  The Secretary of State asserts that the Tribunal has erred
    in finding that the claimant has no ties to  Nigeria,  as  the  correct
    assessment is whether there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    claimant's integration in Nigeria.  It is asserted  that  the  claimant
    spent the first eleven years of his life in Nigeria and therefore spent
    a large part of his youth and formative years there.  In the  Secretary
    of State's Reasons for Refusal Letter information is provided that  the
    claimant has an uncle in the UK who has not  only  sponsored  the  visa
    applications of his mother but also sponsored several visa applications
    for the claimant's father to visit the  UK.   The  Secretary  of  State
    submits that there is every reason to believe that the claimant's uncle
    will be able to assist the claimant in tracing his  father  or  provide
    him with support during his reintegration.  The Secretary of State also
    asserts that the Tribunal's reliance on the case of  Maslov  v  Austria
    [2009] INLR 47 is in error as the case does not apply to  the  claimant
    who has never had settled status in the UK, has spent a major  part  of
    his childhood and youth in Nigeria, as well as the UK and has  ties  to
    Nigeria.

17. In relation to ground 3 Ms Everett submitted that the determination  is
    insufficiently reasoned.  At paragraph  63  the  judge  said  that  the
    claimant had no knowledge of Nigeria. However, he clearly  lived  there
    until he was the age of 11.  She therefore submitted that it was a step
    too far to say he could have no knowledge  of  Nigeria.  This  was  not
    supported by the evidence.  There is no consideration of  the  evidence
    regarding the claimant's uncle which was set out  in  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter.  He supported visa  applications  from  the  claimant's
    father.  In response to a question from Judge Lindsley as to whether or
    not the claimant's father has ever visited the UK, Ms Everett indicated
    that she did not know.  Ms Everett submitted that  the  fact  that  the
    claimant has lived here nearly half of his life is not automatically an
    obstacle in terms of reintegration.  On the  facts  of  this  case  the
    finding at paragraph 68 regarding the claimant's brother, she submitted
    that it is not clear how often the claimant and his  brother  see  each
    other.  She also submitted the fact that someone does not  have  anyone
    in  another  country  is  not  necessarily  an  obstacle  in  terms  of
    integration.   She  submitted  that   there   is   confusion   in   the
    determination  about  what  provision  is  being   looked   at.    When
    considering Article 8 it is not clear that the judge is not considering
    Article 8 through the lens of deportation as the judge  refers  to  the
    case of Maslov.  Ms Everett submitted that there is no  proper  finding
    on Article 8 and whether or not there are obstacles to  the  claimant's
    integration into Nigeria.  Ms Everett indicated that  it  was  not  her
    position that the claimant could not succeed  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules,  but  there  was  insufficient  reasoning   in   the   decision;
    insufficient weight was put on the public interest; and it is difficult
    to see from the decision what weight has actually been  put  on  public
    interest.  The judge has  not  considered  the  financial  independence
    requirements.  The Article 8 evaluation was hampered by the failure  of
    the judge to set out clearly what was being considered.

18. The claimant  filed  a  Rule  24  (of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008) response.  The claimant accepts that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal made an error of law in its approach  to  the  appeal  by
    referring to the deportation Rules. However, the claimant asserts  this
    is not a material error of law.  An appeal  against  deportation  would
    have raised statutory presumptions under Section 117C of the 2002  Act.
    The legal framework would have erected a hurdle for the  respondent  to
    surmount far higher than he was in truth required to traverse  for  his
    appeal to have succeeded.  So the fact that the  Tribunal  referred  to
    the wrong legal framework is immaterial.  It is submitted that there is
    nothing in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  that  suggests  the
    wrong factors were taken  into  account  regarding  either  suitability
    under the Rules or the enquiry  outside  the  Rules  directly  applying
    Article 8 of  the  ECHR.   The  factors  identified  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph 53, i.e. the nature and seriousness of offending,  length  of
    stay, timing of offences and solidity of ties here as opposed to abroad
    were all plainly material to the enquiry as to the  proportionality  of
    the removal decision.  The relevant aspects of the  suitability  Rules,
    i.e. character, conduct, serious harm and persistent offending were all
    addressed within the enquiry, which the First-tier  Tribunal  conducted
    between paragraphs 55 and 72.

19. Mr Symes indicated that he relied on the Rule 24 response.  He accepted
    that there was an error of law in the Tribunal's consideration  of  the
    matter as a deportation issue and looking at the deportation Rules, but
    submitted that this was not a material error.  As  there  is  a  higher
    standard on deportation the judge must have inevitably found  that  the
    claimant passed the general suitability under the Rules.

20. With regard to the second ground of appeal it is asserted (in the  Rule
    24 response)  that  the  challenge  that  the  Tribunal's  decision  is
    perverse is a demanding hurdle to overcome.  The First-tier  Tribunal's
    reasons are transparent.  The claimant had set  his  face  against  his
    past misdemeanours and so posed no risk of serious harm to the  public.
    In relation to the case of R v G (TT) all that authority shows is  that
    'persistent offender' is a widely drawn term allowing for some latitude
    of language in its use, i.e. it is a question of fact.  It is  asserted
    that the phrase in the  Immigration  Rules  plainly  looks  at  present
    circumstances as a result of the tense  employed  by  the  draftsperson
    "they are" and "shows a particular disregard". The First-tier  Tribunal
    was therefore entitled to find that there was no present offending risk
    and that whether or not the claimant had  been  a  persistent  offender
    historically he was not  one  now.   It  is  also  submitted  that  the
    Sentencing Council guidelines state that the test of whether the  young
    person  is  one  who  persists  in  offending,  gives  as  an   example
    imprisonable offences on at least three occasions in  the  past  twelve
    months.  It is submitted that these are strong indications that even in
    the context of sentencing the definition of persistent offender implies
    a present risk of committing misdemeanours.

21. With regard to the second ground of appeal Mr Symes submitted that this
    was a disguised rationality challenge. He submitted that the  reasoning
    in the decision was transparent.  The claimant has set his face against
    offending.  The Tribunal judge was perfectly  able  to  find  that  the
    claimant does not pose a serious risk of harm.   With  regards  to  the
    more  technical  challenge  regarding  the  definition  of   persistent
    offender Mr Symes submitted that the wording is in the  present  tense.
    He also submitted that the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  did  not  make
    these arguments.  This has been brought up for the first  time  in  the
    grounds of appeal.  He submitted that it is too late to treat this as a
    test case to rule on the meaning of  persistent  offender.   The  judge
    took a perfectly reasonable approach.

22. Regarding the third ground of appeal -Article 8, the rule  24  response
    asserts that the Tribunal did not overlook Section  117B  of  the  2002
    Act. This is addressed at paragraph 69 of the decision.  The judge took
    into account the  English  language  requirements  and  the  precarious
    nature of the claimant's residence.  It is also clear that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not  give  any  affirmative  weight  to  his
    employment prospects, though it is clear by the  phrase  'he  had  been
    handicapped by the death of his mother and hence really has no  one  to
    help him to regularise his status in the UK'  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge took account of the fact that he had  been  unable  to  establish
    himself on such a footing as would permit him to earn a living.  It  is
    also submitted that in the requirement  in  117B(3)  the  focus  is  on
    financial independence, not an  enquiry  into  the  costs  of  historic
    criminality.  The First-tier Tribunal fully  evaluated  the  claimant's
    social, cultural or family ties.  Given the claimant arrived in the  UK
    aged 10 and had last had contact with his father eight years ago, there
    was no reason to think he would be able to integrate in Nigeria.

23. With regard to the third ground in oral submissions Mr  Symes  asserted
    that the judge has just done enough in terms of setting out  reasoning.
    He referred to paragraphs 63, 66, 68 and  69.   The  judge  found  that
    there was no family and no help to integrate  in  Nigeria.   The  judge
    considered Article 8 outside the Rules.  The judge was impressed by the
    length of residence in the UK contrasting with the  lack  of  links  to
    Nigeria.   In  conducting  a  proportionality  exercise   the   judge's
    conclusion  was  perfectly  reasonable  in  finding  that  it   was   a
    disproportionate interference with the claimant's rights.  With  regard
    to Section 117B he  submitted  that  the  judge  took  account  of  the
    claimant's precarious status  and  although  the  judge  did  not  look
    explicitly at the  financial  position,  the  judge  did  look  at  the
    parent's conduct.  It was the mother who caused the claimant to  be  in
    the position that he is in.  He was innocent.  He  could  not  work  or
    study as a result of his mother's actions.  The critical issue Mr Symes
    submitted was the compelling case outside the Rules.  It was inevitable
    that the judge would have found a compelling case and a lack of  public
    interest in removing the claimant.

Discussion

The Issues

24. The three grounds of appeal can  be  set  out  succinctly  as  follows.
    Firstly, the First-tier Tribunal erred in law by considering the appeal
    on the basis of the deportation provisions of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Secondly the judge's finding that the claimant  was  not  a  persistent
    offender was irrational and inadequately reasoned. Thirdly  that  there
    were errors and insufficient reasons for the findings that it would  be
    disproportionate to remove the claimant.

Ground 1 - application by the judge of the deportation provisions

25. As set out above it was conceded by the claimant's representative  that
    the  judge  erred  in  considering  paragraphs  398  and  399  of   the
    Immigration Rules. The claimant is subject  to  administrative  removal
    proceedings and not deportation action. The claimant's application  for
    leave to remain in the UK was refused because the  Secretary  of  State
    considered that he fell for refusal under the  suitability  grounds  of
    appendix FM, specifically S-LTR.1.5.

26. The judge, at paragraph 6, sets out that the application for  leave  to
    remain was refused under the suitability requirements set out in  S-LTR
    of Appendix FM. However, the judge and the parties then appear to agree
    to have proceeded on the basis that this was  a  deportation  case.  At
    paragraph 10 the judge states:

         "Since the burden of proof lay on the respondent to establish  that
         the appellant's deportation was conducive to the  public  good,  by
         agreement with both representatives, the SSHD  presented  its  case
         first."

27. It is clear that the judge then considered the appeal in light  of  the
    deportation  provisions.  She  did  not  refer   to   the   suitability
    requirements in S-LTR subsequent to the mention of those provisions  in
    paragraph 6. Throughout the decision the judge conducts  an  evaluation
    of the evidence and makes findings through the lens of the  deportation
    provisions. Howsoever the confusion arose we find that the judge  erred
    by considering the claim under the deportation provisions. Core to  the
    Secretary of  State's  case  is  whether  or  not  the  claimant  is  a
    persistent offender. This ought  to  have  been  considered  under  the
    suitability requirements of S-LTR.1.5 not  the  deportation  provisions
    but we note that wording at S-LTR.1.5 and  at  paragraph  398C  of  the
    Immigration Rules is identical in that it poses  a  test  allowing  for
    refusal/deportation because refusal/deportation would be  conducive  to
    the public good because "their offending has  caused  serious  harm  or
    they are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the
    law". The relevant aspects  of  the  suitability  requirements  namely,
    character, conduct, serious harm  and  persistent  offending  were  all
    addressed by the judge. We do not therefore consider that the error  is
    material. We consider below the findings of the judge in light  of  the
    requirements of S-LTR.1.5.

 Ground 2 - is the claimant a persistent offender?

28. The Secretary of State considers that the  claimant  fell  for  refusal
    under Paragraph S-LTR.1.5.  on  the  basis  that  he  is  a  persistent
    offender. There is no definition in any of the Immigration Acts  or  in
    the Immigration Rules of 'persistent offender'.  There is no definition
    in the Interpretation Act 1978. The words  should  therefore  be  given
    their natural and ordinary meaning.

29. We look first to the plain meaning of the words in the provision of  S-
    LTR  1.5.  The  Shorter  Oxford  English  Dictionary  (sixth   edition)
    definition of 'persistent' provides two  main  options  of  'continuing
    firmly  or  obstinately  in  a  course  of  action  especially  against
    opposition' or of 'continuing  to  exist  or  occur  over  a  prolonged
    period, enduring'. 'Offender' is defined in current usage as: 'a person
    who (or occasionally a thing which) offends; a person who breaks a law,
    rule or regulation; a person who commits an offence; a person who gives
    offence, displeases or excites resentment.'

30. Applying these principles, we find, the natural and ordinary meaning of
    the words 'persistent offender' in the context of S-LTR 1.5 is  someone
    who breaks the law over a prolonged period.

31. We further find that persistent offender under S-LTR 1.5 is confined to
    those whose law breaking is established by conviction or admission, and
    thus likely to be reflected in the criminal  record  of  an  appellant.
    Mere suspicion is not enough to establish the breaking of a law. It  is
    important  that  deference  is  given  to  the  cardinal  principle  of
    presumption of innocence. 'Offender' has strong connotations  of  those
    convicted or recorded within the  criminal  justice  system  as  having
    committed criminal offences, as indicated by the  ordinary  meaning  of
    the words.

32. We have considered the cases of Bah (EO (Turkey) - liability to deport)
    [2012] UKUT 196 and Farquaharson (removal - proof  of  conduct)  [2013]
    UKUT 146. Those cases do not suggest that this approach  is  incorrect.
    They are authority for the proposition that the  acts  behind  criminal
    proceedings that do not result in conviction of an appellant can  still
    be established on the civil standard of  proof  before  a  Tribunal  as
    evidence of 'conduct' that makes it not conducive to allow an appellant
    to remain in the UK  in  both  the  deportation  and  removal  context.
    Clearly a wide range of matters can be brought into  play  under  S-LTR
    1.6. These principles therefore allow the  Secretary  of  State  and  a
    tribunal to rely upon such material in  their  consideration  of  S-LTR
    1.6. as the wording indicates that there may be conduct which does  not
    fall within S-LTR 1.5 that can be taken into account. The cases are not
    authority that 'offender' should be interpreted to  include  those  who
    are alleged by the criminal justice system to have committed crimes but
    where there is no clear (and usually formal) admission of guilt by  the
    appellant or conviction by a court.

33. As set out above, Mr Symes provided a copy of the Sentencing Guidelines
    Council's publication 'Overarching Principles  -  Sentencing  Youths  -
    Definitive Guidelines'[1]. At section 6 the following is set out

         '6.  Persistent offenders

         ...

         6.3  "Persistent offender" is not defined in  legislation  but  has
         been considered by the Court of Appeal on a  number  of  occasions.
         However,  following  the  implementation  of  the  2008  Act,   the
         sentencing framework is different from that when the definition was
         judicially developed, particularly  the  greater  emphasis  on  the
         requirement to use a custodial  sentence  as  "a  measure  of  last
         resort".

         6.4   A  dictionary  definition   of   "persistent   offender"   is
         "persisting or having a tendency to persist"; "persist" is  defined
         as "to continue firmly or obstinately in  a  course  of  action  in
         spite of difficulty or opposition".

         6.5  In determining whether an offender is  a  persistent  offender
         for these purposes, a court should  consider  the  simple  test  of
         whether the young person is one who persists in offending:

             i)   in most circumstances, the normal expectation is that the
             offender will have had some contact with  authority  in  which
             the offending conduct was challenged before being  classed  as
             "persistent"; a finding of persistence  in  offending  may  be
             derived from information about previous  convictions  but  may
             also arise from orders which require an admission  or  finding
             of  guilt  -  these  include   reprimands,   final   warnings,
             restorative justice disposals and conditional cautions;  since
             they do not require such an  admission,  penalty  notices  for
             disorder are unlikely to be sufficiently reliable;

              ii) a young offender is certainly likely to be  found  to  be
             persistent (and, in relation to a custodial sentence, the test
             of being a measure  of  last  resort  is  most  likely  to  be
             satisfied) where the offender has been convicted of,  or  made
             subject to a pre-court disposal that involves an admission  or
             finding of guilt in relation to, imprisonable offences  on  at
             least 3 occasions in the past 12 months.'

34. The guidance provided in respect of sentencing  for  criminal  offences
    cannot be determinative of the interpretation of the phrase 'persistent
    offender' for immigration law  purposes.  What  we  do  note  from  the
    extract set out above is that there  is  nothing  inconsistent  in  the
    approach advocated in relation to defining persistent offender for  the
    purposes of sentencing in relation to  criminal  proceedings  with  the
    approach that we have adopted.

35. We do not find that the case of R v G (TT) [2004] EWCA CRIM 3086 relied
    on by the Secretary of State  provides  assistance.  This  case  is  in
    relation to criminal proceedings. It appears to confirm  that  defining
    persistent offender is a fact based exercise.

36. We find that 'a particular disregard for the law' might be shown  in  a
    number of different ways. It might be that a persistent offender  shows
    a particular  disregard  for  the  criminal  justice  process  by,  for
    instance: obstructing the trial process; committing perjury; prolonging
    trials unnecessarily by pointless pleading; or by  committing  offences
    on bail or licence. It also connotes an evaluation  of  the  degree  of
    responsibility for the wrongdoing. For example,  a  child  or  juvenile
    offender (or perhaps other more vulnerable offender such as those  with
    mental health problems or a low IQ) who simply lacks impulse control or
    who is led or intimidated by others into criminal behaviour may be less
    likely to be considered to have a particular disregard for the law.

37. Mr Symes submitted that the phrase  used  in  S-LTR  1.5  'they  are  a
    persistent offender who shows a particular disregard...' plainly  looks
    at present  circumstances  as  it  uses  the  present  tense.  He  also
    submitted that as paragraph 6.5 from the sentencing  guidelines  refers
    to 'one who persists' and refers to offences in the past 12 months this
    provides a strong indicator that it is a  present  risk.   We  consider
    that this must be correct. We are of the view that it is  necessary  to
    show that the claimant's convictions for criminal offences  demonstrate
    that he currently is to be regarded as a persistent offender who  shows
    a particular disregard for the law. It is therefore clear  that  events
    reasonably proximate to the decision or  hearing  are  likely  to  have
    greater relevance to the claimant falling to be  refused  in  this  way
    than historic matters.

38. We find that the test as to whether someone is 'a  persistent  offender
    with a particular disregard for the law' is  not  simply  a  matter  of
    crude arithmetic or totting up. There  may  be  some  cases  where  the
    number and frequency  of  the  offences  contained  within  a  person's
    criminal  record  is  such  that  it  brings  him  or  her  within  the
    definition. However, most cases will require an evaluative analysis  of
    all of the offences in play including the motive or drive behind  their
    commission, the age or particular characteristic of  the  offender  and
    the proximity of the offending at the date of decision or hearing.

Application of the test to the findings of the First-tier Tribunal

39. At paragraph 52 the judge accepted that the claimant had shown  in  the
    past a disregard for the law. The judge in paragraph 61 sets out:

         "I am aware that there is currently  no  definition  of  persistent
         offender...I find that the  appellant  does  not  fall  within  the
         category  of  "persistent  offender  "and  cannot  sensibly  be  so
         described ..."

40. Whilst the finding in that paragraph is not supported by any  reasoning
    it must be read in light of the decision as a  whole.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal set out in detail the evidence  in  the  case  (paragraphs  18
    -46). The claimant's criminal convictions were set out in  a  table  in
    the First-tier Tribunal's  decision.  There  is  no  dispute  that  the
    convictions are as recorded by the judge[2]. There are  10  convictions
    for 14 offences as follows:

                . 9/2/10   - Possession of cannabis - absolute discharge

                . 10/2/10  - Using threatening behaviours - referral order 9
                  months

                  - Possession of offensive weapon - referral order 9 months

                .  26/5/10   -  Battery  -  Supervision  requirement   Youth
                  Rehabilitation Order

                . 27/4/11  - Breach ASBO - Fine �100

                . 4/5/11   - Burglary  dwelling  -  Supervision  requirement
                  Youth Rehabilitation Order

                . 3/8/12   - Possession cannabis - No penalty

                . 13/9/12  - Driving whilst disqualified - offence committed
                  on bail - 12 weeks young offender's institution  suspended
                  18 months. Supervision order 12 months,  curfew  3  months
                  with electronic tagging

                  - Using vehicle whilst uninsured - no separate penalty

                . 20/12/12 -  Failing  to  comply  with  community  order  -
                  supervision order continued - 6-hour work requirement

                . 2/5/13   - Driving whilst  disqualified  -  16-week  young
                  offender's   institution   suspended   for   18    months.
                  Supervision requirement electronic tagging

                  - Failure to stop vehicle when required  by  police  -  no
                  separate penalty

                . 13/6/13  -  Failure  to  comply  with  community  order  -
                  resulting form original conviction 13/9/12 - order revoked

                  - Using a vehicle whilst uninsured - no separate penalty

41. The judge considered the  claimant's  offending  against  the  criteria
    identified in the case of Akpinar [2014]  EWCA  Civ  937.  Whilst  that
    evaluation is  essentially  a  proportionality  exercise  some  of  the
    factors are relevant  to  the  establishment  of  whether  or  not  the
    claimant is a persistent offender. The factors we  have  identified  as
    relevant to an assessment are the nature of the offences and the motive
    or drive behind their commission, the age or particular  characteristic
    of the offender at the time of the offences and the  proximity  of  the
    offending to the date of decision or hearing.

42. The judge at paragraph 60 set out that she accepted 'that the offending
    and CRIS reports establish conduct that is certainly not attractive, is
    clearly anti-social and confrontational to the police ...'

43. At paragraph 56 she took into consideration the fact that the  claimant
    had not offended since June 2013, which was a period of 2 years  as  at
    the date of the hearing. She accepted the claimant's evidence about the
    driving offence in 2013 that he wanted to get  caught  (paragraph  57).
    The judge found that the claimant had tried to turn his life around  as
    evidenced by the 'several impressive letters  in  support  from  Newham
    Social services, UserVoice and Manor Green College' (paragraph 58). The
    judge took into consideration the claimant's age and the  lack  of  any
    meaningful family support since the death of his mother (paragraph 56).

44. The judge also considered the probation officer's report giving  weight
    to the statement that although the claimant has the potential to  cause
    serious harm he is unlikely to do so unless his  circumstances  change,
    and to the fact that he has made good progress.

45. The evidence of DC Petrov included, in addition to the  convictions,  a
    number of arrests and interventions, which did not result  in  charges,
    cautions or convictions. The judge in considering the  evidence  of  DC
    Petrov found that there is no evidence to support any  allegation  that
    the claimant is a gang member or  that  he  has  criminal  associations
    (paragraph 62).  As we set out above these matters would be relevant to
    an assessment of suitability under  SLT-R  1.6.  As  confirmed  at  the
    hearing  the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  refuse   the   claimant's
    application under S-LTR 1.6. These matters are not  therefore  relevant
    to this case, which concerns suitability on the basis that the claimant
    is a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the law.

46. We consider that the claimant's record of offending  is  an  unedifying
    one.  However, the judge took the convictions into  consideration  when
    evaluating that offending against the backdrop and the circumstances in
    which it arose and gave particular weight to the fact that he had never
    been sentenced to any period of imprisonment and noted the  comparative
    leniency of all the sentences imposed. She also took into  account  the
    fact that the claimant had not offended for 2 years together  with  the
    progress made by the claimant as attested to by  the  various  agencies
    involved. Given the period involved in not committing crime we  do  not
    consider that the judge erred in  law  or  acted  irrationally  in  not
    considering that the claimant might simply be  on  his  best  behaviour
    during this period because of the threat of removal.

47. We therefore conclude that it was rationally  open  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the facts of this case to find that the claimant was not  a
    persistent offender and that there was no misapplication of  the  legal
    test required to assess this aspect of the Immigration Rules. There was
    therefore no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    findings on this aspect.

48. On that basis the claimant did not fall for refusal under paragraph SLR-
    T 1.5 of appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.

Ground 3 - making a material misdirection of law

49. It is also submitted that when considering  the  claimant's  Article  8
    rights within the Immigration Rules and outside the Rules the  Tribunal
    has erred. It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  consider
    the correct Immigration Rules. It appears that the Tribunal  considered
    the claimant's Article 8 claim outside the Immigration Rules (paragraph
    63) conducting a proportionality  exercise  and  importing  a  test  of
    social, cultural and family ties (paragraph 68)[3]. Although the First-
    tier Tribunal did not consider the correct test, which is an  error  of
    law, we ultimately find that this was not material as from the material
    within the Article 8 ECHR consideration it  is  clear  that  the  judge
    would have found that there were  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    claimant's integration into Nigeria had she correctly directed  herself
    to  consider  the  appeal  under  paragraph  276ADE  (1)(vi)   of   the
    Immigration Rules. We are supported in this conclusion by the fact that
    the judge clearly had in mind the  previous  paragraph  276ADE  (1)(vi)
    test of "has no ties (including social, cultural or  family)  with  the
    country to which he  would  have  to  go  if  required  to  leave"  see
    paragraph 68 of the decision.

50. It was confirmed by the parties' representatives at  the  hearing  that
    the claimant had not spent at  least  half  of  his  life  in  the  UK;
    therefore paragraph 276ADE(v) does not apply[4]. The relevant provision
    under the Immigration Rules is  paragraph  276ADE  (vi)  which  at  the
    relevant time provided:

         '(1).    The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the
         date of application, the applicant:

             (i)  does not fall for refusal under any  of  the  grounds  in
             Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM;
             and

             (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain  on  the
             grounds of private life in the UK; and

             ...

             (vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in  the
             UK  for  less  than  20  years  (discounting  any  period   of
             imprisonment) but there would be very significant obstacles to
             the applicant's integration into the country to which he would
             have to go if required to leave the United Kingdom.'

51. Relevant to the "very significant difficulties to integration" test the
    First-tier  Tribunal  found  the  following  in  the  Article  8   ECHR
    proportionality exercise: that the claimant had had  a  very  difficult
    childhood; that the UK is his home; that he has no knowledge of Nigeria
    and no meaningful family there with whom he has had any contact in  the
    past eight years; that his father had not been in touch with him  since
    2007 and had established  a  new  family  which  did  not  include  the
    claimant; and that he has lived in the UK for over half his  life.  The
    Secretary of State has not demonstrated that any of these  findings  is
    unsound or conclusions that the Tribunal was not entitled to reach.  We
    therefore consider that given  these  conclusions,  which  clearly  are
    directly relevant to the test of  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    claimant's integration into Nigeria being met,  there  is  no  material
    error of law in the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  and  that  the
    conclusion that the appeal is to be allowed on Article 8  ECHR  grounds
    is sufficiently reasoned.

52. As we have found that the claimant meets the requirements of  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules on the basis of findings by the  First-
    tier Tribunal there is no need to consider Article  8  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules. We  are  not  required  therefore  to  consider  the
    statutory provisions continued in sections 117A-D of the 2002 Act  (see
    Bossade (ss117A-D  Interrelationship  with  Rules)  [2015]  UKUT  00415
    (IAC)). However, if we had done  so  we  would  have  agreed  with  the
    submissions of Mr Symes that the assessment was  not  one  which  erred
    materially in law. The only real complaint of the Secretary of State is
    the lack of reference to the claimant's inability to be self-sufficient
    in the proportionality exercise. It is clear  however  that  the  judge
    understood the claimant not to be financially self-sufficient: his lack
    of immigration status is explicitly referred  to  in  the  analysis  of
    proportionality, and earlier in the decision  the  judge  relates  this
    lack of status to his inability to work.

Notice of Decision

53. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error on a point of law.

54. The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and the conclusion of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal upheld.

55. We have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence we  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 2 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
-----------------------
[1] https://www.sentencingcouncil.org.uk/wp-
content/uploads/web_overarching_principles_sentencing_youths.pdf
[2] There is a typographical error in the table set out in the decision
-the 9/2/10 date is recorded as 9/12/10 and the sentence in relation to the
offences of 2/5/13 is recorded against the wrong offence
[3] The Secretary of State also referred to the 'no ties' test in the
reasons for refusal letter - see paragraph 24 of the letter.
[4] The First-tier Tribunal found that the claimant had lived more than
half his life in the UK (paragraph 66).

