
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA331332014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 15 June 2016                            |On 17 June 2016                |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          JEAN CLAUDE ONANA BEYEQUE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Akin-Daniels, solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeal with permission against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge M P W Harris, promulgated on 29 September  2015  in
    which he allowed the respondent's appeal against the  decision  of  the
    appellant made on 13  August  2014  to  refuse  to  issue  him  with  a
    residence  card  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations ("the EEA Regulations").





The Respondent's case

 2. The respondent is a citizen of Cameroon born on 3  December  1991.  His
    sister, Ms Nnoumoulou, and with whom he lives, is a French Citizen  who
    is currently exercising Treaty rights in  the  United  Kingdom,  having
    come here over 10 years ago. She was naturalised as a French Citizen in
    late 2011. The respondent entered the United Kingdom in September  2013
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant and has remained her since.

 3. It is the respondent's case that  he  is  currently  a  member  of  his
    sister's household and her dependent. It is also his case that  he  was
    dependent on her for financial and emotional support while he lived  in
    Cameroon.  On that basis, he asserts that he meets the requirements  of
    reg. 8 (2) of  the  EEA  Regulations  and  thus  should  be  granted  a
    residence card pursuant to reg. 17 (4).

The Appellant's case

 4. The appellant refused the application on the basis  that  she  was  not
    satisfied that the respondent had been dependent on  or  residing  with
    his sister immediately prior to entering the United Kingdom, concluding
    therefore that the requirements of reg. 8 were not met.  There  was  no
    consideration of reg. 17(4).

The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 21 August  2015.  The
    appellant was not represented.  The judge heard oral evidence from  the
    respondent and his sister; he also  heard  submissions  from  Mr  Akin-
    Daniels who also appeared before me.

 6. The judge found both witnesses to be credible, and taking into  account
    their evidence and the documentary evidence in the bundle  provided  to
    him.  The judge found:

      i) The respondent has, since September 2013,  been  a  member  of  his
         sister's household [9];

     ii) The respondent had lived in Cameroon with  his  mother  who  was  a
         single parent; her income had  not  been  sufficient  to  meet  his
         needs; and, that his sister had sent funds on a regular basis which
         were spend on the educational and material needs of the  respondent
         [12];

    iii) The respondent had  therefore  been  previously  dependant  on  his
         sister [12];

     iv) The respondent met the requirements of reg. 8 92); and, therefore;

      v) Was entitled to have is application for a residence card considered
         by the appellant pursuant to reg. 17 (4).

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal against this decision on  the
    grounds that the judge erred:

      i) In failing to make a finding as to when the respondent's sister had
         become a French citizen, contrary to  Moneke  (EEA-  OFMs)  Nigeria
         [2011] UKUT 341;

     ii) In failing to give adequate reasons for concluding that  dependency
         had  been  established,  there  being  (contrary  to   Moneke)   no
         engagement with the period of  time  during  which  the  dependency
         lasted, what difference is made, or why simply paying

    iii)  On  2  March  2016  Designated  Tribunal  Judge   Shaerf   granted
         permission.

Hearing before the Upper Tribunal on 15 June 2016

 8. Mr Jarvis accepted that, in light of the evidence that the respondent's
    sister had been naturalised as a French citizen, it would be  difficult
    to show that a failure to determine the date on which that occurred (as
    it transpires, 25 July 2011) was capable of being a material error.

 9.  He submitted that this was not just a reasons  challenge,  given  that
    there was insufficient indication that the judge had considered factors
    other than economic support, and had not adopted the correct,  holistic
    approach set out in Reyes (EEA Regs: dependency) [2013] UKUT 314 (IAC).



10. Mr Akin-Daniels submitted that,  viewed  as  a  whole,  and  given  the
    unchallenged findings of fact, the judge had directed himself  properly
    and had reached findings open to him.

Discussion

11. It is evident from  the  material  provided  in  the  bundle  that  the
    respondent's sister had been a French Citizen since at least 2012,  the
    date her passport had been issued. The actual date  is  now  confirmed.
    There is thus a period in which she was a French citizen and  when  the
    respondent was living in Cameroon. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that
    ground 1 is made out.

12. With regard to the findings on dependency, I bear in mind what was said
    in Reyes at [19]:

         "19. From the above, we glean four key things. First, the test  of
         dependency is a purely factual test. Second,  the  Court  envisages
         that questions  of  dependency  must  not  be  reduced  to  a  bare
         calculation of financial dependency but should be construed broadly
         to involve a holistic examination of a number of factors, including
         financial, physical and  social  conditions,  so  as  to  establish
         whether there is dependence that is genuine.  The  essential  focus
         has to be on the  nature  of  the  relationship  concerned  and  on
         whether it is one characterised by a situation of dependence  based
         on an examination of all the factual circumstances, bearing in mind
         the underlying objective of maintaining the unity of the family. It
         seems to us that the need for a wide-ranging fact-specific approach
         is indeed enjoined by the Court of Appeal in SM  (India):  see  in
         particular Sullivan LJ's observations at [27]-[28].  Third,  it  is
         clear from the wording of both Article 2.2 and regulation 7(1) that
         the test is one of present, not past  dependency.  Both  provisions
         employ the present tense (Article 2.2(b) and (c)  refer  to  family
         members who "are dependants" or  who  are  "dependent";  regulation
         7(c) refers to "dependent direct relatives..."). Fourth  (and  this
         may have relevance to what is understood  by  present  dependency),
         interpretation of the meaning of the term must be such  as  not  to
         deprive that provision of its effectiveness."

13. There is sufficient evidence in the witness statements,  the  truth  of
    which was accepted, and is unchallenged, that the support given  by  Ms
    Nnamalou was emotional as well as financial.  It  is  also  clear  from
    these statements that the  emotional  support  was  continuous.  It  is
    evident also from the decision when read as a whole, in  particular  at
    [11] and [12] that the judge had  taken  social,  emotional  and  other
    factors into account, as he was bound to do.  While the reasoning could
    easily have been clearer  and  more  expansive,  it  is  sufficient  to
    justify his conclusions as to dependency which are thus sustainable  on
    the evidence before him which he accepted.

14. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error of law, and I uphold it.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
    an errors of law and I uphold it.


Signed                                  Date: 16 June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

