
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33016/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 December 2017                            |On 23 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                               Mr SHEHZAD KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms U Diri, Asher An Tomar Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan.   He  came  to  the  UK  as  a
    student in 2009.  His subsequent immigration history  is  not  easy  to
    ascertain.  The respondent's refusal decision states that he  has  been
    an overstayer since 30 October 2011 when  his  original  student  leave
    expired.  However, following discussion with  the  parties  it  appears
    that prior to 30 October  2011  he  made  an  in-time  application  for
    further leave to remain which was refused but on  3  February  2012  he
    succeeded on appeal.  In response, the respondent gave him 60  days  to
    find a new sponsor.  On  6  August  2013,  the  appellant  submitted  a
    further application within that time.  The respondent then  issued  him
    with a residence permit valid from 13 June 2014-26 September  2016  but
    then wrote to him on 8 December 2014 saying that this had  been  issued
    to him in error as the respondent had information he had used deception
    when undertaking an ETS test on 26 June 2013.  On 23 February 2015, the
    appellant made a human rights claim.   It  is  refusal  of  this  claim
    against which the appellant appealed.

2.   On 2 March 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn dismissed  his  appeal.
    The judge found that the appellant had used deception to obtain a TOEIC
    certificate and  as  a  result  could  not  meet  the  suitability  and
    eligibility requirements of  paragraph  S-LTR.1.6  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

3.   In going on to consider whether the appellant had  a  sustainable  case
    under Article 8 ECHR the judge first looked at his position  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  The  judge  noted  that  the  appellant  could  not
    qualify under the partner route, paragraph EX.1(a) of  Appendix  FM  in
    particular, "for the reasons set out on page 2 of the Refusal  Letter",
    and  did  not  satisfy  paragraph  276ADE  because  he  had  not  shown
    significant obstacles to integrating into Pakistan society.  The  judge
    noted that Ms H had entered her relationship with him with knowledge of
    his immigration status.  The judge considered it was not  unduly  harsh
    for him to relocate to Pakistan.

4.   The appellant's grounds  of  appeal  contended  that  the  judge  erred
    firstly by treating him as an overstayer; second, in  considering  that
    the appellant would fall for refusal under  paragraph  320(7A)  of  the
    Rules and "ought to have allowed the appeal on the suitability  issue";
    thirdly, by  giving  unsustainable  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
    appellant had used deception in his ETS test; and fourthly, in deciding
    that the appellant and his wife would face insurmountable obstacles  in
    Pakistan.

5.    I  am  extremely  grateful  to  Ms  Dirie  and  Ms  Ahmad  for   their
    submissions;  they  both  argued   their   positions   eloquently   and
    succinctly.

6.   I am not persuaded that the grounds establish a material error of law.

7.   Undoubtedly the judge  erred  in  proceeding  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant was an overstayer since October 2011  (see,  e.g.,  paragraph
    2).  This was not,  as  the  judge  portrayed  it,  a  "Matter  not  in
    Dispute".    It is clear that subsequent to that date the appellant was
    granted at least one further period of leave.  However, whether or  not
    the appellant can be correctly said to have had continuous lawful leave
    to the present (as Ms Dirie contends), it remains that  his  leave  has
    always been limited leave and was thus, for the purposes of Section 117
    of the NIAA 2002, "precarious".

8.   As regards the  judge's  treatment  of  the  deception  issue,  it  was
    incorrect of the judge (as Ms Ahmad conceded) to consider the  relevant
    suitability provision of the Immigration Rules to be paragraph 320(7A);
    rather  it  was,  as  identified  in  the  refusal  letter,  S-LTR.1.6.
    However, the judge's decision and reasoning made clear enough  that  he
    was concerned with the deception requirement and the issue  of  whether
    the appellant had used false representations  by  relying  on  a  false
    document.  That was as  much  a  part  of  S-LTR.1.6  as  of  paragraph
    320(7A).

9.   So far as  concerns  the  appellant's  challenge  to  the  respondent's
    decision that he had used deception, I can discern no arguable error in
    the judge's reasoning.  He  properly  understood  that  the  evidential
    burden of proof to prove falsity to rest on  the  respondent,  but  (if
    that onus was discharged) then shifted to the appellant.   Although  he
    did not cite any of the case law on ETS/TOEIC cases, his  reasoning  is
    consistent with these (the case law has recently been  summarised  very
    helpfully by Underhill, LJ in Ahsan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2009 at [22]-
    [33]).  The judge had before him both generic evidence from Home Office
    officials regarding ETS/TOEIC cases but also specific evidence from  Ms
    Lesley Singh in the form of printouts of ETS Self Source Data and Fetch
    Results from an ETS TOEIC Test Centre Lookup Tool identifying  that  on
    the day the appellant took his test at Universal Training  Centre,  84%
    were invalid and the remaining 16% were questionable.  In addition, the
    appellant (although not represented) was afforded  the  opportunity  to
    explain the invalid test result he had received.  The judge also had  a
    copy of his witness statement which touched briefly on this issue.  The
    judge clearly took into account in favour  of  the  appellant  that  he
    spoke English well.  The judge did not, however, consider  this  enough
    to explain the invalid results noting, inter alia, that the appellant's
    account of the time the test had been taken (the point raised in  point
    10 of the appellant's written grounds amounts to  a  mere  disagreement
    with the judge's findings  on  this)  differed  from  the  respondent's
    record; that he had travelled "as far as Watford"  to  take  the  test;
    that despite knowing that he  was  fingerprinted  and  there  was  CCTV
    evidence (the appellant referred  to  these  features  in  his  witness
    statement), he had not taken steps to provide evidence to show  it  was
    him who attended, even though he said his solicitor  was  dealing  with
    his case at that time.  In short,  the  appellant's  written  and  oral
    evidence did  not  constitute  anything  that  approached  an  innocent
    explanation and the judge's conclusion that he had used  deception  was
    entirely within the range of reasonable responses.

10.  The challenge raised in the grounds to the judge's  findings  regarding
    insurmountable obstacles is not made out.  It is  true  those  findings
    are extremely brief, but the judge's conclusion at paragraph 48 has  to
    be read in the context of the evidence that was before the judge.  That
    evidence included the  respondent's  refusal  letter  which  noted  the
    appellant's claim that his  wife's  health  would  pose  insurmountable
    obstacles to her joining him abroad.  The letter stated that  "although
    your partner is stated to suffer with Arthritis, there  is  no  medical
    evidence provided that indicates she is unable  to  lead  her  everyday
    life with your support".  That lack of medical  evidence  of  the  kind
    identified in the refusal decision remained a feature of the case  when
    it came before the judge.  The letters from the Crystal Palace  Medical
    Group dated 15 October 2015 and an Orthopaedic Surgeon dated 14 October
    evidenced knee problems but  not  of  a  serious  order.   The  grounds
    mention that the appellant set out in his written submissions  that  he
    and his wife, as parties to an  interfaith  marriage,  supported  by  a
    report, would face difficulties if they moved  to  Pakistan.   However,
    that evidence fell well short of establishing that  interfaith  couples
    were in general at real risk in Pakistan  of  either  ill-treatment  or
    serious hardship.  Bearing in mind the guidance given  by  the  Supreme
    Court in Agyarko as regards the meaning  of  the  term  "insurmountable
    obstacles" and their confirmation that it  is  a  stringent  test,  the
    judge's conclusions that  the  couple  would  not  face  insurmountable
    obstacles in Pakistan was a reasonable one.  In terms of the  balancing
    exercise that the judge had to carry out under Article  8  outside  the
    Rules, the position therefore was that the appellant had not  shown  he
    met either the substantive requirements of  those  Rules  (relating  to
    family and private life) and he had entered into his marriage  when  he
    knew his immigration status was precarious.  In addition, the  fact  of
    his deception properly found to have been committed by the appellant  -
    see above),  added  further  weight  to  the  public  interest  factors
    weighing against his Article 8 claim.

11.   Even  though,  therefore,  the  judge   incorrectly   understood   the
    appellant's immigration history the reasoning lying behind the decision
    to dismiss the appellant's appeal has not been shown to be vitiated  by
    legal error.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed:                                 Date: 21 January 2018

            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal







