







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33248/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 5 August 2014                             |On 1 September 2014          |
|Prepared:  28 August 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                             Secretary of State

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr manjit singh
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Halligan, counsel, instructed by Marks and
Marks    Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as the "secretary of state for the Home
      Department" and to the respondent as "the claimant."






   2.  The  secretary  of  state  appeals  with   permission   against   the
      determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bradshaw, promulgated on 28
      May 2014 allowing the claimant's appeal on human rights grounds.






   3. The background to the appeal is as follows: The claimant asserted that
      he entered the UK in 1999 without entry clearance. On  21  June  2012,
      his solicitors applied for indefinite leave to remain the UK  alleging
      that he had been residing continuously in the UK for over 14 years. As
      at the date of the application however, he  had  not  resided  for  14
      years.






   4. It was however only a year after submitting his  application,  namely,
      on 30 July 2013 that a decision was made by the secretary of state  to
      remove the claimant from the UK.


   5. The Secretary of State stated in her reasons for refusal dated 30 July
      2012 that the claimant had applied for indefinite leave to  remain  on
      the basis of his length of residence.


   6. It was  contended  that  his  application  for  such  leave  was  only
      submitted on 22 July 2012. It was on that basis that the secretary  of
      state contended that paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules ceased to
      be a provision under the rules as at 9 July 2012.


   7. His application was thus considered 'outside of  the  rules.'  It  was
      also considered under the provisions of paragraph 276ADE of the rules.
      It was refused under paragraph 276CE.


   8. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, it was submitted on his
      behalf that the application had been made prior to 9 July 2012 -  para
      6 of the determination. However, his counsel stated that if that  were
      not accepted he would rely on the fact that there was a good  arguable
      case to be considered under Article 8  "in  terms  of  the  Strasbourg
      jurisdiction."  (The claimant was not represented at that  hearing  by
      Mr Halligan).


   9. The Judge noted at paragraph 8 that the presenting officer  on  behalf
      of the secretary of state  accepted  that  the  application  had  been
      received by the secretary of state prior to the new rules coming  into
      force. It was nevertheless 'accordingly agreed' that the Judge  should
      consider the appeal on the basis of an Article 8 case in terms of  the
      claimant's private life under the Strasbourg jurisprudence [8].






  10. The Judge went on to find that  the  claimant  ".....was  telling  the
      truth in giving his evidence at the hearing" [45].


  11. He accordingly accepted that the claimant had been  in  the  UK  since
      April 1999, a period of 15 years. He had a wife and  two  children  in
      India but had lost touch with them over the years. He had  established
      a private life in the UK.  The  claimant  is  63  years  old  and  had
      integrated well into the community in the UK. The Judge found that  at
      this stage of his life, he would find it  extremely  difficult  to  go
      back to India to  seek  to  re-integrate  himself  into  the  culture,
      society and the community there.






  12. In reaching his conclusions  on  the  issue  of  proportionality,  the
      consequences of interference to his private life by his being returned
      to India "....would reach the standard whereby the fundamental  rights
      of the claimant in terms of Article 8 would be  breached"  [60].   The
      appeal was thus allowed on human rights grounds.


  13. The secretary of state subsequently applied  to  appeal  against  that
      decision. The grounds did not challenge the finding by the Judge  that
      the claimant had spent 15 years in the UK. It was contended  that  the
      claimant's circumstances are not exceptional and  that  it  would  not
      amount to anything unjustifiably harsh for him  to  be  returned.  The
      appeal  did  not  disclose  any  breach  of  his  moral  and  physical
      integrity.






  14. On 14 June 2014,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nicholson  granted  the
      secretary of state permission to appeal. He noted at  paragraph  4  of
      his decision that counsel for the  claimant  had  submitted  that  the
      application was made prior to the introduction of the  new  rules  but
      that, if that were not accepted, he would rely on Article 8. Why  such
      submission was made was not clear because the  Judge  at  paragraph  8
      recorded that in the light of a receipt from the  secretary  of  state
      dated 21 June 2012, the secretary had indeed accepted at  the  hearing
      that the application had been made prior to the  introduction  of  the
      rules.






  15. Judge Nicholson went on to state that it was  'unsurprising'  that  in
      those circumstances the secretary of state sought permission to appeal
      on the basis that the claimant's circumstances were  not  exceptional.
      If the appeal had been subject to the new rules, then it  is  arguable
      that the Judge's decision was wholly unsustainable.






  16. Judge Nicholson, however, went on to state that the difficulty for the
      purpose of the application for permission is that in  accordance  with
      the transitional provisions, where an application for indefinite leave
      to remain was made before 9 July 2012, and  the  application  had  not
      been decided, it was to be decided in accordance  with  the  rules  in
      force on 8 July 2012.


  17. It had been conceded at paragraph 8  of  the  determination  that  the
      application was made prior to  the  introduction  of  the  new  rules.
      Accordingly,  the  application  should  have  been  considered   under
      paragraph 276B. It was thus arguable that once it was found  that  the
      claimant had been in the UK  for  15  years,  the  Judge  should  have
      allowed the appeal under paragraph 276B of the rules, or at least that
      the Article 8 decision was justifiable given that the claimant met the
      requirements of the rules.  If so, the Judge's arguable error  of  law
      had no bearing on the outcome of the appeal.


  18. Judge Nicholson finally noted that it could also be  argued  that  the
      Judge should simply have found that the decision was not in accordance
      with the law in line with Edgehill and another v  Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 402.






  19. At the hearing on 5 August 2014, Mr Deller at the outset accepted that
      as at the date of the secretary of state's decision on 30  July  2013,
      the relevant requirements relating to 14 years'  continuous  residence
      had been met.






  20. However, the secretary of  state  had  not  in  terms  considered  the
      application under paragraph 276B, which  would  have  failed  had  the
      secretary considered  it  shortly  after  the  application  was  made.
      However, that is not the  case.  As  at  the  date  of  decision,  the
      secretary did not take account of the immigration rules applicable  at
      the date of the receipt of the application.






  21. Mr Deller very fairly accepted that the  letter  from  the  claimant's
      solicitors dated  21  June  2012  which  accompanied  the  application
      contended in terms that the claimant had had a  continuous  14  years'
      residence in the UK. Accordingly, this was  an  application  expressly
      stated to be for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of  his  long
      term residence.






  22. The claimant's grounds before the First-tier  Tribunal  were  somewhat
      generic but it was contended that the decision  of  the  secretary  of
      state  was  against  the  weight  of  the  evidence,   including   the
      information explaining the facts by way of the witness  statement  and
      documents.






  23. Mr Deller submitted that once it was raised before  the  secretary  of
      state, the application had to be considered under  paragraph  276B  as
      the  application  was  effectively  made  and  received   under   that
      paragraph.






  24. Mr Deller referred to the concession by the presenting officer at  the
      hearing at paragraph 8 that the application had been received prior to
      the new rules coming into force. At that stage, the grounds of  appeal
      could have been adapted so as to contend that the claimant had in fact
      met the requirements under paragraph 276B.


  25. Accordingly, the decision had not been in accordance with the law.






  26. Mr Deller accepted that it would make a difference for the  appeal  to
      be allowed under paragraph 276B rather than under Article 8 as, unlike
      Article 8, paragraph 276B of the Rules gives the  claimant  indefinite
      leave to remain.






  27. Mr Deller accepted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  thus  erred
      for the reasons given and should have concluded that  the  application
      had not been considered, as it should have been,  under  276B  of  the
      rules as they then were.






  28. The Tribunal's finding of fact, namely that the claimant had been here
      for over  15  years  meant  that  the  14  year  continuous  residence
      requirement had been met. That fact had not been challenged.






  29. Mr Deller also accepted that the secretary of state  did  not  suggest
      that there was anything in paragraph 276B that should  have  prevented
      the application being granted. There are no apparent  reasons  why  it
      would have failed if the date upon which the claimant claimed to  have
      arrived in the UK had been accepted. Accordingly, he should have  been
      granted indefinite leave to remain under 276B.






  30. He accepted that in the circumstances the determination should be  set
      aside and should be re-made on  the  basis  that  the  requirement  of
      paragraph 276B had been met.






  31. On behalf of the claimant, it was submitted that  in  any  event,  the
      decision in  accordance  with  Article  8  was  based  on  sustainable
      grounds.






     Assessment





  32. It is evident that the solicitor's letter dated 21 June 2012 which was
      sent to the secretary of state plainly contended that the claimant had
      been continuously residing in the UK for over 14 years.  It  was  also
      contended in that letter that there was nothing to  suggest  that  his
      presence is "undesirable to the UK." He had no criminal  record  apart
      from a minor traffic violation that is almost four years old, and that
      should not be taken as an adverse indication regarding his character.






  33. I find, as noted by Mr Deller, that there has been no challenge to the
      finding by the First-tier Tribunal Judge that the claimant had resided
      continuously in the UK since 1999.  Accordingly, as at the date of the
      secretary of state's decision  on  30  July  2013,  the  claimant  had
      continuously resided in the UK for over 14 years.






  34. The First-tier Tribunal Judge had regard to the letter dated  21  June
      2012, namely the application for indefinite leave  to  remain  on  the
      basis of his length of residence. At the hearing, Ms. Pos on behalf of
      the secretary of state accepted that the application had been received
      prior to  the  new  rules  coming  into  force.  Notwithstanding  that
      concession, the claimant's counsel informed the Tribunal that the only
      basis of the appeal was his Article 8 rights.


  35. As noted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson in granting permission
      to appeal, it is not clear why that contention was made in  the  light
      of the fact that the secretary of state had  indeed  accepted  at  the
      hearing that the application had been made prior to  the  introduction
      of the rules.






  36. Accordingly, given the concession that the application was made  prior
      to the introduction of the new rules, the application should have been
      considered under paragraph 276B. Further, given the finding  that  the
      claimant had been here for 15 years,  the  Judge  should  either  have
      allowed the appeal under paragraph 276B of  the  rules,  or  at  least
      found, as noted by Judge Nicolson, that the  Article  8  decision  was
      justifiable as the claimant had met the requirements under the rules.


  37. In addition, the Judge should also have considered that the  secretary
      of state's decision had in any event not been in accordance  with  the
      law as no decision was taken under paragraph 276B of the rules,  which
      should have taken place.






  38. I accordingly find that the Judge should  in  the  circumstances  have
      found that the decision was not in accordance  with  the  law  as  the
      secretary of state had not considered paragraph  276B  of  the  rules,
      which were applicable at the date the application was made.






  39. I accordingly set aside the decision and re-make it.






  40. For the reasons already given and accepted by  both  parties,  I  find
      that as at the date of the secretary of state's decision  on  30  July
      2013, the claimant had  fulfilled  the  residence  requirements  under
      paragraph 276B.






  41. Mr Deller has very fairly accepted that  there  is  nothing  from  the
      claimant's history which would  stand  in  the  way  of  a  successful
      application under paragraph 276B. There were no public  policy  issues
      which prevented that outcome.






  42. I accordingly find  that  the  claimant  is  entitled  to  be  granted
      indefinite leave to remain in accordance with paragraph  276B  of  the
      rules which applied at the time.






     Decision





     The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error  on  a
point of law.     Having set aside the decision, I remake it and allow  the
claimant's appeal under the    Immigration Rules.













                               Signed                 Date  28/8/2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


