
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33434/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th August 2015                   |On 24th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                 KUNDAN LAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V James of Counsel instructed by LLB Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. On 29th December 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Grant-Hutchison
    gave permission to the appellant to  appeal  against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Pickup  in  which  he  dismissed  the
    appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse leave to  remain  on
    the basis of long residence and on human rights  grounds  applying  the
    provisions of paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  relating  to
    private life.

 2. Judge Grant-Hutchison thought it arguable that the judge had failed  to
    consider the guidance in Devaseelan (Second appeals  -  ECHR  -  extra-
    territorial effect) Sri Lanka [2002] UKIAT  00702  in  relation  to  an
    earlier determination which should  be  a  start  point,  even  if  the
    decision related to a point of law as opposed to findings of fact.

 3. In the grounds of application it was contended that  Judge  Pickup  was
    wrong to conclude that Devaseelan did not apply to the earlier decision
    of Judge Phull who had allowed the appeal to the  limited  extent  that
    the respondent's refusal was not in accordance with the law.

Submissions

 4. Ms James expanded upon the grounds arguing  that  Judge  Pickup  should
    have taken into consideration the findings  of  the  earlier  judge  in
    paragraph 11 of her decision in which she found that the respondent had
    failed to consider the appellant's application for leave  made  on  6th
    July 2012 under the Rules applicable  prior  to  9th  July  2012.   She
    argued that there were exceptional circumstances examined by the  judge
    even if they related to what the appellant's representatives  had  done
    at the time.  The failure of Judge Pickup to apply Devaseelan  in  that
    respect  therefore  tainted  the  rest  of  his  decision  because  the
    exceptional  circumstances  relating   to   the   appellant's   earlier
    application were not taken into consideration  even  though  the  first
    judge had made positive findings about them.

 5. Mr McVeety relied upon the response in which  it  is  stated  that  the
    appellant's valid application was made after the change in Rules on 9th
    July 2012 and could not succeed  under  those  Rules.   Further,  Judge
    Pickup had given cogent reasons for concluding that the  first  judge's
    decision resulted from an application of the law.  In any event it  was
    unclear  what  Judge  Phull  intended  to  flow  from  the  finding  of
    exceptional circumstances when her decision stemmed from an error on  a
    point of law in the respondent's decision.

 6. Mr McVeety also submitted that the appeal could have not  been  allowed
    by Judge Phull on the basis of exceptional circumstances as  there  was
    no such principle applicable.  My attention was drawn  to  the  refusal
    decision of 30th July 2014 which forms the basis of this appeal.   This
    is referred to in paragraph 17 of  the  decision  in  which  the  judge
    quotes from the refusal as follows:

         "We cannot be held responsible for  your  representatives'  errors.
         As this application was made after 9th July 2012, we are  under  no
         obligation to consider the case under the  now  abolished  fourteen
         year long residence Rules".

    Mr McVeety emphasised that the appellant's failure to  submit  a  valid
    application  before  the  Rules  changed  was  not  the  fault  of  the
    respondent.  The decision was remitted back  by  Judge  Phull  for  the
    respondent to consider the decision against  exceptional  circumstances
    which was done.

 7. In conclusion Ms James reminded me  of  the  content  of  her  skeleton
    argument in  which  she  contends  that  an  appellant  should  not  be
    prejudiced  by  the  errors  of   his   professional   advisers.    The
    respondent's latest refusal letter had made no reference to the earlier
    decision by  Judge  Phull  and  the  respondent  was  wrong  to  simply
    reiterate the arguments set out in the first refusal letter.

Conclusions

 8. After I had considered the matter for a few moments I announced that  I
    was not satisfied that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  showed
    an error on a point of law.  My reasons for that conclusion now follow.

 9. Judge Pickup was not wrong to conclude in paragraph 15 of his  decision
    that the guidance set out in Devaseelan did not apply  to  the  earlier
    decision of Judge Phull who had decided that the respondent's  decision
    was not in accordance with the law and a fresh decision  was  required.
    That is because Judge Phull had simply reached a conclusion on a  point
    of law rather than fact. But even if Judge Pickup's decision was  wrong
    and the earlier decision should have been a start point, the  error  is
    not, I conclude, material. There was nothing in the decision  of  Judge
    Phull which could have been be followed by the  second  judge.   Whilst
    the earlier decision recites events which suggest that the  appellant's
    representative had  been  negligent,  no  reasons  are  given  for  the
    conclusion that the respondent should have considered  the  appellant's
    application under the Rules prior to 9th July 2012.   The  "exceptional
    circumstances" which may have related to the errors allegedly  made  by
    the appellant's representatives could not have  any  relevance  to  the
    fact that a valid application was not made by the appellant until after
    9th July 2012.

10. At paragraph 16 of his decision Judge Pickup correctly points out  that
    it was not the responsibility of the Secretary of State to protect  the
    appellant  against  the  failure  of   his   representatives   to   act
    expeditiously.  The application initially made was  invalid  and  could
    not be accepted.  The application did not fall to be  considered  under
    previous long residency  requirements.   There  was  nothing  in  Judge
    Phull's decision, even if it had been taken into  consideration,  which
    could have led to a favourable decision by Judge Pickup.   In  reaching
    that conclusion I bear in mind that Judge Pickup's decision also  gives
    adequate and cogently reasoned consideration to  the  position  of  the
    appellant under human rights and was entitled  to  dismiss  that  claim
    also.

Decision

11. No material error on a point of law is shown, the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal shall stand.

Anonymity

12. An anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal and  was
    not requested before me.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
