
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33147/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 8th June 2015                    |On: 21st July 2014                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     CAB
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Alabi, Solicitor (Advocates)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of  Ghana  born  in  1970.   On  the  15th
    January 2015 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Flynn) allowed his appeal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom pursuant to  s10  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    1999[1]. The Secretary of State now has permission  to  appeal  against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Background and Matters in Issue

 2. The Respondent came to the UK in 1999 and  overstayed.  His  partner  M
    arrived in 2001 and also overstayed.   They  have  had  three  children
    since their arrival. C1 was born in April 2003, C2 in November 2004 and
    C3 in July 2011.  On the 29th September 2012 applications were made for
    them all to be granted leave to remain. The applications  were  refused
    on the 6th November 2013 but no appealable decision was made.  Judicial
    review proceedings were launched and the matter was settled by consent.
    The Secretary of State served each member of the family with  a  notice
    of a decision to remove them under s10[2].

 3. The refusal letter that  accompanied  the  decisions  listed  all  five
    members of the family. It addressed the Respondent's claim to remain in
    the UK on human rights grounds, and his failure  to  establish  a  case
    under either Appendix FM or 276ADE. It then  addresses  'leave  outside
    the Rules', and s55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
    2009 and in  that  context  addresses  the  Article  8  rights  of  the
    children. It is accepted that both C1 and C2 had been  in  the  UK  for
    over seven years - a reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the  Rules
    - but since their parents had been  refused,  not  that  their  removal
    would be disproportionate.

 4. At the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  the  Secretary  of  State
    requested that the appeal be adjourned. The Presenting Officer  pointed
    out that only CAB had appealed.  The suggestion was made that the other
    family members could submit  out  of  time  appeals  to  be  joined  as
    appellants. The First-tier Tribunal declined to take this course on the
    basis that his partner M and C3 could be treated as  CAB's  dependants.
    As for C1 and C2, the Tribunal was under the impression that  they  had
    both now naturalised as British citizens. With that in  mind  he  found
    that it would be wrong to adjourn.

 5. The first finding in the determination is that the appeal of  CAB  must
    be allowed under Appendix FM of the Rules, along with  his  dependants.
    It is accepted that he failed on "eligibility" grounds because  of  the
    length of time he has overstayed.  Referring  to  E-LTRPT.1.1,  2.2-2.4
    and 3.1 it is found that "on the face of it"  those  requirements  were
    not met. Although it is  not  spelled  out  presumably  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was here referring to E-LTRPT.2.3 (a) which  states  that  the
    applicant must have sole parental responsibility for  the  child.   The
    determination goes on to address EX.1. Finding that the elder  children
    have been in the UK for over seven years and that their  removal  would
    not be reasonable, the appeal is allowed under the Rules.

 6. The Tribunal then turned to Article 8.  The  statutory  provisions  set
    out in s117A-D of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  (as
    amended) are set out in full.  The Tribunal considers the  five  Razgar
    steps and having reached the question  of  proportionality,  noted  its
    evaluation of CAB  as  being  a  "deeply  unimpressive  witness".   The
    Tribunal rejected his evidence that he had not been working  illegally.
    It carefully  considered  the  fact  that  maintenance  of  immigration
    control is  in  the  public  interest.   In  his  favour  the  Tribunal
    considered the provisions of s117B(6).  Having  found  the  two  eldest
    children to be British, and  thus  "qualifying"  the  Tribunal  further
    found that their removal would not be reasonable to expect them  to  go
    to Ghana.  The determination refers to the guidance  in  ZH  (Tanzania)
    and the appeals are all allowed under the Immigration Rules  and  human
    rights law.

Errors of Law

 7.  On  the  11th  May  2015  we  heard  representations  on  whether  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained errors of  law  such
    that it should be set aside. On that day the  Secretary  of  State  was
    represented by Ms Isherwood, and CAB by Mr Alabi.  Our findings were as
    follows.

 8. The first error in this decision  is  in  the  approach  taken  to  the
    'appellants' before him.   The  Secretary  of  State  had  served  five
    notices of a decision to remove and in those circumstances it was  open
    to each family member to appeal. They did not do this, instead electing
    to pursue their appeals as "dependents" of CAB. It was of  course  open
    to the Tribunal to consider the right of other family  members  in  the
    context of the Article 8 claim[3], but it  was  not  possible  for  the
    Tribunal to "allow the appeals  under  the  Immigration  Rules"  as  it
    purports to do in this determination. There was only one appeal  before
    the Tribunal.

 9. The second is that in allowing that appeal under the Immigration  Rules
    the Tribunal appears to have misunderstood the nature of  EX.1.  Having
    already found that CAB  did not meet the  Eligibility  or  relationship
    requirements in Appendix FM it was not open to the Tribunal  to  go  on
    and apply EX.1 as if it were a free standing provision: Sabir (Appendix
    FM - EX.1 not free standing) [2014] UKUT 00063 (IAC).

10. Thirdly we  find  that  the  Tribunal  has  not  conducted  a  complete
    proportionality balancing exercise. The determination has set out s117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended by  the
    Immigration Act 2014) in full. It is  not  however  apparent  from  the
    findings that all of the relevant sub-sections have been  addressed  in
    the reasoning. At paragraph 26 the Tribunal properly directs itself  to
    the matters of effective immigration control, and obliquely touches  on
    whether CAB  might  be  considered  "financially  independent"  in  its
    finding that he has been working unlawfully. No consideration is  given
    to whether he speaks English or what bearing his  lack  of  immigration
    status might have on his relationships and private life in the UK.   It
    may be that in making its positive findings on s117(6) the Tribunal did
    not consider it necessary to go through each of (1)-(5) since (6) could
    be treated as a 'trump'.  This was the wrong approach. In Dube (ss.117A-
    117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held that the  factors
    in 117B(1)-(6) are not to  be  treated  as  an  "a  la  carte  menu  of
    considerations". Each must be addressed. In this  case  the  Respondent
    contends that the failure to do so led to the Tribunal omitting, in its
    assessment of (6), to weigh in the balance factors which might be  said
    to  show  the  childrens'  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  to   be
    reasonable.  That complaint is justified.

11. Finally the determination contains an error of fact in that C2  is  not
    in fact a British national. Although he was born  here  and  has  lived
    here continuously for over ten years, Mr Alabi agreed before us that C2
    does  not  have  British  nationality,  nor  has  he  yet  applied   to
    naturalise.  It may be that this is not an error that had any  material
    bearing on the outcome of the case, since it is  accepted  that  C1  is
    indeed a British citizen and they are both  "qualifying  children"  for
    the purpose of the Rules: it is a moot point whether the rights of  two
    qualifying children weigh more than one.  It is nevertheless  an  error
    that the Respondent raises in her  grounds  of  appeal  and  given  our
    findings above, adds to the impetus to set this decision aside.

12. At the hearing before us in May there was insufficient time to  re-make
    the decision. CAB's family were not present and we considered  that  in
    the re-making it might be helpful to hear directly from C1 and M  about
    their circumstances. The matter was therefore adjourned to  be  re-made
    at a later date.

The Re-Made Decision

13. At the outset of the hearing there was some  discussion  about  whether
    the remaining family members wanted to lodge  out-of-time  appeals  and
    whether this was a matter that should be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal so that the matters could  all  be  heard  together.   It  was
    agreed that the Tribunal would proceed to re-make the  decision  in  Mr
    CABs appeal without waiting for other family members to  be  joined  to
    the proceedings: Mr Alabi indicated that there was a problem with funds
    to pay the appeal fees and we considered that any further  delay  would
    not be in anyone's interests. The parties agreed that the rights of the
    children and M  could  be  taken  into  account  'in  the  round'  when
    considering Article 8.

14. Our starting point is to dismiss the appeal under the Rules. CAB cannot
    qualify on private life grounds under paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).  Whilst
    we accept that he will find it difficult to return to Ghana and he will
    face some obstacles in finding housing, employment  and  education  for
    his children, these cannot be said to be "very significant".  We  heard
    evidence that he still has a large extended family  living  in  Eastern
    Ghana and although he has little contact with them now, this remains  a
    resource of support for him. He and M have managed to cope in  the  UK,
    where they have not had any status at all. We reject the suggestion  in
    the evidence of CAB and M that they will be destitute  if  returned  to
    Ghana. There may be a high unemployment rate in Ghana but there was  no
    evidence before us to suggest that there was any particular  impediment
    to either of the adults in this family finding work.  Nor can CAB  meet
    the requirements of Appendix FM, for the reasons set out above.

15. We therefore  turn  to  Article  8.   We  accept  that  CAB  has  lived
    continuously in the UK since 1999.  During the 16  years  that  he  has
    spent here he has, we accept, established a  private  life.  There  was
    evidence of this in the documentary evidence before us, but since it is
    not disputed we need not set that out here.  We note only that part  of
    that private life is the relationship he has with his mother, who is in
    her late 60s and suffers from  health  problems  including  high  blood
    pressure.  We accept and find as fact that CAB  shares  a  family  life
    with his partner and three children, at least  one  of  whom,  C1,  has
    become a British national and so is entitled to remain living in the UK
    unencumbered by immigration control.  We accept that CABs removal, with
    all or part of his family unit,  would  be  an  interference  with  his
    Article 8(1) rights to the extent that the Article is engaged.

16. We accept that the decision to remove persons with no leave  to  remain
    is one rationally connected to  the  legitimate  Article  8(2)  aim  of
    protection of the economy, and that it is in law one that the Secretary
    of State is entitled to make.

17. We therefore turn to the question  of  proportionality.  We  must  have
    regard to all of the factors set out in s117B of the NIAA 2002:

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases

         (1)      The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
         the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)      Little weight should be given to a private life
         established by a person at a time when the person's immigration
         status is precarious.

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom.

18. The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
    interest.  CAB came to the UK as a visitor in 1999 and never left.   He
    has therefore stayed for approximately 16 years in this country with no
    leave or authority to do so.  He does not presently qualify  for  leave
    to remain under the Rules. We have attached significant weight to  that
    fact.

19. We are satisfied that CAB can speak fluent English and that this has no
    doubt aided his integration into the United Kingdom.    It  is  in  the
    public interest, and in particular in the  interests  of  the  economic
    well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who  seek  to  enter  or
    remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons
    who can speak English are less of a burden on taxpayers, and are better
    able to integrate into society.  This is not therefore  a  factor  that
    weighs against CAB.

20. There is no evidence to suggest that CAB or indeed his partner  M  have
    ever claimed public funds. We accept that  they  have  supported  their
    family themselves. We do not accept that this has been by  the  charity
    of others or because M makes a living plaiting hair. We do  not  accept
    CABs evidence that he has never worked  in  the  UK.    On  C1's  birth
    certificate the Registrar recorded CABs occupation as "kitchen porter".
    CAB told us that he had just said that because he was  receiving  money
    and payments in kind from his church where he helped in the kitchen  at
    events.   On C2's birth certificate  the  Registrar  has  recorded  his
    occupation as "local government officer". In response to Mr  Whitwell's
    questions CAB said that he had "just said that to put something"  -  he
    had forgotten what fictional job he had put on C1s birth certificate so
    had simply said the first job that came into his mind. We do  not  find
    it credible that the occupation "local government officer"  would  just
    pop into his head. We find it far more likely that at the time of  C1's
    birth he was working as a kitchen porter and that by the  time  C2  was
    born in 2004 he was working as a local  government  officer.   CAB  has
    been working illegally and this is not something  we  are  prepared  to
    weigh in his favour.  That is not the sort  of  financial  independence
    that parliament had in mind  when  they  approved  s117B(3).  There  is
    certainly no evidence before us that CAB  earns  a  salary  that  would
    bring him within the level of income required by the Rules.  That  said
    we also accept that if CAB and M were to have their status  regularized
    they would work hard and contribute to the economy.

21. Virtually the whole period that CAB has been establishing  his  Article
    8(1) private life in the UK he  has  been  here  unlawfully.  For  that
    reason we should  attach little weight to it.

22. Mr Alabi submits that notwithstanding all of this, CAB's  appeal  under
    Article 8 should be allowed because of the terms  of  s117B(6).  It  is
    accepted that the eldest two children in this family are  "qualifying".
    C1 is now British. Once they have the money to do so CAB and  M  intend
    to apply for C2 to naturalise. He has lived in the UK longer  than  ten
    years since birth and is prima facie entitled to  citizenship.    There
    is  no  dispute  that  CAB  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
    relationship with his children.  The question is whether  it  would  be
    "reasonable" for the child(ren) to leave the UK.

23. CAB's eldest child now aged 12. She has lived here all  her  life.  She
    does  not  need  to  show  that  she  meets  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules, because she  is  a  British  citizen.  The  question
    arises in her father's appeal "is it reasonable to expect her to  leave
    the UK"?  The Immigration Directorate  Instruction  'Family  Migration:
    Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life  (as  a  Partner  or  Parent)  and
    Private Life: 10-Year Routes'  ("the IDI") sets out  the  Secretary  of
    State 's policy in such cases:

         'Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or primary carer of a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age of
         that child. This reflects the European Court of Justice judgment in
         Zambrano.

         ...

         Where a decision to refuse the application would require a parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the EU, the case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that parent
         or primary carer.'

24. That policy statement is consistent with the position adopted in Sanade
    and Ors (British Children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC),
    and approved by the then President Blake J:

         "93.  Finally, we note that a further question on  which  we  asked
         for the respondent's assistance was in these terms:

             "Does the respondent agree that in a case where a non-national
             parent is being removed and claims it is a violation  of  that
             person's human rights to be separated from a child  with  whom
             he presently enjoys family life as an engaged parent,  that  a
             consequence of the CJEU's judgment is that it is not  open  to
             the respondent to submit that an interference can  be  avoided
             because it is reasonable to expect the child  (and  presumably
             any other parent/carer who is not facing  deportation/removal)
             to join the appellant in the country of origin?   If  not  why
             not?"

         94.  To this Mr Devereux replied on 24 November 2011:

             "We do accept, however, that in a case where a  third  country
             national is unable to claim a right to reside on the basis set
             out above it will not logically be  possible,  when  assessing
             the compatibility of their removal  or  deportation  with  the
             ECHR to argue that any  interference  with  Article  8  rights
             could be avoided by the family unit moving to a country  which
             is outside of the EU".

         95.  We shall take this helpful submission  into  account  when  we
         consider the application of Article 8 to each appellant's case.  We
         agree with it.  This means that  where  the  child  or  indeed  the
         remaining spouse is a British citizen and therefore  a  citizen  of
         the European Union, it is not possible to require them to  relocate
         outside of the European  Union  or  to  submit  that  it  would  be
         reasonable for them to do so. The  case  serves  to  emphasise  the
         importance of nationality already identified in the decision of the
         Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania). If  interference  with  the  family
         life is to be justified, it can only  be  on  the  basis  that  the
         conduct of the person to be removed gives rise to considerations of
         such weight as to justify separation.

         [emphasis added]

25. Mr Whitwell did not resile from either the concession made in Sanade or
    the clear terms of the IDI. He rather submitted that the  Secretary  of
    State was not requiring C1 to go anywhere. She is  not  being  removed,
    and whether she goes to Ghana with her family is therefore a matter  of
    choice for her parents.  Whilst that is  technically  correct  this  is
    something of a Hobson's choice. She could be separated from her parents
    and siblings to live here. She could remain here with her  elderly  and
    ailing grandmother, or to be placed in the care  of  the  state.   Both
    would be to the detriment of the  economy,  since  grandmother  is  not
    working and would, we presume, claim the benefits to which she would be
    entitled if her granddaughter were to live with  her.   Both  would  be
    significantly contrary to her best interests.  We do not doubt that  C1
    enjoys a warm  relationship  with  her  grandmother  but  there  is  no
    evidence before us that this woman would be prepared or  even  able  to
    look after her grandchild on a full time basis. Alternatively C1  could
    go to Ghana with her family, and be deprived of the rights and freedoms
    she is entitled to enjoy as a citizen of  the  UK,  and  the  EEA.  The
    reality is therefore, that if her father is removed to Ghana, she  will
    have to go with him.   Whatever the merits of  the  Ghanaian  education
    system, whether or not she would have  the  benefit  of  meeting  other
    family members and growing up  in  a  culture  that  reflects  her  own
    heritage, these considerations fall away in the light of  C1's  British
    passport: the Secretary of State's own position is that it would not be
    reasonable to expect her to leave the UK.

26. We therefore find, in accordance with s117B(6) that the public interest
    does not require the removal of CAB  or  his  partner  M.  Mr  Whitwell
    realistically conceded that if their appeals were to be  allowed  under
    Article 8, so too would the appeals of C2 and C3.

Decisions

27. The determination contains error of laws and it is set aside.

28. We re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it  on  human  rights
    grounds.

29. Due to the young age of the children involved in this  appeal  we  make
    the following direction for anonymity having had regard to Rule  14  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders:

"Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings".



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              11th July 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Decision dated 8th August 2014
[2] Although we have not seen these decisions, we were informed of this by
Ms Isherwood at hearing with no challenge by Mr Alabi.
[3] Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 38

