
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33879/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 February 2018                           |On 7 March 2018               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                Khaleda Begum
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Islam of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Rodger promulgated on 21 March 2017 dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision of 25 September 2015  refusing  leave
    to remain thereby refusing a human rights claim.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 19 June  1966.   On  1
    June 2009 she married Mr Mohammed Hussain (date  of  birth  20  January
    1930), a British citizen.  Mr Hussain had been  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 1957 and had previously been married for a period of some
    40 years before he was divorced in  early  2009.   Mr  Hussain  has  10
    children, all of whom live in the United Kingdom, and all of  whom  are
    adults; he has a number of  grandchildren,  also  all  present  in  the
    United Kingdom.


3.   On 19 May 2012 the Appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to
    entry clearance as a spouse valid until 3 July 2014.  On 6 August  2014
    the Appellant applied for further leave to remain.  The application was
    made after the expiry of her leave  to  enter.   Indeed,  it  was  made
    approximately 6 days beyond the 28 day period of  grace  now  permitted
    under the Immigration  Rules  in  respect  of  late  applications.   In
    consequence the Appellant's application for leave to remain was refused
    on 18 December 2014 as having been made out-of-time.  The nature of the
    refusal decision at that time carried no  right  of  appeal.   In  such
    circumstances,  on  8  January  2015  the  Appellant  made  a   further
    application for leave to remain, relying on her relationship  with  her
    husband and in effect pleading in substance human rights grounds.  This
    application was made by way of form FLR(FP).


4.   The application was refused for reasons  set  out  in  a  'reasons  for
    refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 25 September 2015.


5.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.  The appeal was  dismissed  for  the
    reasons set out in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rodger.


6.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal, which was in the  first
    instance refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Alis on 20 October  2017,
    but was subsequently granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce  on  12
    December 2017.


7.   In the premises I note that  Mr  Hussain,  even  if  he  is  no  longer
    enjoying 'family life' - within the very particular meaning of  Article
    8 - with his adult children, is an individual who at the  time  of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal had been living  in  the  United
    Kingdom for approximately 60 years.  Further the Appellant entered  the
    United Kingdom pursuant to a provision designed to protect and  promote
    family life.  There is nothing to  suggest  that  there  has  been  any
    breach of the Appellant's conditions of entry, or  any  change  in  her
    purpose in being here.


8.   However, as identified above, the Appellant became an overstayer.   The
    Appellant has explained this by reference to awaiting  the  renewal  of
    her passport  before  she  was  able  to  submit  her  application  for
    variation  of  leave  to  remain.   At  no  point  has  the  Respondent
    challenged the facts of  this  explanation.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge does not make any adverse finding in this regard either -  albeit
    perhaps it may be said that the Judge has not made any clear finding in
    this regard. It seems to me that by  default  the  explanation  has  in
    substance  been  accepted.   It  is  to  be  acknowledged  that  it  is
    ultimately the responsibility of an applicant to ensure that she is  in
    a good position to make the appropriate application at the  appropriate
    time: however, on the particular facts here  it  is  the  case,  in  my
    judgment, that there is  no  particular  threat  to  the  integrity  of
    immigration control by reason of the Appellant's oversight  in  failing
    to ensure the process of renewing her passport  was  not  completed  in
    good time in 2014.  Be that as it may, as I have already indicated, the
    Appellant's application in 2014 was refused under the Rules: I  do  not
    suggest by my preceding observation  that  that  was  not  the  correct
    decision. The Appellant's more recent application was also refused.


9.   The 'Decision and Reasons' of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is for  the
    main part a very thorough and well-reasoned document.   The  Judge  had
    regard to all of the various disparate elements of the case  that  were
    put before her, and for the main part  appropriately  directed  herself
    with regard to the applicable law and tests  in  cases  such  as  this.
    However, I  consider  that  notwithstanding  the  thoroughness  of  the
    Decision there is error of law such that it is necessary to  set  aside
    the Decision.


10.  In  particular,  I  note  the  following  in  respect  of  the  Judge's
    consideration of the private life of Mr Hussain  and  the  question  of
    whether Article 8 was engaged at all in the appeal.   At  paragraph  27
    the Judge says this:

         "In considering this appeal outside of  the  rules,  I  am  firstly
         satisfied that there is a genuine marital relationship between  the
         appellant and her husband.  However, I am not  satisfied  that  the
         refusal  decision  adversely  interferes  with  their  family  life
         together because as set out above, I am satisfied that their family
         can continue  in  Bangladesh  or  through  regular  visits  to  the
         appellant in Bangladesh and through modern forms  of  communication
         between visits.  As regards her private life, the appellant came to
         the UK in May 2012, when aged 46 years, and  whilst  she  may  have
         built up a private life in  the  UK,  of  which  there  is  limited
         evidence, she would  be  able  to  continue  her  private  life  in
         Bangladesh.   Therefore,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  refusal
         decision adversely interferes with the family or  private  life  of
         the appellant or her spouse such  that  Article  8  is  potentially
         engaged."

    The Judge hereby in effect concluded that the Appellant's case did  not
    get past the first two Razgar questions.  Whilst, as will be seen in  a
    moment,  the  Judge  goes  on  to  consider  proportionality   in   the
    alternative, the ratio of the  Decision  is  that  Article  8  was  not
    engaged.


11.  I am particularly concerned in respect of the Judge's  finding  to  the
    effect that there would be no adverse  interference  with  the  private
    life of the Appellant's spouse such that Article 8 is  not  potentially
    engaged.  The Judge has given no reason for such a conclusion.


12.  Whilst I note that the Judge has given  very  particular  consideration
    at paragraph 21(b) to Mr Hussain's relationships with his children  and
    grandchildren she has done so in the context of family life, concluding
    that in the absence of anything more than  the  normal  emotional  ties
    between adult relatives there is nothing to  suggest  that  the  family
    life aspect of  Article  8  is  engaged.  Similarly,  the  Judge  makes
    comments and observations in respect of Mr Hussain's brothers,  nieces,
    and nephews.


13.  Notwithstanding the challenge brought by the Appellant in  this  regard
    it seems to me that the  Judge  has  clearly  and  sustainably  reached
    conclusions in respect of family life.  However,  the  Judge  does  not
    seem to  have  recognised  that  these  various  relationships  were  a
    significant and important aspect of Mr Hussain's private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom.


14.  In any event, I can detect no reasoning offered at paragraph 27 of  the
    Decision - or indeed anywhere else - for the conclusion that Article  8
    was not potentially engaged in respect  of  the  Mr  Hussain's  private
    life.


15.  It seems to me the proposition is simple and  straightforward.   If  Mr
    Hussain remains in the United Kingdom without his wife then -  even  if
    they maintain the marital relationship by way of  visits  and  frequent
    communication - there is an interference in their mutual  family  life.
    If in the alternative Mr Hussain leaves the  United  Kingdom  with  his
    spouse in order to  set  up  home  in  Bangladesh,  then  there  is  an
    interference in his private life established in the UK over the last 60
    years or so. Given the very low  threshold  of  the  first  two  Razgar
    questions, a finding to the effect that a man  who  has  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom for 60 years and has present in the United  Kingdom  ten
    children, a number of grandchildren, and siblings does  not  clear  the
    first two Razgar questions would be in essence perverse.


16.  Accordingly, in my judgment the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  fell  into
    error in respect of evaluation  of  the  Appellant's  spouse's  private
    life. She did not offer any reasons for a conclusion that  was  in  any
    event perverse.


17.  I note that the Judge seeks to consider  matters  in  the  alternative.
    From paragraph 28 she states that she is going on to  consider  matters
    as if she had found that Article 8 was  potentially  engaged;  then  at
    paragraph 29 she begins by stating: "In considering whether the refusal
    decision was proportionate ...".  The difficulty with such an  approach
    is that it is unclear precisely what it is that the Judge  is  weighing
    in the proportionality balance, given her findings in  respect  of  the
    first two Razgar questions.  It seems to  me  that  if  the  Judge  has
    erroneously  concluded  that  Article  8  is  not  engaged   then   the
    'alternative'  proportionality  balance  is  at  substantial  risk   of
    starting off on an erroneous basis. The assessment  of  proportionality
    in the alternative will necessitate a complex  and  nuanced  evaluation
    that moves away from the adverse finding in private/family life, if  it
    is to defeat criticism of  the  evaluation  of  the  first  two  Razgar
    questions as being immaterial.


18.  In this context, insofar as any consideration was  given  again  to  Mr
    Hussain's private life it appears to be limited to the following:

         "Further, I am  not  satisfied  that  Mr  Hussain's  age  alone  or
         together with a combination of the amount of time that he has spent
         in the UK are factors that can be considered to be exceptional such
         that they are capable of outweighing the  public  interest  in  the
         removal of the Appellant." (paragraph 29).

    In  my  judgement,  absent  evidence  of  being  a  recluse,  there  is
    inevitably so much more to an individual's private life than  his  mere
    age and the amount of time spent in the  UK.   The  principal  findings
    underlying the ratio of the First-tier Tribunal's decision, as  I  have
    already indicated, is devoid of any recognition, findings or reasons in
    respect of such matters in the context of private life. I find  nothing
    in this 'alternative' treatment that suggest  a  fuller  or  adequately
    nuanced approach  as  a  premise  to  the  'proportionality'  balancing
    exercise.


19.  Further in this regard, it seems to me that the  Judge  inappropriately
    disregards the circumstance and  period  in  which  the  Appellant  had
    become an overstayer before the attempt to regularise her status by way
    of the application made on 6 August 2014.  The Judge says this:


         "I have considered  the  reasons  provided  by  the  appellant  for
         overstaying and I have considered the short period in which she had
         overstayed, but this appeal is limited to that of human rights  and
         given that I have made findings that the  Appellant's  husband  has
         connections with Bangladesh and that he is able to travel and  does
         travel to Bangladesh I am not satisfied that it can  be  said  that
         the Appellant or her spouse would face very serious difficulties in
         continuing their family life together outside the UK,  which  could
         not be overcome or would entail very serious hardship or that there
         are exceptional  circumstances  in  this  appeal  such  that  would
         justify a grant of leave outside of the rules." (paragraph 29).



20.  It have noted above that the Judge makes  no  express  finding  on  the
    Appellant's explanation (although necessarily  does  not  indicate  its
    rejection either).  The  absence  of  a  clear  finding  suggests  that
    although the Judge referred to this circumstance, she did not factor it
    in to the overall consideration  of  proportionality.   Indeed,  in  my
    judgement the use of the word "but" before "this appeal is  limited  to
    that  of  human  rights"  underscores  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    considered that she should disregard this element  of  the  Appellant's
    history. In my  judgment,  that  was  in  error.   The  nature  of  the
    Appellant's breach of the term of her leave  is  relevant  because  the
    balancing exercise requires  consideration  of  all  relevant  matters,
    including in particular matters relating to the integrity and system of
    immigration  control.  The  circumstance   of   how   the   Appellant's
    predicament - of finding herself an overstayer without leave and having
    to rely upon a human rights based application and  appeal  -  arose  is
    very pertinent to the overall consideration  of  where  proportionality
    lies.


21.  Indeed, albeit this is not directly informative of  my  conclusions  on
    error of law, on the particular facts of this case I would  go  further
    with regard to the public interest consideration  under  section  117B.
    In  my  judgment,  it  is  positively  harmful  to  the  integrity   of
    immigration control, and therefore harmful to the  public  interest  in
    maintaining effective immigration control, if  the  system  of  control
    cannot show itself to be flexible enough to disregard such a breach  in
    an otherwise compelling case.


22.  Be that as it may, for all of the reasons given I find that  there  was
    a material error of law on the part of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    and in those circumstances the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge is set aside.


23.  I have heard brief submissions from  both  representatives  as  to  the
    remaking of the appeal.  Neither thought it necessary for there to be a
    further hearing; both considered that the appeal could be remade on the
    basis of all of the materials available to the Tribunal. Accordingly, I
    remake the decision in the appeal without a further hearing.


24.  Mr Islam for the Appellant  essentially  relied  upon  the  grounds  of
    appeal and the manner in which the case had been put before the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Mr Kotas in substance relied upon the Respondent's  RFRL
    and invited consideration to adopting a similar approach and outcome to
    that of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


25.   I allow the appeal.  If the Respondent's decision  is  left  to  stand
    the integrity of the mutual family life of the Appellant and Mr Hussain
    would only be preserved if he were to leave the UK to establish a  home
    in Bangladesh.  In my judgment, it would be a  wholly  disproportionate
    interference with his private life established over 60 years in the  UK
    to expect him so to do.  This, in combination with the  fact  that  the
    Appellant's predicament - and indeed Mr Hussain's  predicament  -  only
    arises by reason of a minimal breach of the limits of her leave  for  a
    reason (the too late completion of the renewal of her passport) that is
    understandable even if it does not completely exempt the Appellant from
    responsibility, makes this, in my judgment, an exceptional case  within
    the contemplation of Lord Bingham in Razgar as explained by the Supreme
    Court in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 (see in particular at paragraph 60).


Notice of Decision

26.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.


27.  I remake the decision in the appeal. The appeal  is  allowed  on  human
rights grounds.


28.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


Signed:                                 Date: 5 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and in all of the circumstances make a  whole  fee
award.


Signed:                                 Date: 5 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
(qua a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal)
