
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33195/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22nd September 2017                   |On 27th October 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                           Mr MOHAMED MOMOH CONTEH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Rashid, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone born  on  11th  March  1962.
    The Appellant's immigration history is that on 18th July  2001  he  was
    issued with a multivisit visa valid until 18th  January  2002  although
    the Appellant claims to  have  entered  the  UK  clandestinely  on  1st
    September 2000 but the Secretary of State had no trace of lawful  entry
    to the UK at that time.  On 10th October  2001  the  Appellant  claimed
    asylum and that claim was refused.  The Appellant's appeal process  was
    concluded  in  March  2003  when  the  Appellant  was  refused  further
    permission to appeal and on 7th December 2007 he was removed  from  the
    UK on an emergency travel document.

 2. On 20th May 2010 the Appellant was issued with entry clearance  in  the
    category of a visa settlement spouse valid until 20th August 2012.   On
    11th September 2012 the Appellant made an out of time  application  for
    leave to remain as the spouse of a settled person but this was rejected
    on 17th October 2012.  A fresh application based on similar grounds was
    lodged on 20th October 2012 but this application was  refused  with  no
    right of appeal on 1st March 2013.  On 21st January 2015 the  Appellant
    was served with notice IS.151A as an overstayer.

 3. It was against that basis that on 26th March 2015 the Appellant made an
    out of time application for indefinite leave to remain as the spouse of
    a settled person.  That application was refused by  Notice  of  Refusal
    dated 8th October 2015.

 4. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Maciel sitting at Taylor House on 24th November 2016.  In
    a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  19th  December   2016   the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed both on  immigration  grounds  and  on
    human rights grounds.

 5. On 4th January  2017  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds contended that the Immigration Judge erred  in
    dismissing the appeal outside the Rules under Article 8  and  that  the
    judge's assessment of proportionality under  the  Razgar  approach  was
    wholly inadequate.  They contended that  the  judge's  conclusion  that
    there was no interference with family life when the Appellant was given
    lawful permission to join and reside with his British wife  in  the  UK
    (and which relationship is genuine and subsisting) and for them to  now
    go and reside in Sierra Leone would be unlawful.

 6. Secondly, the  grounds  contended  there  had  been  no  assessment  of
    proportionality and that the judge was required as a matter of law when
    considering  Article   8   outside   the   Rules   to   undertake   the
    proportionality exercise, and that it was arguable that an  eight  year
    old genuine and subsisting marriage with a non-UK partner who had  been
    specifically granted entry  clearance  to  join  and  reside  with  his
    British spouse, was  a  material  and  weighty  matter  in  the  Razgar
    balancing exercise which the Immigration Judge had failed to undertake.



 7. On 10th July 2017 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Brunnen  granted
    permission to appeal.   On  25th  July  2017  the  Secretary  of  State
    responded to the Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24.  The Rule 24 response
    submits that the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  directed  herself
    appropriately, pointing out that the application was submitted  out  of
    time and was considered therefore under Appendix  FM  and  276ADE,  and
    that the judge found that the Appellant did not satisfy EX.1(b) as  set
    out at paragraphs 22 and 23 of her  decision.   Further,  the  Rule  24
    response submits that the  judge  had  properly  considered  Article  8
    outside the Rules as set out at paragraphs 26 to 30.

 8. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel, Mr Rashid.  Mr Rashid is familiar  with  this  matter,  having
    appeared before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Nath.

Submissions/Discussion

 9. Mr Rashid starts by reminding me that the  Appellant  came  here  as  a
    spouse in 2010 with a visa valid  until  August  2012.   All  that  was
    necessary for the Appellant to do in  order  to  apply  for  indefinite
    leave to remain was to undertake the Knowledge of Life test.   However,
    instead, the Appellant made application for further  leave  to  remain.
    It was not until the Appellant's leave had expired by some three  weeks
    that it was noted by his current representatives that  the  wrong  form
    had been filled in in seeking an extension of  his  leave.   Mr  Rashid
    points out that the judge has accepted this  at  paragraph  20  of  her
    decision.  He submits there would  be  insurmountable  obstacles  which
    would prevent the couple living together in Sierra Leone.

10. Mr Nath in response  points  out  that  the  application  made  by  the
    Appellant  was  late  and  that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet   the
    Immigration Rules.

11. Mr Rashid points out that the Appellant's application, whilst accepting
    that it was out of time, was not made at a time when  he  was  ever  an
    overstayer and consequently the public interest issue is  not  one  for
    due consideration and that apart from being out of time  the  Appellant
    meets the Rules.  He submits that the Rules interfere with the  justice
    of this matter.  He takes me  to  paragraph  29  of  the  decision  and
    submits that analysis as to how Article 8 outside the Rules  should  be
    made constitutes an error of law.  He  contends  that  the  Appellant's
    spouse will not go to live in Sierra Leone and that the judge  accepted
    that there is family life and that there has to be an interference with
    it if the Appellant's spouse will not go to Sierra Leone.   He  submits
    that the judge has not carried out the five step test under Razgar  and
    undertaken an appropriate balancing exercise.   He  asked  me  to  find
    there is therefore a material  error  of  law  and  to  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

12. Mr Nath disagrees with this analysis, pointing out to me that if I read
    the judgment carefully that the judge has carried out a  full  analysis
    of the Appellant's appeal under Article 8 outside the  Rules  and  that
    the decision amounts effectively to little more than mere disagreement.



The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

15. I start by reminding myself that the purpose of this hearing is  solely
    to determine whether or not there is a material error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   It  is  not  my  role  to
    analyse or comment on the history  of  this  matter  and  the  apparent
    failings of the Appellant to take the proper and appropriate steps that
    were necessary to regularise his status within the UK.

16. It is the role of this Tribunal to scrutinise whether or not there is a
    material error of law in the approach that  has  been  adopted  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.   Whether  I  agree  or  disagree  with  the
    findings of that  judge  is  not  a  relevant  factor  providing  I  am
    satisfied that the judge carried out a proper and reasoned analysis  of
    the evidence and made findings that she was entitled to.

17. Whilst it will come as a substantial disappointment  to  the  Appellant
    and to his spouse, I find that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Judge
    discloses  no  material  error  of  law.   The  judge  has   thoroughly
    considered the issues in this matter.  The earlier paragraphs  set  out
    the history and notes that the Appellant seeks to pass  the  blame  for
    not having completed his Knowledge  of  Life  test  onto  his  previous
    solicitors.  The judge finds quite properly that the  Appellant  cannot
    succeed under the Rules, and then goes on to set out the basis of  that
    conclusion.  Thereafter, the judge analyses in paragraphs 26 to 30  the
    Appellant's human rights appeal and at paragraph 28, having  considered
    the evidence at paragraph 27, found there were  no  compelling  reasons
    for the grant of leave outside the Rules.

18. What is important is that the judge has gone on to consider the  proper
    approach set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  The judge acknowledges that
    the Appellant has established a family life with his  British  wife  in
    the UK.  The judge has made a reasoned finding that the  decision  does
    not interfere with the Appellant's rights to family and  private  life,
    noting that the Appellant and his wife have chosen to live  in  the  UK
    and that there is nothing preventing them from living as  a  family  in
    Sierra Leone.  The judge has noted that the  Appellant  has  previously
    lived in Sierra Leone and worked there and that  there  is  nothing  to
    prevent him from working  and  living  there  where  he  has  an  adult
    daughter.  Consequently, I am satisfied that the analysis  carried  out
    by the judge is proper and does not disclose any material error of law.



19. Having said this, it is difficult not to have considerable sympathy for
    the position in which the Appellant finds himself.  The  allegation  is
    that the failure  to  make  appropriate  application  was  due  to  the
    Appellant's previous solicitors.  I know of no reason why the Appellant
    did not take his Knowledge of Life test and regularise  his  status  at
    that time.  This is one of those cases where if a  proper  and  further
    consideration of a proper application were to be made, it may  well  be
    that the Secretary of State may view this matter differently, albeit  I
    emphasise that it is not for this Tribunal to pre-judge any  subsequent
    assessment that  might  be  made  on  the  Appellant's  behalf  by  the
    appropriate authorities.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the appeal is dismissed and the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

