
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33736/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Columbus House, Newport   |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On: 23 June 2015                     |On: 13 July 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                       ANA YVETTE DE LA CRUZ ENRIQUEZ
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms M Bayoumi, Counsel instructed by Hoole & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Sweeney in which he dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, a citizen of
    the Philippines, against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse to
    vary leave to remain on the basis of her family and private life in the
    United Kingdom.

 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 23  November  2010  with
    leave to enter as a Tier 4 general student migrant valid until 23 March
    2014. On 20 February 2014 the Appellant applied to vary  her  leave  to
    remain on the basis of her private and family life  as  the  spouse  of
    Amir Chovaty an Iranian national who had been granted refugee status in
    the United Kingdom. By notice dated 13 August  2014  accompanied  by  a
    reasons for refusal letter dated 12 August 2014  this  application  was
    refused. The Appellant appealed against this decision and this  is  the
    appeal which came before Judge Sweeney on  18  December  2014  and  was
    dismissed. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The application was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Frankish on 17 March 2015 in the following terms

         "The application for permission to appeal asserts that SS (Nigeria)
         (2013) EWCA Civ 550 was not followed in that interference with S8 8
         rights should no be no more than required for the  proper  exercise
         of the state's responsibilities and should be proportional; ignored
         the obstacles to relocating in Philippines; insufficient regard  to
         Chikwamba (FC) v SSHD 2008 UKHL 40.

         The sponsor suffered a psychotic breakdown on the  initial  refusal
         of his asylum application. His mental health has recovered with the
         support of the appellant and her church which they both attend.  It
         is arguable that the proportionality assessment omits consideration
         of the fact that removal of  the  appellant  would  amount  to  the
         effective end of this marriage or the  psychiatric  impact  of  the
         appellant  if  he  were  in  fact  to  attempt  to  settle  in  the
         Philippines with the appellant."

 3. At the hearing before me Ms Bayoumi appeared on behalf of the Appellant
    and Mr Richards represented the Respondent.

Background

 4. The history of this application  and  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The
    facts, not challenged, are  that  the  Appellant  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom as a student in 2010 and met the Sponsor in 2012.  The  Sponsor
    had arrived in the United Kingdom on 23 August 2007 and he was  granted
    leave to remain as a refugee on 22 December 2011. The couple married on
    11 January 2014 and the Respondent acknowledged in the  refusal  letter
    that this is a genuine and  subsisting  relationship.  The  Appellant's
    application to remain on the basis of the marriage was refused  because
    the Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant met  the  financial
    requirements of the Immigration Rules or that there were insurmountable
    obstacles preventing the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  continuing  their
    family  life  outside  the  United  Kingdom.  The  Respondent  was  not
    satisfied that there  were  any  exceptional  circumstances  warranting
    consideration by the Secretary of State of a grant of leave  to  remain
    outside the requirements of the Immigration Rules by virtue of  Article
    8 of the European Convention.

 5. In her appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the  Appellant  asserted  that
    the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with  the  law  or  the
    Immigration Rules, that an error  had  been  made  in  calculating  the
    Appellant's income and that she met the financial requirements  of  the
    Rules and that discretion should have been exercised differently.

 6. In a lengthy skeleton argument submitted for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing by Ms Bayoumi the  assertion  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law or the Immigration Rules was  not  pursued.  It
    was not suggested that the Appellant met the financial requirements  of
    the Rules and the Appellant's witness statement submitted for the First-
    tier Tribunal  hearing  confirmed  that  she  did  not.  There  was  no
    suggestion in the skeleton  argument  that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles in the way of the couple continuing their family life in  the
    Philippines. It was asserted  that  the  Respondent  had  not  properly
    assessed the Appellant's circumstances under Article 8.

 7. At the First-tier Tribunal hearing it was accepted by  the  Appellant's
    representative that she did not meet the financial requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules and, in accordance with  the  skeleton  argument  the
    Judge was asked to consider the  Appellant's  appeal  under  Article  8
    outside the Rules. There  was  no  assertion  either  in  the  skeleton
    argument or in the submissions recorded that there were  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing in the Philippines  such  as  would
    engage paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM.

 8. In his decision and reasons the Judge notes that  submissions  focussed
    on Article 8 but nevertheless considered whether the Appellant met  the
    requirements of the Rules and found that she did not either in terms of
    the  financial  requirements  or  in  accordance  with  paragraph  EX.1
    (paragraphs 48-52 of the decision). The Judge went on to find that  the
    Respondent's decision was not a disproportionate  interference  in  the
    Appellant's family and private life.

 9. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  assert  that  the  Judge's
    approach to proportionality was flawed.

Submissions

10. For the Appellant Ms Bayoumi referred to the grounds of  appeal  saying
    that the core of the issue was the Judge's approach to proportionality.
    Having made findings that the Sponsor suffered in  re-establishing  his
    life in the United Kingdom and the impact of the Appellant's removal on
    the Sponsor's  well-being  insufficient  weight  was  attached  to  the
    evidence given on the impact of the Appellant's removal. It is all well
    and good to say the Appellant could return to the  Philippines  but  he
    has not adequately assessed the impact of a  temporary  separation.  Ms
    Bayoumi accepted that there was  no  medical  evidence  submitted.  The
    Judge's analysis of proportionality at paragraph 70 is not  sufficient.
    The Judge has not taken into account the positive factors  outlined  in
    section 117B.  The  couple  both  speak  English  and  are  financially
    independent. This is an error of law.

11. For the Respondent Mr Richards said that  the  Judge  was  required  to
    consider matters by reference to Article 8. He has  done  all  that  is
    required of him. He has found that  it  is  not  unreasonable  for  the
    Sponsor to go  to  the  Philippines.  He  has  looked  at  the  medical
    difficulties and given  them  due  weight.  The  Judge  gives  positive
    comments at paragraph 67 to the Sponsor's abilities.  He  has  overcome
    difficulties previously. He is quite capable of going to  live  in  the
    Philippines. The Judge has come to a conclusion that was open  to  him.
    So far as the positive factor in section 117B referred to by Ms Bayoumi
    is concerned it is not clear that the couple are self sufficient.  They
    do not meet  the  financial  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Section 117B does not presume to be exhaustive in any event.

12. I reserved my decision.

Error of law

13. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  taken  together  with  the
    grant of permission and Ms  Bayoumi's  submissions  are  clear.  It  is
    asserted that the Judge's approach to proportionality was flawed so  as
    to  amount  to  a  material  error  of  law  and  indeed  that  in  his
    proportionality assessment the Judge has failed to  take  into  account
    matters that he is  statutorily  required  to  consider  by  virtue  of
    section 117B.

14. The facts relevant to this appeal are detailed above. The Appellant  is
    a Filipino national who at the time of the application under appeal had
    been in the United Kingdom for 4 years with limited  leave  to  remain.
    The Sponsor is a refugee who has lived in  the  united  Kingdom  for  7
    years. They married in the United Kingdom in January  2014.  They  live
    together  and  there  is  no  doubt  about  the  genuineness  of  their
    relationship. They do  not  meet  the  financial  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. It is accepted that they have established  a  family
    life together and that they have a private life in the  United  Kingdom
    and that the Respondent's decision is a potential interference in  that
    family and private life of sufficient gravity to engage the Convention.
    The only  issue  is  whether  the  decision  is  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim of effective immigration control.

15. The Judge deals with proportionality at paragraphs  62  to  71  of  his
    decision. In doing so the Judge examines the issues in  a  demonstrably
    comprehensive way. He considers whether it  would  be  unreasonable  to
    expect the Sponsor to travel with the Appellant and finds that it would
    not. In doing so he takes into  account  the  Sponsor's  mental  health
    noting in doing so that there is no supporting medical  evidence,  that
    the Sponsor is not taking any medication and has not done so  since  he
    got married and that he does not see the doctor on a regular basis. The
    Judge accepts that the Sponsor has had mental health issues in the past
    but also notes that the relationship with and stability brought by  the
    Appellant has brought about a substantial improvement in the  Sponsor's
    mental health. The Judge finds that it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
    Sponsor to accompany the Appellant to the Philippines but if  he  chose
    not to do so that he has the support of his  church  community.  In  my
    judgement the assertion that the Judge failed to take into  account  or
    to take into account adequately the  impact  on  the  Sponsor's  mental
    health of  accompanying  his  wife  to  the  Philippines  or  of  being
    separated from her is not made out.

16. Ms Bayoumi's assertion in submissions that the  Judge  failed  to  take
    account of the positive factors in section 117B cannot succeed.  Whilst
    the Judge does not refer to section 117B at all in his decision  it  is
    clear that he has conducted a thorough proportionality assessment.  Had
    the Judge specifically considered section 117B he would no  doubt  have
    found that the Appellant speaks English. In the context of her  failure
    to meet the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules  a  finding
    that she was financially  independent  may  not  however  have  been  a
    foregone conclusion. The Judge would  also  have  been  bound  to  give
    little weight to the Appellant's private life as it was established  at
    a time when her immigration status  was  precarious  (see  AM  (section
    117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC). The Judge found that if the Sponsor
    chose to go to the Philippines with the  Appellant  their  family  life
    would continue and that it was not unreasonable to expect him to do so.



17. In my judgement any error of  law  that  may  have  arisen  though  the
    Judge's failure to specifically refer to section 117B was not  material
    since his assessment of proportionality is comprehensive and could  not
    have been materially affected by section 117B considerations. The Judge
    has considered the Appellant's circumstances, he has found after proper
    consideration of the Sponsor's mental health  issues  that  it  is  not
    unreasonable  to  expect  him  to  accompany  the  Appellant   to   the
    Philippines and he has reached the  conclusion  that  the  Respondent's
    decision is proportionate to the legitimate aim of immigration control.
    This is a fully reasoned conclusion that was patently open to the Judge
    to make. The grounds of appeal assert a material error of  law  but  in
    reality only amount to a disagreement with the Judge's conclusion.

Summary

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law. This appeal is dismissed.



Signed:     Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
