

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/33379/2014
                                                               IA/33384/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Stoke                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On : 6 July 2015                     |On 9 July 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             bilkees rashid shah
                           syed hiba abid andrabi
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Lee, instructed by Salam & Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Ms  Shah's
    appeal, and that of her daughter, against the  decision  to  refuse  to
    vary their leave and to remove them from the United Kingdom.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent and Ms Shah and  her  daughter  as
    the appellants, reflecting their positions as they were in  the  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellants are citizens of India born on 24  December  1976  and  7
    July 1999 respectively, and are mother and daughter.  They  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 18 February 2014 with leave to enter as  visitors
    until 4 August 2014. Prior to the expiry of  their  leave,  on  5  June
    2014, they applied for leave to remain on the basis of their family and
    private  life  with  the  first  appellant's  husband  and  the  second
    appellant's father, Syed Abid Ali Andrabi, the sponsor,  who  had  been
    granted discretionary leave to remain in the United Kingdom  until  May
    2016 on the basis of exercising access rights  to  his  other  daughter
    from a different relationship.

 4. The history of the first appellant's relationship with the  sponsor  is
    of relevance and I therefore set  it  out  at  this  point.  The  first
    appellant and her husband, the sponsor, were  married  in  an  arranged
    marriage in August 1998 and had their daughter, the  second  appellant,
    in July 1999. Owing to tensions  between  the  families  of  the  first
    appellant and her husband, arising as a result of the first appellant's
    family being very conservative whereas  her  husband's  were  not,  the
    couple separated in 2007 and divorced in September  2008.  The  sponsor
    moved to South Africa and married a South  African  national  and  they
    moved together to the United Kingdom and had a daughter,  Safiya,  born
    in May 2009. That relationship broke down and the  couple  divorced  in
    January 2010. The sponsor was able to remain in the United Kingdom with
    discretionary leave on the basis of his relationship with his  daughter
    Safiya who had indefinite leave to remain in the UK. The appellants  in
    the meantime were living with the first appellant's parents in  Kashmir
    but were finding it difficult because of their  conservative  attitude.
    The first appellant then made efforts to reconcile  with  the  sponsor.
    The appellants applied for visit visas in 2012 which were refused,  but
    following an appeal were later granted in February 2014. Whilst waiting
    for the appeal the  first  appellant  and  the  sponsor  re-married  in
    secret, in Kashmir, on 10 July 2013 and the  sponsor  returned  to  the
    United Kingdom. The appellants  travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom  in
    February 2014 as visitors intending to return to India, but decided  to
    stay and they then made their applications for leave to remain.

 5. The appellants' applications were refused by the respondent on 6 August
    2014 on the basis that they could not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules under Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE and that  there
    were no exceptional circumstances justifying a grant of  leave  outside
    the Rules.

 6. The appellants appealed against that decision  and  their  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa on 29 October 2014, where
    the sole issue was Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules,  it  having
    been accepted that they could not meet the requirements of  the  Rules.
    The first appellant, in her evidence, said that she could not return to
    India and make a spouse application from there, as her parents did  not
    recognise her marriage and in any  case  she  was  having  difficulties
    conceiving due to medical problems and needed to be with  her  husband.
    Her husband used to visit India every year after their divorce, to  see
    his daughter and in 2009 he made an unsuccessful  application  for  his
    daughter to join him in the United Kingdom.  The judge also heard  from
    the second appellant and the sponsor, who gave evidence  that  his  two
    daughters got on very well together and that Safiya would come to  stay
    with them twice a week.  The  judge  found  that  family  life  existed
    between the sponsor and the appellants and, following the approach in R
    (Razgar) v SSHD (2004) UKHL 27, concluded that the appellants'  removal
    would be disproportionate and in breach of Article 8.  She  accordingly
    allowed the appeals.

 7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the respondent
    on the grounds that the judge had failed  to  explain  what  compelling
    factors had led her to allow the appeal and had failed to explain  what
    contrary factors had been weighed in the balancing exercise.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on 7 January 2015.

Appeal Hearing

 9. At the hearing Mr McVeety submitted  that  there  was  nothing  in  the
    judge's decision to show that she  had  considered  any  countervailing
    factors or that she had given any thought to the more recent  case  law
    regarding to the best interests of the children since ZH Tanzania  (FC)
    v SSHD [2100] UKSC 4. There was a complete  failure  to  give  adequate
    reasons for allowing the appeal.

10. Ms Lee submitted that the grounds of appeal were mere disagreement  and
    that the judge had made detailed findings and considered  all  relevant
    factors. The findings that she made were open  to  her.  There  was  no
    error of law.

11. Mr McVeety reiterated his previous submissions in his response.

Consideration and Findings

Error of Law

12. I find myself in agreement with Mr McVeety that  there  is  a  lack  of
    adequate reasoning by the judge in reaching the conclusion that she did
    and I do not agree that the grounds  of  appeal  simply  demonstrate  a
    disagreement with her decision.

13. Reading the decision as a whole it seems to me that, whilst  the  judge
    stated at paragraph 44 that the best interests of  the  child  did  not
    always determine the case, that is precisely what occurred in this case
    and that appears to have been the judge's sole reason for allowing  the
    appeals.

14. As regards the finding itself that the best  interests  of  the  second
    appellant were to remain in the United Kingdom, Ms Lee pointed out that
    that finding had not been challenged in the grounds. That  does  appear
    to be the case, although I agree with Mr  McVeety  that  the  reasoning
    behind the judge's conclusion does not take account of recent case  law
    and shows a failure to consider how the burden of proof had been met by
    the appellants on the evidence available, in that respect, pursuant  to
    the guidance in MK (section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone  [2015]
    UKUT 00223. There was no regard by the judge to the factors referred to
    in EV (Philippines) & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874 in assessing the best interests of a child. That is
    particularly relevant in this case in that  the  second  appellant  had
    lived in the United Kingdom for only eight months at the  time  of  the
    appeal hearing, had only known her half-sister for  that  short  period
    and had not lived with her father for 7 years, whilst she had spent  15
    years of  her  life  in  India  and  was  attending  school  there  and
    presumably had developed close friendships there, albeit that  she  did
    not like living with her grandparents.

15. Having, in any event, found that it was in the best  interests  of  the
    second appellant to live with both parents in the  United  Kingdom  the
    judge  plainly  failed  to  consider  any  countervailing  factors   in
    conducting the Article 8 proportionality balancing exercise and  failed
    to explain what compelling circumstances there were to justify a  grant
    of leave outside the Rules. That was particularly relevant in light  of
    the above considerations and in light of the following observations  of
    the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines):

    "34. In determining whether or not, in a case such as the present,  the
    need for immigration  control  outweighs  the  best  interests  of  the
    children, it is necessary to determine the  relative  strength  of  the
    factors which make it in their best interests to remain here; and  also
    to take account of any factors that point the other way.

 1. A decision as to what is in the best interests of children will  depend
    on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the  length  of  time
    that they have been here; (c) how long they have been in education; (c)
    what stage their education has reached; (d) to what  extent  they  have
    become distanced from the country to which it  is  proposed  that  they
    return; (e) how renewable their connection with it may be; (f) to  what
    extent they will have linguistic,  medical  or  other  difficulties  in
    adapting to life in that country; and  (g)  the  extent  to  which  the
    course proposed will interfere with their family life or  their  rights
    (if they have any) as British citizens.

 1. In a sense the tribunal is concerned with how emphatic an answer  falls
    to be given to the question: is it in the best interests of  the  child
    to remain? The longer the child has been here, the  more  advanced  (or
    critical) the stage of his education, the  looser  his  ties  with  the
    country in question, and the more deleterious the consequences  of  his
    return, the greater the weight that falls into one side of the  scales.
    If it is overwhelmingly in the child's best interests  that  he  should
    not return, the need to maintain immigration control may well  not  tip
    the balance. By contrast if it is in  the  child's  best  interests  to
    remain, but only on balance (with some factors pointing the other way),
    the result may be the opposite.

 1. In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken  into  account
    the strong weight to be given  to  the  need  to  maintain  immigration
    control in pursuit of the economic well-being of the  country  and  the
    fact that, ex hypothesi, the applicants have no entitlement to  remain.
    The immigration history of the parents may also  be  relevant  e.g.  if
    they are overstayers, or have acted deceitfully."

16. The judge, at paragraph 40, stated that she had regard to Section  117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and  at  paragraphs
    40 to 42 considered factors which she did not accept as  compelling  or
    in themselves sufficient to outweigh the public interest. At paragraphs
    43 to 45 she then  concluded,  as  already  discussed,  that  the  best
    interests of the child were  such  that  the  appellants'  removal  was
    disproportionate. What she failed to do, however,  was  to  demonstrate
    that she had placed in the balance and addressed  the  various  counter
    factors weighing against the appellants, such as the  short  period  of
    time that they had been in the United Kingdom, the fact that  they  had
    lived apart from the sponsor for 7 years, the fact that they  had  come
    here only as visitors and the fact that the sponsor's status  was  only
    temporary and, as considered in AM (S 117B) Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260,
    precarious. Neither was there any consideration of whether  or  not  it
    would be unreasonable  for  the  appellants  to  return  to  India  and
    continue their family life with the sponsor through visits, as had been
    the case previously, or for the sponsor to return with them. It is also
    significant that the judge considered as a  positive  factor  that  the
    appellants were both financially independent in that  they  were  being
    maintained by the sponsor. However, as  Mr  McVeety  pointed  out,  the
    sponsor was not able to maintain the appellants in accordance with  the
    financial requirements of the Immigration  Rules  as  his  income  fell
    below the required level.

17. For all those reasons I agree with  the  respondent  that  the  judge's
    decision contains errors of law and has to be set aside.  Both  parties
    agreed that the decision  could  simply  be  re-made  on  the  evidence
    available without a further hearing, since there was  no  challenge  to
    the facts.

Re-making the Decision

18. For the reasons given  above  I  find  that  the  appeals  have  to  be
    dismissed. Although the second appellant has stated that she wishes  to
    remain in the UK with her father and  half-sister  and  does  not  like
    living with her grandparents in India, the evidence falls well short of
    demonstrating that it is in her best interests to remain in the  United
    Kingdom, considering the limited amount of time  spent  in  the  United
    Kingdom with her father and half-sister  and  the  ties  that  she  has
    established in India. However, even accepting that her  best  interests
    do lie in remaining here with both parents and that her best  interests
    are a primary consideration,  there  are  various  significant  factors
    weighing against the appellants, as set out above.

19. Section 117B(1)  of  the  2002  Act  states  that  the  maintenance  of
    effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the  public   interest.   The
    appellants cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.  The
    sponsor is not able to maintain them to the level  required  under  the
    Rules and they cannot therefore  be  considered  as  being  financially
    independent. There is no evidence to show that it would be unreasonable
    for the appellants to return to India and  conduct  their  family  life
    with the sponsor through regular visits, as occurred previously. It is,
    alternatively, open to the sponsor to return to  India  with  them  and
    maintain his family life with  Safiya  through  visits  to  the  United
    Kingdom. Any fertility  treatment  the  couple  wish  to  have  can  be
    undertaken in India. The sponsor is  not  settled  here  but  only  has
    limited leave. If and when he becomes settled here, the appellants  can
    then apply to join him. The appellants, if not able to  live  with  the
    first appellant's parents,  are  able  to  stay  temporarily  with  the
    sponsor's  family  and  there  is  no  reason  why  they  cannot   live
    independently thereafter. The first  appellant  has  qualifications  in
    India and was in long-term employment prior to  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom and there is no reason why she could not resume that employment
    or find a new job on return and support herself and her  daughter  with
    the sponsor's assistance. The second  appellant  could  return  to  her
    school and resume her education there.

20.  In  all  the  circumstances  I  find  that  there  are  no  compelling
    circumstances justifying a grant of leave outside the Immigration Rule.
    I do not  accept  that  the  appellants'  removal  to  India  would  be
    disproportionate and I find that their removal to India would not be in
    breach of Article 8.

21. The appeals are therefore dismissed on all grounds.

DECISION

22. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an error
    on a point of law. The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  is  accordingly
    allowed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. I re-
    make the decision by dismissing  Ms  Shah's  appeal  and  that  of  her
    daughter.






                               Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
