
[pic]
IAC-TH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33201/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st September 2015                |On 18th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                               mr MODOU SANNEH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Parkin (Solicitor Advocate)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision promulgated on 19th March 2015,  the  appellant's  appeal
    against a decision to remove him from the United Kingdom, made  on  7th
    August 2014, was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Mailer  ("the
    judge").

2.   In brief  summary,  the  judge  found  that  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules ("the rules") were not met,  both  parties  accepting
    that paragraph 276ADE(vi) was engaged in the appeal.  The judge applied
    the rules in the form they took on and after 28th  July  2014.   Having
    weighed the evidence regarding  the  appellant's  ties  to  the  United
    Kingdom and regarding the presence of family  members  in  Gambia,  and
    having reviewed the Secretary of State's conclusion that there were  no
    circumstances warranting the grant of  leave  outside  the  rules,  the
    judge concluded that no Article 8 assessment was required  outside  the
    rules.  He took into account section 117A to C of the 2002 Act  in  his
    assessment.

3.   The appellant applied for permission to appeal on two grounds.   First,
    he contended that the application he made to  the  respondent  on  20th
    August 2010, when he applied for leave to  remain  outside  the  rules,
    required the judge on a proper analysis to apply the rules as they were
    before the changes introduced in July 2012.   The  Secretary  of  State
    refused him further leave in a decision made on 3rd October 2010  which
    did not attract a right of appeal (the appellant had no leave to remain
    at the time).  On 8th May 2012, the appellant sought a  reconsideration
    of that decision.  In due course, the Secretary of State responded in a
    letter dated 28th  July  2014  in  which  she  considered  the  earlier
    decision made in 2010, took into account paragraph 322(1) of the  rules
    and went on to assess the appellant's circumstances  in  the  light  of
    paragraph  A277C,  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE.   Her  overall
    conclusion was that the appellant was not entitled  to  any  leave  and
    that there were no compelling or compassionate circumstances warranting
    the grant of leave to him outside  the  rules.   As  noted  above,  the
    Secretary of State made a removal decision a few  days  later,  on  7th
    August 2014, the notice of decision in form IS.151B being served on the
    appellant on 11th August 2014.

4.   In the application for permission to appeal, the  removal  decision  is
    described as "the outcome of the initial refusal  ...  of  3rd  October
    2010", giving rise to the assertion that the earlier rules fell  to  be
    applied.

5.   In a second ground, which was advanced  on  the  basis  that  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) did, after all, fall to be applied, it  was  contended  that
    the judge failed to make a well-rounded assessment of  the  appellant's
    circumstances.  The judge failed to consider whether his familial ties,
    consisting of his parents in Gambia, were such that he might expect  to
    be supported on return.  The judge's findings in fact showed the extent
    of the ties established in the United Kingdom, their  strength  showing
    how diminished his ties in Gambia were.   The  appellant's  uncle  gave
    evidence at the  hearing  and  several  "testimonials"  were  provided,
    showing the appellant's work experience in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    strength of his ties in this country would prevent him from being  able
    to receive the  kind  of  support  he  would  require  in  Gambia,  "as
    identified by Ogundimu" (Ogundimu [2013] UKUT 60).

6.   Permission to appeal was granted on 19th May 2015.  In a response  from
    the Secretary of State under rule 24,  the  appeal  was  opposed.   The
    Secretary of State indicated that  she  would  submit  that  the  judge
    directed himself appropriately.  The removal decision made in July 2014
    was clearly a fresh decision and so, in the light of Singh  and  Khalid
    [2015] EWCA Civ 74, the relevant  rules  were  those  which  came  into
    effect on 28th July 2014.  The rules required  the  appellant  to  show
    very significant obstacles to his integration into Gambia.   The  judge
    had taken into account the evidence and made  clear  findings  of  fact
    regarding the appellant's relationship with his family  in  Gambia  and
    his presence there during his formative years.   The  judge's  decision
    contained no error of law.

7.   Mr Melvin handed up written  submissions  in  which  the  Secretary  of
    State's response was developed.  The judge's clear findings showed that
    there were no obstacles to the  appellant's  integration  into  Gambia.
    The  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  there  were  no   compelling
    circumstances warranting an assessment outside the rules.  It was clear
    that the judge applied the right rules, being those  in  force  on  the
    date of decision in August 2014.

Submissions on Error of Law

8.   Mr Parkin said that the judge applied the wrong version of  the  rules.
    The appellant's application for leave outside the rules, made in  2010,
    was refused in October that year.  Even though the Secretary  of  State
    made no "immigration decision" at the time, refusal of the  application
    was, nonetheless, a valid decision.  It was the appellant's  case  that
    the removal decision made in August 2014  arose  from  the  refusal  of
    leave in 2010 and could not properly be  treated  as  a  "stand  alone"
    decision.

9.   The decision to refuse leave in 2010 lay at the heart of the  case  and
    amounted to a substantive decision prior to the changes  to  the  rules
    introduced in July 2012.  Taking into account  the  guidance  given  in
    Singh and Khalid, the Secretary of State should have made her  decision
    in accordance with the pre-July 2012 rules.  This would have opened the
    way to a different proportionality assessment.  The removal decision in
    August 2014 was contingent on the 2010 application.

10.  So far as the second ground was concerned, the judge erred in  relation
    to the 2014 rules, if they fell to be applied.  There  was  no  rounded
    assessment and the judge placed  excessive  emphasis  on  family  ties.
    There was no proper assessment of  the  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    integration, should he be returned to Gambia.  There  was  insufficient
    on this aspect.

11.  Mr Melvin said that reliance was placed upon the rule 24  response  and
    the written submissions.  Neither ground had  merit.   So  far  as  the
    first was concerned, the judge correctly applied the rules  which  came
    into effect in July 2014.  The appellant had  been  without  any  leave
    since 2005.  He was unable to attach his case to a particular rule  and
    the decision was not made with the benefit of  transitional  provisions
    in the period between July and September 2012, identified by the  Court
    of Appeal in Singh and Khalid.  Applying YM (Uganda), the judge applied
    the rules in force as at the date of the hearing.

12.  So far as the second ground was concerned, the judge made  a  full,  in
    the round assessment in the light of the evidence available.   He  took
    into  account  the  last  grant  of  leave  in  2005,  considered   the
    appellant's circumstances, took into account the evidence regarding his
    ties in Gambia and had regard to the important fact that the  appellant
    was 21 years old when he left to  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    student.  The judge made a careful assessment of  the  family  ties  in
    both the United Kingdom and  Gambia.   His  decision  was  sustainable.
    There was no material error of law.

13.  Mr Parkin had nothing to add to his earlier submissions.

Findings and Conclusions on Error of Law

14.   I  am  grateful  to  the  two  representatives   for   their   careful
    submissions.

15.  I turn to the first ground.  I find that it has no merit.   Refusal  of
    the appellant's application for leave to remain outside the rules, in a
    decision made with no right of appeal  on  3rd  October  2010,  has  no
    substantive impact at all on  the  immigration  decision  made  by  the
    Secretary of State  on  7th  August  2014,  following  the  appellant's
    request that the earlier decision be reviewed.   The  earlier  decision
    was fully reasoned and the Secretary of State  had  regard  in  October
    2010 to the appellant's family and private  life  ties,  such  as  they
    were, and the absence of leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    decision made on 7th August 2014 and the explanatory letter dated  28th
    July 2014 show that an entirely freestanding and up-to-date  assessment
    was made following the appellant's request for a reconsideration of his
    case.  The Secretary of State took into account and applied the current
    rules, including paragraph A277C, Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.  As
    explained by the Court of Appeal in Singh and Khalid  and  also  in  YM
    (Uganda) [2014] EWCA Civ 1292, she was perfectly entitled to do so  and
    was doing no more and no  less  than  applying  the  general  principle
    established in the earlier case of Odelola [2009] UKHL 25.   There  was
    no requirement to explain the immigration decision giving rise  to  the
    present appeal by reference to the earlier rules in  force  before  the
    substantial changes introduced in July 2012 and July 2014.

16.  Similarly, the judge did not  err  in  law  in  having  regard  to  the
    current rules.  Indeed, it appears  that  both  parties  accepted  that
    paragraph 276ADE(vi), as amended with effect from 28th July 2014,  fell
    to be applied.  Whether or not there was in fact agreement between  the
    parties on this, the judge correctly identified the  relevant  rule  at
    paragraphs 106 and 107 of  the  decision.   The  appellant  could  only
    succeed if he were able to show that there would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration into Gambia, following his removal.   This
    was the correct starting point for the judge's assessment.

17.  So far as the second ground is concerned, which  was  advanced  on  the
    alternative basis that if paragraph 276ADE(vi) was the correct rule  to
    apply, there was, nonetheless, no well-rounded assessment, this too has
    no merit.  The decision has been prepared by an  extremely  experienced
    judge and the  assessment  he  made  of  the  evidence  before  him  is
    admirably clear and fully reasoned.

18.  The judge began by considering the extent of the  appellant's  ties  in
    Gambia, in the light of his contention that he would not be admitted to
    his parents' household and would be without means of  support.   In  so
    doing, he took into account evidence given by the appellant himself and
    by his uncle and his younger sister.  He properly took into account the
    appellant's immigration history and his presence in Gambia until he was
    21 years old.  The judge  also  took  into  account  and  assessed  the
    evidence regarding the appellant's ties in the United Kingdom  and  the
    presence here of several family members.

19.  The judge also had the Secretary of State's case clearly  in  mind,  as
    set out in the letter dated 28th July 2014.  He noted the clear adverse
    findings regarding Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the rules.   The
    Secretary of  State  considered  whether  there  were  any  exceptional
    circumstances warranting  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the  rules  and
    concluded that there were none.  The judge reached a similar conclusion
    that there were no compelling or  compassionate  circumstances  in  the
    case.  The final paragraphs of the  decision  show  that  he  correctly
    applied the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo)  &  Ors
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  No assessment outside the rules was  required  as
    all relevant considerations had been weighed under them.   The  judge's
    approach is entirely consistent  with  further  guidance  given  by  Mr
    Justice Edis in Sunassee [2015] EWHC 1604 (Admin), at paragraphs 33 and
    36 of the judgment, where the current state of the law  is  summarised.
    In the present appeal, the judge was entitled to conclude that no  more
    was required and that the appellant could not succeed under  Article  8
    of the Human Rights Convention.  The decision shows  that  he  did  not
    give undue weight to the ties the appellant has here or in Gambia.   He
    gave due weight  to  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  circumstances
    overall, in relation to  both  countries,  and  reached  a  sustainable
    conclusion that the requirements of the rules were not met and that the
    appeal fell to be dismissed.

20.  In summary,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  no
    material error of law and shall stand.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



ANONYMITY

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

This is a fee exempt appeal.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
