
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33164/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2nd September, 2013                        |On 27th September, 2013      |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            JAMAL ABDULLAH BASHIR
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The appellant in person






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent is a citizen of Somalia who was  born  on  5th  January,
    1978.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on  6th  September,  1996,  and
    claimed asylum which was refused by the respondent on  4th  May,  2000.
    However on 29th September, 2000, the appellant granted  the  respondent
    exceptional leave to enter until 29th September, 2004.  The  respondent
    made an in time application for further leave and on  5th  June,  2005,
    was granted indefinite leave to remain.

2.   On 2nd September, 2006, the respondent was convicted of  wounding  with
    intent to cause grievous bodily harm and sentenced to  a  term  of  two
    years' imprisonment.  He was served with notice of intention to make  a
    deportation order against him on 13th  September,  2006,  and  on  10th
    February, 2007, was served with a deportation order.   The  signing  of
    the order revoked his grant of indefinite leave  to  remain.   On  both
    29th May, 2007, and 11th June, 2007, the respondent signed a disclaimer
    indicating that he wished to leave the United  Kingdom  and  waive  his
    right of appeal.

3.   On 11th September, 2007, the respondent was removed to Kenya  with  the
    intention of him taking an onward flight to Somalia.   However  he  was
    returned to the United Kingdom by  the  Kenyan  authorities,  since  no
    onward flight was available. On 11th February 200,8 he signed a further
    disclaimer, indicating that he wished to be moreover  from  the  United
    Kingdom without awaiting for an outcome on his appeal.  It appears that
     nothing further happened.

4.   On 28th January, 2010, the respondent submitted  representations  which
    were  accepted  by  the  appellant  as  an  application  to  revoke   a
    deportation  order.   He   also   submitted   various   representations
    concerning the claims that he was suffering  from  ill-health.  He  was
    given an opportunity to provide full details at a  screening  interview
    and a substantive asylum interview on 11th November 2010.  In  addition
    to claiming a fear of return to Somalia, he claims that he suffers from
    breathing difficulties, mental  health  problems,  depression,  alcohol
    addiction and pain as a result of a broken arm.

5.    On  18th  January,  2011,  the  application  for  revocation  of   his
    deportation order was refused with an in-country right of appeal.   The
    respondent lodged an appeal on 3rd February,  2013,  but  this  refusal
    decision and the appeal were withdrawn by the appellant on 14th  March,
    2011, for further consideration.

6.   Following further consideration, the application for the revocation  of
    the deportation order was again refused by the appellant on  25th  May,
    201,1 and the respondent lodged an appeal against this decision on 15th
    June, 2011.  Again the  appeal  and  decision  were  withdrawn  by  the
    respondent on 27th June, 2011, for further consideration.  Having given
    the matter further consideration, the appellant refused to  revoke  the
    deportation order on 25th October, 2011, again generating an in-country
    right of appeal.  The  respondent  lodged  Notice  of  Appeal  on  14th
    November, 2011.

7.   The appeal was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colyer  on  3rd
    January, 2012. She dismissed the respondent's appeal, but permission to
    appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  and  the  Upper  Tribunal
    remitted the appeal to be reheard by the First-tier  Tribunal,  because
    of errors of law in the earlier determination.  The matter was heard by
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Osborne  on  31st  May,  2013  and  in  her
    determination dated 18th June,  2013,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    allowed the respondent's appeal on asylum and  humanitarian  protection
    grounds and allowed the respondent's human rights appeal under  Article
    3 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights.

8.   The appellant challenged the decision on three grounds although  ground
    1 and ground 2 were effectively the same. The grounds of  appeal  argue
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to give adequate  reasons
    for departing from the country guidance case of AM and Others (Somalia)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  UKUT  445  and  in
    particular at paragraphs 366, 370 and 371. the judge also made findings
    in respect of the respondent's mental state despite the fact that there
    was no medical evidence before her.

9.    At  the  hearing  today  before  me  the  respondent  did  not  appear
    initially.  He arrived late.

10.  I carefully explained the purpose of the hearing to the respondent  and
    that I would not interfere with the decision of the First Tier Tribunal
    Judge unless I was satisfied that it contain an error  on  a  point  of
    law.

11.   The appellant was represented by a Home Office Presenting Officer  who
    suggested  that  at  paragraph  81  of  the  determination,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Osborne  had  suggested  that  it  was  clear  from  the
    background information that Al-Shabaab operate in limited areas on  the
    outskirts of Mogadishu and  still  retain  control  of  certain  areas.
    However there was no objective evidence before her which could have led
    to that conclusion and the judge does not indicate where  she  obtained
    that evidence.  The  evidence  contained  within  the  decision  in  AM
    suggests that this organisation is not  in  control  although  they  do
    together with  other  militias  move  into  some  areas  at  night.   I
    explained this to the respondent who  appeared  to  understand  it  but
    disagreed.

12.  The second challenge was effectively the same point, but  made  not  in
    relation to the asylum claim but in relation to  the  Article  3  human
    rights appeal. The  last  challenge  criticised  paragraph  55  of  the
    judge's determination, where she foud that there is  a  risk  that  the
    respondent's state of health could deteriorate further.  She refered to
    Dr  Hung's  report,  describing  the  extremely  limited  mental  heath
    facilities throughout Somalia, but there was no medical evidence before
    her suggesting that the appellant was suffering  any  psychological  or
    other difficulties.  I explained these submissions to the respondent.

13.  He told me that the judge had not  made  any  error.   He  was  in  the
    United Kingdom in "a state of limbo".  His village is  gone.   "I  will
    have to go back", he said.  He told me that  since  2006  he  had  been
    moved so often that he cannot collect all the evidence he needs to  put
    before the court.

14.  The appellant said that he wanted to go "home"  voluntarily.   I  again
    explained the purpose of today's hearing,  summarised  the  appellant's
    submissions and asked him if there was anything further that he  wished
    to say.  He told me that the Home Office had "punished" him badly.   He
    again said that he wanted to leave the United Kingdom and "go home".

15.  I have concluded that the judge did err in law.  The judge did fail  to
    properly consider and apply AM.  There  was  no  credible  up  to  date
    evidence placed before her which would have allowed the judge  to  make
    the findings she did in respect of the respondent's mental health.

16.   I drew Mr Mangion's attention to paragraph  7  of  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement which provides as follows:

         "7.1     Where under Section 12(1) of the 2007  Act  proceeding  on
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal the Upper Tribunal finds that the
             making of the decision concerned involved  the  making  of  an
             error on a point of law the Upper Tribunal may set  aside  the
             decision and if it does so must either remit the case  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal under Section 12(2)(b)(i)  or  proceed  in
             accordance with the relevant practice directions to remake the
             decision under Section 12(2)(d)(ii).


         7.2  The Upper Tribunal was likely on each such occasion to proceed
             to remake the decision instead of remitting the  case  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that


             (a)  the effect of the error has been  to  deprive  the  party
                  before the Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
                  for that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the
                  First-tier Tribunal or


             (b)  the nature and extent of any  judicial  fact  finding  is
                  necessary in order for the decision in the  appeal  to  be
                  remade is  such  that  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in Rule 2 it is appropriate to remit the case to
                  the First-tier Tribunal.


         7.3  Remaking rather than remitting  will  nevertheless  constitute
             the normal approach to determining appeals where an  error  of
             law is found even if some further fact finding is necessary."

17.  I am  satisfied  that  this  is  a  case  which  falls  squarely  under
    paragraph 7 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statement,  given  the
    length of time the parties would have to wait  for  the  matter  to  be
    relisted before me in North Shields.   Conversely  it  could  be  heard
    relatively speedily by the First-tier  Tribunal  and  in  view  of  the
    overriding objective informing the onward conduct  of  this  appeal,  I
    have decided that the appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    hearing afresh before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Osborne or First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer.

18.    I specifically draw the attention of the Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department to the expressed desire of the respondent to leave  the
    United Kingdom and to return, "home".  I hope that steps will be  taken
    to assist the respondent to achieve this, should that  be  his  genuine
    wish, and that those steps are  taken  without  delay;  it  is  in  the
    interest of all concerned that they should be.






Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
