
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/33344/2014
                                                               ia/21184/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 February 2016                  |On 3 May 2016                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               shamaila ashraf
                             muhammad bin ashraf
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Dr Morgan, instructed by Morgan Mark Solicitors

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-Tier Tribunal. I find that no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case that give rise to the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant in  this  appeal  is  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the
    Respondents were the Appellants before the First-tier Tribunal. For the
    sake of clarity I  refer  to  the  Appellant  in  this  appeal  as  the
    Secretary of State and the Respondents as the Claimants respectively.

2.   The first Claimant is the mother of the  second  Claimant.   She  is  a
    national of Pakistan as is her son.  They arrived in the United Kingdom
    in March 2010 and she had entry  clearance  to  accompany  her  parents
    valid from 11 June 2008 until 11 June 2010.  The second Claimant had  a
    visa to accompany her for two years.  On 18 May 2010 the first Claimant
    made an application for further leave to remain. That  application  was
    refused and her appeal was heard by Immigration Judge Gillespie  on  17
    November 2010. The appeal was dismissed.  On  11  May  2012  the  first
    Claimant made a further application for leave to remain on the basis of
    her rights under Article 8 ECHR. On 19 May  2013  her  application  for
    judicial review was compromised by way of a consent order in which  the
    Secretary  of  State  agreed  to  reconsider   her   application.   The
    application was refused on 19 August 2014.

3.   The Claimants appealed against that decision and the appeal  was  heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge George who  allowed  their  appeals  in  a
    decision promulgated on 1 April 2015.  She allowed  the  appeals  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  The Secretary of
    State took issue with that decision and sought permission to appeal  on
    the basis that the judge failed to consider the Immigration Rules as an
    expression of the views  of  the  Secretary  of  State  and  adopted  a
    haphazard approach towards Section 117.  It  was  also  said  that  the
    principles set out in EV (Philippines) & Others v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 were not  properly  applied
    and that the judge failed  to  have  regard  to  the  guidance  of  the
    Tribunal in Azimi-Moayed & Others with regard to the best interests  of
    the child. The fourth ground is that the judge failed properly to  make
    findings in accordance with the case of Devaseelan v Secretary of State
    (Second Appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial  Effect)  Sri  Lanka  [2002]
    UKIAT 00702.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cruthers
    on the basis that arguable errors of law had arisen in relation to  the
    alleged  failure  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  factor  into   the
    assessment whether the appeals could have succeeded pursuant to the new
    Rules. It was also considered arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had
    erred in disregarding the first Claimant's immigration history  in  the
    assessment in relation to the second Claimant.

5.   The case came before the Upper Tier  Tribunal  in  order  to  establish
    whether or not there was an error of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier  Tribunal.  The  hearing  took  place  on  28  September  2015.  I
    determined that there was an error of law in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal. My findings were at [26] to [30]:

         "26. The first Claimant entered the UK on 6 March of 2010  and  her
         visa was valid until 11 June 2010. The second Claimant also  had  a
         visa which was valid for two years. It is not clear from the papers
         when exactly it expired although I note the Judge Gillespie  stated
         it was in mid-2012. The first  Claimant  made  an  application  for
         leave to remain on 18 May 2010 which was refused on 6 August  2010.
         She appealed in time and her appeal was dismissed  on  17  November
         2010. She did not apply for further leave to remain  until  11  May
         2012. Hence since the expiry of her leave under section 3C  of  the
         1971 Act on 18 January 2011 she has been here unlawfully. In AM  (S
         117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT  0260  the  Upper  Tribunal  held  that  a
         person's immigration status  is  "precarious"  if  their  continued
         presence in the UK will be dependent upon their obtaining a further
         grant of leave. It is clear therefore, that the  Claimants  private
         lives in the UK were  established  whilst  they  were  here  either
         unlawfully or precariously. The Judge was obliged therefore to have
         regard to the considerations in section 117B (4) and  (5)  and  did
         not do so. The Judge did not identify and  analyse  the  provisions
         concerned.  It is not possible to infer that it was conducted.  The
         Judge refers at paragraph  38   of  the  decision  that  the  first
         Claimant was an overstayer  but  concludes  that  because  she  was
         actively seeking lawful leave this was not  to  be  regarded  as  a
         "countervailing consideration of sufficient force to  outweigh  the
         detailed factors" to which she had already referred.  There was  no
         acknowledgement in this passage or otherwise that the  entirety  of
         the Claimants' private life in the United Kingdom  was  established
         during a period when their immigration  status  was  precarious  or
         unlawful. This was clearly a material error of law because had  the
         Judge properly applied the relevant provisions  and  conducted  the
         required exercise she would have been obliged to find  that  little
         weight should be accorded to the Claimant's private lives.

         27.   Grounds 2 and 3 can be dealt with together as they relate  to
         the First-tier Tribunal's analysis of the  best  interests  of  the
         second Claimant. Ground 2 asserts that the First-tier Tribunal  did
         not assess the best interests of the child in the  context  of  the
         proper factual matrix, namely that the first Claimant did not  have
         the right to remain in the UK. Ground 2 asserts that the First-tier
         Tribunal erred in failing to have regard to the young  age  of  the
         second Claimant in the proportionality exercise.

         28.  It is clear from the consistent jurisprudence  of  the  higher
         courts that the best interests of a child are an integral  part  of
         the proportionality assessment under article 8  ECHR  and  a  child
         must not be  blamed  for  matters  for  which  he  or  she  is  not
         responsible, such as the conduct of a parent (ZH  (Tanzania  [2011]
         UKSC4, Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]
         UKSC 74)).   Further, the best interests of the  child  are  to  be
         determined by reference to the child alone without reference to the
         immigration history or status of either  parent  (EV  (Philippines)
         and others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA
         Civ 874).

         29.  The First-tier Tribunal stated at paragraph 37, in considering
         the second Claimant's best interests, "the  fact  that  the  second
         appellant is in the UK unlawfully is not  his  making  and  I  have
         taken that into account when coming to this conclusion". I  do  not
         consider this to be a misdirection in the light  of  the  case  law
         summarised above. The Judge is, as I understand  it,  stating  that
         the second Claimant is not to be blamed for his adverse immigration
         history in an assessment of his best interests. That is  a  correct
         statement of the law.

         30.  However, in failing to acknowledge that the new  Rules  should
         be given greater weight than as merely a  starting  point  for  the
         consideration of proportionality and in  further  failing  to  find
         that little weight should be accorded  to  the  Claimants'  private
         lives, the Judge did not give proper weight to the need to maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of  the
         country. The Judge did not assess  whether  it  was  reasonable  to
         expect the second Claimant to follow  the  first  Claimant  to  the
         country   of   origin   applying   the   proper   public   interest
         considerations."



The Hearing

6.   At the resumed hearing I  received  documentation  in  the  form  of  a
    further bundle from the Claimants, a re-amended chronology and skeleton
    arguments from Dr Morgan and Mr Melvin.   I  heard  evidence  from  the
    first Claimant and her mother which I summarise here.

7.   Dr Morgan called Ms Ashraf and she adopted her  witness  statements  in
    the Claimants' bundles.  She said that she was aware  that  her  family
    were hoping to settle in the United Kingdom in 2006 and  2007  and  she
    did not want to come with them because she was in love  and  wanted  to
    stay with her boyfriend.  She met him in college and decided  to  marry
    but their families were against it and they decided to  run  away  from
    home.  Her boyfriend did not seek the approval of his family and it was
    hidden from both their families.  She  did  not  know  anyone  else  in
    Pakistan who had done this.  It was a love marriage.  Her  husband  had
    his own business.  She  did  not  study  after  the  marriage  but  got
    pregnant and gave birth to the second Claimant.  Her husband was  happy
    when the child was born but not so after that.  The marriage  went  bad
    because there was fighting between them and things went  downhill.   He
    said he wanted to go back to his parents and his parents said  that  he
    had to leave her.  Her husband had never said that he wanted to come to
    the United Kingdom. He arranged for  the  second  Claimant's  visa  and
    there was no lawyer involved.  They had agreed that he would say to the
    High Commission that he  would  support  her  and  that  she  had  sole
    responsibility for the second Claimant.  She had advice from her  uncle
    in the United Kingdom.  There was no discussion about  the  divorce  in
    Pakistan.  When she came here her husband completely cut off.  She  was
    never interviewed by the High Commission but had seen  the  application
    before which included a court document which was at pages 7  and  8  of
    the bundle.  Her husband did not say there that  the  relationship  was
    over.  Dr Morgan asked what the relationship was with  her  husband  in
    the United Kingdom and she said she told him that she would go back  if
    she did not  get  the  visa.  She  had  wanted  him  to  say  that  the
    relationship could continue  if  they  would  went  back  but  he  said
    nothing.  Her son needed a dad and her husband did not care  about  her
    when she came to the United Kingdom.  There was no contact at all.

8.   At the hearing in November 2010 she was  represented  by  a  barrister.
    She did not give evidence but there was a witness  statement.   If  she
    had been asked in 2010 how her marriage was she would  have  said  that
    everything was  fine.   It  was  put  to  her  that  Immigration  Judge
    Gillespie thought her husband was waiting for her in Pakistan  to  take
    her and the second Claimant back and she was  asked  whether  that  was
    correct.  She said that was not right.  When she gave  evidence  before
    Judge George she was represented by a barrister.  She was  asked  about
    the marriage and she told that court what she  told  this  court.   Her
    barrister and the  Home  Office  representative  asked  her  about  her
    husband.  The second Claimant was 11 months old when  she  brought  him
    here and he was now nearly 7 years old.  She was living with her  uncle
    and all her family were living with her uncle when they arrived.  Since
    her mother got a house she was living there with her parents.  She  and
    her parents looked after the second Claimant. Her father was working in
    a factory.  She was not permitted to work but would if she could.   Her
    sister and brother were working in a factory.  Dr Morgan asked  if  she
    was to return to Pakistan how  she  would  see  herself  looking  after
    second Claimant.  She said if she  did  not  have  family  it  was  not
    alright.  All her mother's family were in the United Kingdom.  She  had
    lived in Faisalabad when in Pakistan but had not lived  anywhere  else.
    She had never lived away from her parents before and had never lived on
    her own.

9.   Mr Melvin in cross-examination asked whether all of her mother's  seven
    sisters and brothers lived in the United Kingdom and she said they did.
     She said her father was an only child and  her  father  did  not  have
    extended family and her mother's family was all in the  UK.   They  all
    lived in Thetford.  There were five sisters and two had passed away and
    the brothers were still alive.  Nobody had gone back  to  Pakistan  and
    she said that her mother had returned last year  for  a  holiday.   Her
    father also went and they stayed at  a  hotel  in  Faisalabad  visiting
    friends, maybe her dad's friends.  They did no other travelling and she
    did not know whether they had visited any other friends.

10.  She and her husband were married in  a  courthouse  and  her  husband's
    friend was the only witness.  Before marriage she was studying business
    and accountancy.  She did not complete accountancy but did  complete  a
    computing course.  She did not return to college  after  the  marriage.
    After the marriage they lived in a rented room and the address  was  on
    the application.  She was married for two years before  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom and never  met  her  husband's  family.   Her  husband's
    family were not aware that they got married.  When asked how he managed
    to keep that secret for two years she  said  it  was  only  after  they
    argued that he told them.  He told them that they  were  married  after
    her son was born which was after a year.  She told  her  parents  about
    the marriage in August and she had married  in  June.   She  was  asked
    where she thought they were between June and August 2008 and  she  said
    that they did not know where she was and took her passport with them to
    the airport and sent it back to her.  She was asked if her parents were
    not concerned and she said yes, they made a complaint to the police  to
    look for her.  She was asked whether her parents went to the college to
    ask about her boyfriend and she said that when she came to  the  United
    Kingdom her father told her that he had made a complaint to the police.
     It was put to her that it was hard to believe that her  parents  would
    have gone to the United Kingdom whilst she was missing.  She said  that
    they decided to leave her and after two months they  started  searching
    again.

11.  She had never worked in Pakistan and she had not spoken to her  husband
    for five years.  She had tried to contact him but his number went dead.
     It was a home number and that was answered and she was  told  that  he
    had left and that was in January 2011.  She had had  no  contact  since
    then and could not contact his parents because she did not  know  where
    they lived or had their phone numbers.  It was put  to  her  she  could
    have made enquiries and she said she did not  know  his  friends.   The
    person who had come to court as a witness, she did not have his number.
     It was put to her that her husband's friends could have given her  the
    contact details and she said that she did  not  know  his  friends  and
    whilst she was in Pakistan the only people who had been with the  child
    were him and her. She was a housewife.  She was asked what she had done
    since arriving in the United Kingdom and she said nothing, she just sat
    at home and had taken her son to school.  Mr Melvin put it to her  that
    she had "inserted" herself in the United Kingdom and she said she could
    not get a job because she had no visa.  She could not continue with the
    accountancy training because she had not got a visa and  had  not  gone
    back to college for the same reason.  She done no voluntary work or had
    acquired no skills since coming to the UK.

12.  When she came to the UK she came on a child dependent visa and  it  was
    put to her she was not dependent on them  and  had  not  been  for  two
    years.  She agreed with that.  It was then put to her that she deceived
    them or deceived the immigration authorities and she said that that was
    not right.  When she came here the Immigration Officer saw  everything.
    It was put again to her that she deceived the Immigration  Officer  and
    she said she did not know the law.  It was put to  her  that  the  true
    situation was that she was dependent on her husband and she  said  when
    she applied for extension she was dependent on her  husband.   She  was
    asked whether there was any reason her family could not assist  her  on
    return and she said that they had their own families and they had their
    own life here.  She was asked why her father could not support  her  in
    Pakistan and she said because he had  bills  and  expenses  here.   She
    could not work there because she had a son and she asked who could drop
    him off at school and bring him back.  She said she could not do  that,
    as a single mother in Pakistan she could not work, she  had  no  skills
    and had not completed her studies.  She had no medical difficulties.

13.  In re-examination it was put to her that she said she  was  married  in
    June 2008 and had told her friend and the judge that it was August that
    she telephoned. She was asked why she telephoned and she  said  it  was
    because she was pregnant she thought her  parents  were  worried  about
    her.  When she called Pakistan they were not  there.   She  called  her
    uncle.  Her mother was angry at first and then after she told her  what
    happened she said she was happy if the Claimant  was  happy.   She  had
    arrived in Heathrow when  she  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
    Immigration Officer asked her where she was going but she was not asked
    any more questions than that.

14.  Her mother, Mrs Noor gave evidence and said  she  was  born  in  Kenya.
    She adopted her witness statement.   Her  family  became  connected  to
    Kenya because her father married and that is how she came  there.   All
    her brothers and sisters  were  born  in  Kenya  and  she  had  British
    nationality as did her brothers and  sisters  and  they  all  lived  in
    Thetford.  She brought her husband and children over  when  she  gained
    British citizenship and only left the Claimant behind.   She  did  know
    that the Claimant had a boyfriend at college and learnt that when  they
    were about to  come  to  the  UK.    The  Claimant  disappeared.   They
    reported that to the police and she realised that she had gone  to  her
    boyfriend.  She had told her that she got married after they arrived in
    the United Kingdom and that she was pregnant.  Her view was  that  that
    was fine so long as she was happy.  She had had a conversation with her
    husband on the phone but did not  remember  the  date.   They  did  not
    discuss anything except that they had married.  The Claimant's passport
    was left with her aunt in Pakistan when the family came to  the  United
    Kingdom.  It was her husband's sister in  Faisalabad.   The  aunt  then
    gave the passport to the Claimant.  The Claimants came to live with  in
    the United Kingdom.  The Claimant applied for an extension of leave  in
    the United Kingdom which was refused three  times.   She  had  not  had
    contact with her husband and did not talk to him.  If her  husband  had
    asked her to go back she would have  said  that  she  should  go.   The
    second Claimant was looked after by the first Claimant, her mother  and
    her father.  Mrs Noor dropped him off  at  school  and  collected  him.
    Sometimes that was her and sometimes it was her daughter that did that.
     They both did the cooking and they both did the cleaning.

15.  Mr Melvin asked how many brothers and sisters Mrs  Noor's  husband  had
    and she said none.  He asked who the aunt was with  whom  the  passport
    was left with when they came to the United Kingdom and she said it  was
    her sister.  It was put to her that she had previously said it was  her
    husband's sister.  She said the relationship was like sisters.  She was
    asked who she left the passport  with  when  she  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  She said it was her sister and before coming  here  she  gave
    the passport to her daughter.  She said that her whole family was  here
    and there was only the Claimant in Pakistan but now  she  had  arrived.
    Her sister came two years ago.  Before coming to the United Kingdom she
    knew that her  daughter  had  a  boyfriend.   They  did  not  name  the
    boyfriend when they contacted the police because they did not know  his
    name. She could not recall her daughter studying in Pakistan  and  said
    that since she had arrived here she had done  nothing.   Mrs  Noor  had
    returned once to Pakistan on holiday.  The dates were in her  passport.
    It was last year.  She thought it was for two weeks.  It was put to her
    that her daughter had said a month.  She said it was on  the  passport.
    She had stayed with a friend.  It was put to her that her daughter said
    it was her husband's friend.  She said a friend of a friend.  When  the
    Claimant came to the United Kingdom she lived at her sister's house and
    Mr Melvin said that he thought that her daughter's husband  rented  the
    house.  Mrs Noor said that she came first to her sister  and  then  the
    property was rented.  After leaving the sister's house she  was  living
    with her.  She could not recall exactly when she moved in  but  it  was
    when her son started going to school.  Sometimes  she  lived  with  one
    sister and sometimes the other sister and then she came  to  her.   She
    resided rent free.  Now she lived with her and her grandchild.  Whether
    she continued to live there would depend on the  decision  whether  her
    son got status and if he did she would get a job and she would  rent  a
    property.

16.  The first Claimant could not go to Pakistan because she had no  one  to
    live with.  She could not survive  in  that  environment.   Mrs  Noor's
    grandson was attached to her and the circumstances in Pakistan were not
    good.  She did not want her grandson to  go.   She  was  worried  about
    them.  She had no contact with the husband in Pakistan and  they  tried
    their best to find the family's  whereabouts  but  there  had  been  no
    contact at all.  Her daughter had been living in a rented house.   They
    had not asked the lawyers to find their daughter's husband.  They tried
    their best, they could not find him, he had disappeared and he  had  no
    connection with her.  When she had arrived here  she  had  a  telephone
    conversation but after that there was no contact and the  father  heard
    the voice of her grandson crying and  there  was  no  connection  after
    that.  She was asked how many  months  after  his  arrival  he  stopped
    contact and she said when her daughter arrived she had a phone call but
    after that there was no contact, he did not know his whereabouts.

17.  On re-examination she was asked what  she  meant  when  she  had  given
    evidence that she was not  mentally  present  and  she  said  she  felt
    giddiness due to tension and when she was at home she had to lie on her
    bed and could not remember things that had happened in the past.   They
    had left her daughter's passport in Pakistan. She said  when  asked  it
    was her husband's sister because they called her  sister  and  she  had
    already said her husband was an only child.  If  the  first  Claimant's
    husband asked her to go back she would take the  view  that  it  was  a
    matter between them.

18.  In submissions Mr Melvin relied on the refusal letter  of  August  2014
    and his skeleton argument.  He said it  was  accepted  that  the  Rules
    could not be  met  in  relation  to  Appendix  FM  and  if  there  were
    compelling circumstances outside the Rules only then should there be  a
    consideration of Article 8 ECHR.  He had grave concerns in relation  to
    the claims made in this matter.  Firstly, the first Claimant had  given
    evidence that the passport was sent by her parents to  Pakistan.   That
    was untrue because the mother said it was with her sister.   The  other
    points he had concerns about was the contact with the husband  and  the
    evidence in that regard.  It was unclear from the evidence if there was
    still contact when that contact ceased to exist and of greater  concern
    was the apparent lack of interest.  His submission was that it would be
    relatively straightforward to get hold  of  the  husband  as  the  Home
    Office were provided with full details of him in relation to a  divorce
    which may take place.  She had given evidence that she arrived with her
    mother.  The first Claimant had resided with various family members and
    when pushed on the point she said she  had  difficulties  with  memory.
    Her evidence was untruthful as to the facts of the case.  The child was
    6 years old and arrived at the age of 1 and  attended  primary  school.
    The Tribunal should not  consider  the  fact  that  the  child  was  in
    reception class meant that the mother should be able to "piggy back" on
    the back of his education.

19.  The  first  Claimant  has  attended  computer  classes  and  was  fully
    educated up to the age of 19.  Since arriving in the United Kingdom she
    had done nothing to better  herself  in  terms  of  education  or  make
    efforts to contribute to the United Kingdom  through  charity  work  or
    assisting.  She had installed herself  in  making  an  application  and
    another application culminating in today's hearing. When presenting her
    passport to  the  Immigration  Officer  at  Heathrow  Airport  she  was
    supported by her husband and was not  dependent  on  her  parents  when
    arriving in the United Kingdom.  She had entered on a  dependent  visa.
    She was educated and  could  obtain  work  and  live  independently  in
    Pakistan.  He did not accept that all the family members  were  in  the
    UK.  He had great concerns in relation to her claim that her  husband's
    family did not assist in the year  after  the  birth  of  their  child.
    Taking all those points into account he asked me to find that the facts
    of the matter were not sufficient to show that  there  were  compelling
    circumstances and that discretionary leave should not be granted.  With
    regard to Section 117 her leave had always been of a precarious  nature
    and could not assist her.  He asked me to dismiss the appeal.

20.  Dr Morgan asked me to accept that she was entitled to protection  under
    Article 8 and that the second Claimant could avail himself of the  same
    rights and particularly in relation to Section 55.  With regard to  the
    mother's visits to Pakistan the dates in her passport were from 7 to 27
    January and the witness should be believed.  That was the view  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  George  and  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
    Gillespie never said  that  he  did  not  believe  her  evidence.   The
    grandmother could not understand why we could not understand  that  her
    sister was also her husband's sister.  In Pakistan, for a  young  woman
    and a young man to defy their families was an exceptional thing  to  do
    and Ms Ashraf was an assertive person who made the decision as a  young
    woman to defy her parents and convention and her husband did  the  same
    thing.  It was not long before regret set in and he  appeared  to  have
    regretted it and the appearance of  the  second  Claimant  played  both
    ways.  Ultimately he appeared to have abandoned  his  wife  and  child.
    There was one payment that he made that may  be  related  to  the  visa
    application.  Her grandmother said  it  was  a  matter  for  the  first
    Claimant if she wanted to return.

21.  The  whole  family  was  living  in  Thetford  and  they  had  retained
    connection with Britain from Kenya.  They were Kenyan  immigrants  into
    the United Kingdom.  He had not found a copy of  the  first  Claimant's
    visa.  It was valid in the sense it was open to her  to  be  used  from
    when it was granted on 11 June 2008 until 11 June 2010  and  Mr  Melvin
    was trying to stretch the concept of fraud.  If your father and  mother
    obtained a visa for you why could you not seek to use it?  He submitted
    that she could present it and then  it  was  her  duty  to  answer  any
    questions and not to fill in the Immigration  Officer  with  her  whole
    life story.  Mr Melvin relied on her husband's statement with regard to
    parental responsibility.  She had access to money from her husband  but
    it did not mean she was dependent on him.  She defied them and asked to
    marry and went to her parents and contacted  them  and  they  told  her
    where to get a passport or  her  passport.   That  was  dependency  and
    whatever the expenditure she was dependent on  them.  He  thought  this
    turned on what occurred at the point of entry.  She  did  not  seek  to
    mislead, she presented a  valid  visa  and  her  siblings'  visas  were
    accepted and she was not asked any detailed questions  to  which  there
    may have been an opportunity to mislead.  The allegation  of  deception
    did not stand up to proper examination.  On  the  question  of  law  he
    referred to the country guidance cases.  She had been here  since  2010
    and she was living with her family of  origin.   They  were  under  the
    authority of the grandfather and grandmother and the Secretary of State
    was asking them to return somewhere where there were no family members.
     She could not envisage that she could work and look  after  her  child
    and that was the basis of the human rights claim.  Both women should be
    believed.  The second Appellant was not responsible for the  fact  that
    he had been brought up as a British child and it was not  entirely  due
    to a repetition of applications but the denial of appeal rights  and  a
    consent order based on the fact there was a  child.   The  question  of
    insurmountable obstacles was not one that was in Article 8,  rather  it
    was in the Immigration Rules.

Discussion and Findings

22.  In coming to my conclusions in this appeal I  have  considered  all  of
    the evidence and the arguments as set out in the skeleton arguments  of
    both representatives.

23.  In DK (Serbia) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2008]  1
    WLR 1246 Latham LJ made the following observations in relation  to  the
    procedures then in place for reconsideration of  a  decision  following
    the identification of an error of law in the decision:

         "25. Accordingly,  as  far  as  the  scope  of  reconsideration  is
         concerned, the tribunal is entitled to approach  it,  and  to  give
         directions accordingly, on the basis that the reconsideration  will
         first determine whether or not there are any identifiable errors of
         law and will then consider the effect of any such error  or  errors
         on the original decision.  That assessment should prima facie  take
         place on the basis of the findings of fact and the  conclusions  of
         the original tribunal, save  and  in  so  far  as  they  have  been
         infected by the identified error or errors of law.   If  they  have
         not been infected by any error  or  errors  of  law,  the  tribunal
         should only revisit them if there is new evidence or material which
         should be received in the interests  of  justice  and  which  could
         affect those  findings  and  conclusions  or  if  there  are  other
         exceptional circumstances which justify reopening them."

24.  I have set out the relevant paragraphs of my  decision  in  respect  of
    the error of law above. I found that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  not
    given sufficient weight to the public interest for the reasons set out.



25.  The First-tier Tribunal made the following findings of fact. She  found
    as a fact that the first Claimant and her husband had  separated  [26].
    She found it credible that she had not been on touch with  her  husband
    for five years [26]. She found that her parents would not  be  able  to
    wholly support her by  way  of  housing  and  living  expenses  if  she
    returned to Pakistan [27]. She found that she had no family in Pakistan
    and no support from her husband's family and that it would be difficult
    to find accommodation as a  single  woman  [28].  She  found  that  she
    enjoyed family life in the UK and lived with her parents  and  siblings
    [29]. She found that the second Claimant had lived  with  his  mother's
    family for four years and did not have close ties in Pakistan [30]. She
    then considered the best interests of the second Claimant on the  basis
    of these factual findings and concluded that it would  be  contrary  to
    his best interests to be removed from his supportive family  to  return
    to Pakistan [37].

26.  Mr Melvin submits in his skeleton argument  that  it  is  in  the  best
    interests of the second Claimant to remain with his mother. It  is  not
    accepted that it would be unreasonable for the Claimants to  return  to
    Pakistan. It is submitted that  there  is  no  reason  why  the  second
    Claimant cannot be assisted by his biological  father  and  it  is  not
    accepted that he has become so integrated  that  return  would  have  a
    detrimental effect on him. It is submitted that he has been brought  up
    whilst in the UK in  a  household  where  the  Pakistani  language  and
    culture is still prominent given that his mother's  family  only  moved
    here in 2008. It is further submitted  that  he  will  be  entitled  to
    education and healthcare in Pakistan.

27.  Mr Melvin  makes  a  number  of  challenges  to  the  first  Claimant's
    evidence which implicitly request a departure from the findings of fact
    of the First-tier Tribunal. He submits in the skeleton argument that it
    is not accepted that there is no contact between the first Claimant and
    her husband or that he would  not  support  the  second  Claimant.  The
    Respondent does not accept that there are no extended family members in
    Pakistan. Further it is submitted that when the first Claimant  entered
    the UK in 2010 her marriage had broken  down  which  goes  against  her
    credibility.

28.  Dr Morgan argues that the Claimant and her  mother  were  found  to  be
    credible witnesses and that the findings  of  fact  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should not be displaced.

29.  My findings in relation to the error  of  law  related  to  the  weight
    given to the public interest and therefore not to the primary  findings
    of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal. In principle  therefore  those
    findings should stand and should not be revisited unless "there is  new
    evidence or material which should  be  received  in  the  interests  of
    justice and which could affect those findings  and  conclusions  or  if
    there are  other  exceptional  circumstances  which  justify  reopening
    them." (DK). I have also taken account of judgement  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Rajaratnam v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 8 in relation to when it is
    appropriate to depart from the  findings  of  fact  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

30.  Mr Melvin asserts that the  first  Claimant  used  deception  when  she
    entered the UK in 2010 as she entered on a visa to  which  she  was  no
    longer entitled due to a change of circumstances. The Appellant entered
    the UK on a settlement visa as her parent's dependent.  It  is  not  in
    dispute that she was married at the point of  entry  and  therefore  no
    longer dependent on her parents.

31.  The  Respondent  has  not  taken  a  point  thus  far  in  relation  to
    deception. No point was taken in the Refusal  Letter  dated  19  August
    2014 and it does not appear that it was  taken  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Whilst the First-tier Tribunal did not summarise the contents
    of the submissions, it does not appear to have been a  point  taken  in
    cross-examination. The first Claimant's evidence before me was that she
    showed the immigration officer her visa and entered the  UK.  She  says
    she was not questioned about  her  circumstances.  The  Respondent  has
    produced no evidence to show that she was interviewed or questioned  by
    an immigration officer and gave a false account. The burden of  proving
    deception is on the Respondent  and  cogent  evidence  is  required.  I
    consider it to be uncontentious that the first Claimant knew  when  she
    entered the UK that the factual basis on which she had granted her visa
    for the UK no longer pertained. She did not disclose that on entry. Had
    she done so, she would have been likely to have been refused entry.  As
    there is no evidence to show that she was questioned, I  consider  that
    it cannot be said that she actively deceived the authorities.  However,
    she failed to disclose material facts. I consider that this is a matter
    that is relevant to the exercise of proportionality, but it is not  new
    evidence or material that warrants departure from the findings of  fact
    of the First-tier Tribunal.

32.  Mr Melvin also argues that the first Claimant has changed her  evidence
    regarding her relationship with  her  husband.  On  28  June  2010  the
    Respondent refused her  indefinite  leave  to  remain  and  her  appeal
    against that decision was heard  and  dismissed  by  Immigration  Judge
    Gillespie in a decision promulgated on 2 December 2010. He  records  at
    paragraph 8  that  she  has  made  a  statement  showing  that  she  is
    maintained by remittances from her husband and that she and the  second
    Claimant lived with an uncle in the UK. He also notes that at the  time
    of appeal decision in relation to her, her siblings and  father,  since
    she was married she was no longer entitled to entry as a  dependant  of
    her parents (11).

33.  Immigration Judge Gillespie did not record whether the  first  Claimant
    gave evidence, but it appears from reading  the  decision  that  it  is
    likely that she did not. There is no reference to oral evidence.  I  do
    not have a  copy  of  the  witness  statement  that  was  before  Judge
    Gillespie. As her  grounds  for  judicial  review  attest  (C1  of  the
    Respondent's bundle)  it  was  her  case  that  her  husband  had  been
    financially supporting her and their son and that support stopped after
    her arrival in the UK.   In her witness statement before the First-tier
    Tribunal she states at paragraph 5 to 7 that when she arrived in the UK
    she and her husband were on good terms and had no marital problems  and
    he supported her and her son financially. She states that it was during
    her stay in the United Kingdom they started to  grow  apart  and  as  a
    result he not only cut off all form  of  contact  with  them  but  also
    stopped supporting both her and her son. She states  that  after  their
    marital  relationship  broke  down  they  separated  and  since   being
    separated she and her husband had no form of contact.

34.  She filed a further statement dated 3 December 2015  for  the  purposes
    of this hearing. Her account of her relationship with  her  husband  is
    rather different. She states from paragraphs 5  to  18  that  from  the
    outset of her marriage she realised that the marriage would not work as
    they had nothing in common. She made many efforts to make her  marriage
    work but he made it clear that he wanted to have  nothing  to  do  with
    her. She lived in a "lifeless and unhappy" marriage  and  due  to  this
    depressing situation decided to join her parents in the UK. He did  not
    hesitate to support her son's  entry  clearance  application  and  only
    remained in touch to see how his son was doing.

35.  I note that the first Claimant has chosen to introduce evidence by  way
    of her fresh statement that contradicts her previous  statement  before
    the First-tier Tribunal. She has not explained why she has changed  her
    account from being on good terms with her husband on arrival in the  UK
    and growing apart to having been  in  a  loveless  marriage  since  its
    inception.  I consider that the only reasonable conclusion is that  she
    is attempting to enhance her claim by asserting that she came to the UK
    to escape her marriage.

36.  Whilst this evidence  could  entitle  me  to  go  behind  the  positive
    finding in relation to the Claimant's credibility  (see  paragraphs  22
    and 23 of Rajaratnam), I accept,  nevertheless,  that  she  has  is  no
    longer in contact with her husband and that they ceased to have contact
    after her arrival in the UK. Her evidence on this point was  consistent
    before the First-tier Tribunal and consistent  before  me.  Her  mother
    also gave consistent evidence on this point.  I  therefore  do  not  go
    behind the finding that she has not been in touch with her husband  for
    five years.

37.  The Claimants do not seek to argue that  they  can  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules. They appeal under Article 8 only.  In  R  (Nagre)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin),
    Sales J (as he then was) stated at [29] that:

         "... the new Rules do  provide  better  explicit  coverage  of  the
         factors identified in case-law as relevant to  analysis  of  claims
         under Article 8 than was formerly the position, so  in  many  cases
         the main points for consideration in relation to Article 8 will  be
         addressed by decision-makers applying the new Rules. It is only if,
         after doing that, there remains an arguable case that there may  be
         good grounds for granting leave to  remain  outside  the  Rules  by
         reference to Article 8 that it will  be  necessary  for  Article  8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the  new  Rules  to
         require the grant of such leave".

38. The two-stage approach has been approved by the Court of  Appeal  in  a
    number of cases including Singh and Khalid v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  72.
    The  decision-maker  should  adopt  a  two-stage  process.   The  first
    question is whether the individual can succeed under the Rules and  the
    second is, if not, can he or she succeed outside the Rules under Art 8.
    There is no threshold requirement  of  arguability  before  a  decision
    maker  reaches  the  second  stage.  However,   the   extent   of   any
    consideration outside the Rules will depend upon whether all the issues
    have been adequately addressed under the Rules.  In  Singh  and  Khalid
    the Court of Appeal, Underhill LJ opined at [64]

         "... there is no need to conduct a full separate examination of Art
         8 outside the Rules where, in the  circumstances  of  a  particular
         case, all the issues have been addressed in the consideration under
         the Rules."

39. In SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at [32] Richards LJ in the  Court  of
    Appeal clarified the relationship between the Immigration Rules and the
    public interest considerations:

         "However, even away from those contexts, if the Secretary of  State
         has sought to formulate Immigration Rules to reflect a fair balance
         of interests under Article 8 in the general run  of  cases  falling
         within their scope, then, as explained above, the Rules  themselves
         will  provide  significant  evidence  about  the  relevant   public
         interest considerations which should be brought into account when a
         court or tribunal seeks to strike the proper balance  of  interests
         under Article 8 in making its own decision. As Beatson LJ  observed
         in Haleemudeen v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]
         EWCA Civ 558; [2014] Imm AR 6, at [40], the new Rules  in  Appendix
         FM:

             "... are a central part of the legislative and policy  context
             in which the interests of  immigration  control  are  balanced
             against the interests and rights of people who  have  come  to
             this country and wish to settle in it. Overall, the  Secretary
             of State's policy as to when an interference with an Article 8
             right  will  be   regarded   as   disproportionate   is   more
             particularised in the new Rules than it had previously been."

         Accordingly, a court or tribunal is required to give the new  Rules
         "greater  weight  than  as  merely  a  starting   point   for   the
         consideration  of  the  proportionality  of  an  interference  with
         Article 8 rights" (para. [47])."

40. At 33 Richards LJ further observed:

         "In our judgment, even though a test  of  exceptionality  does  not
         apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
         accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of
         special contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances
         would need to be identified to support a claim  for  grant  of  LTR
         outside the new Rules in Appendix  FM.  In  our  view,  that  is  a
         formulation which is not as strict as a test of exceptionality or a
         requirement of "very compelling reasons"  (as  referred  to  in  MF
         (Nigeria) in  the  context  of  the  Rules  applicable  to  foreign
         criminals), but which  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the  focused
         consideration of public interest factors as finds expression in the
         Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in Appendix  FM."



41. At paragraph 44 the Court set out the proper approach:

         "The proper approach should  always  be  to  identify,  first,  the
         substantive content of the relevant Immigration Rules, both to  see
         if an applicant for LTR or LTE satisfies the conditions  laid  down
         in those Rules (so as to be entitled  to  LTR  or  LTE  within  the
         Rules) and to  assess  the  force  of  the  public  interest  given
         expression in those rules (which will be relevant to the  balancing
         exercise under Article 8, in deciding whether LTR or LTE should  be
         granted outside the substantive provisions set out in  the  Rules).
         Secondly, if an applicant does not satisfy the requirements in  the
         substantive part of the Rules, they may seek to  maintain  a  claim
         for grant of LTR or LTE outside the substantive provisions  of  the
         Rules, pursuant to Article 8. If there  is  a  reasonably  arguable
         case under Article 8 which has not already been sufficiently  dealt
         with by consideration of  the  application  under  the  substantive
         provisions of the Rules (cf Nagre, para. [30]), then in considering
         that case the individual interests  of  the  applicant  and  others
         whose Article 8 rights are in issue should be balanced against  the
         public interest, including as expressed in the Rules, in  order  to
         make an assessment whether refusal to grant LTR or LTE, as the case
         may be, is disproportionate and hence unlawful by virtue of section
         6(1) of the HRA read with Article 8."

42. It is clear therefore, that in an appeal under the new Rules, where  an
    applicant cannot satisfy the requirements of the Rules, the  Rules  are
    to be given greater weight than a starting point and  will  inform  the
    proportionality assessment as an expression of the public interest.

43. The Claimants have lived in the UK for 6 years.  At  the  date  of  the
    Respondent's reconsideration in August  2014  neither  could  therefore
    meet the length of residence requirements of Rule 276ADE  having  lived
    in the UK for only 4 years.  It has not been argued that there are very
    significant  obstacles  to  the  First  Claimant's   integration   into
    Pakistan. It has also not been argued that she could meet the dependent
    relative requirements of the Rules or could succeed  under  the  parent
    route.

44. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that the Claimants enjoyed family life
    with the First Claimant's parents. The First-tier Tribunal  also  found
    it was in the second Claimant's best interests to  remain  in  the  UK.
    That finding is not infected by the identified error of law.

45. In EV (Philippines) and others v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  874  the  Court
    held at [34] to [38]:

         "34. In determining whether or not, in a case such as the  present,
         the need for immigration control outweighs the  best  interests  of
         the children, it is necessary to determine the relative strength of
         the factors which make it in their best interests to  remain  here;
         and also to take account of any factors that point the other way.

         35.  A decision as to what is in the  best  interests  of  children
         will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)  the
         length of time that they have been here; (c)  how  long  they  have
         been in education; (c) what stage their education has reached;  (d)
         to what extent they have become distanced from the country to which
         it is proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection
         with it may be; (f) to  what  extent  they  will  have  linguistic,
         medical or other difficulties in adapting to life in that  country;
         and (g) the extent to which the course proposed will interfere with
         their family life or their rights (if they  have  any)  as  British
         citizens.

         36.  In a sense the tribunal is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
         answer falls to be given  to  the  question:  is  it  in  the  best
         interests of the child to remain? The longer  the  child  has  been
         here, the more advanced (or critical) the stage of  his  education,
         the looser his ties with the country  in  question,  and  the  more
         deleterious the consequences of his return, the greater the  weight
         that falls into one side of the scales. If it is overwhelmingly  in
         the child's best interests that he should not return, the  need  to
         maintain immigration control may  well  not  tip  the  balance.  By
         contrast if it is in the child's best interests to remain, but only
         on balance (with some factors pointing the other way),  the  result
         may be the opposite.

         37.  In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken  into
         account the strong weight to be  given  to  the  need  to  maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of  the
         country and the fact that, ex hypothesi,  the  applicants  have  no
         entitlement to remain. The immigration history of the  parents  may
         also be relevant e.g.  if  they  are  overstayers,  or  have  acted
         deceitfully.

         38.  The need to carry out this sort of assessment is considered in
         the judgment of the Upper Tribunal in MK India (Best  interests  of
         the child) [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC):

             "23. There is in our view a fourth point of principle that can
             be  inferred  from  the  Supreme  Court's  judgments   in   ZH
             (Tanzania). As the use by Baroness Hale and Lord Hope  of  the
             adjective "overall" makes clear, the consideration of the best
             interests of the child  involves  a  weighing  up  of  various
             factors. Although the conclusion of the best interests of  the
             child consideration must of course provide a yes or no  answer
             to the question, "Is it in the best interests of the child for
             the child and/or the parent(s) facing expulsion/deportation to
             remain in the  United  Kingdom?",  the  assessment  cannot  be
             reduced to that. Key features of the  best  interests  of  the
             child consideration and  its  overall  balancing  of  factors,
             especially those which count  for  and  against  an  expulsion
             decision, must be kept in  mind  when  turning  to  the  wider
             proportionality assessment  of  whether  or  not  the  factors
             relating to the importance of maintaining immigration  control
             etc. cumulatively reinforce or outweigh the best interests  of
             the child, depending on what they have been found to be.

             24.  The need to keep in mind the "overall" factors making  up
             the best interests of the  child  consideration  must  not  be
             downplayed. Failure to do so may give rise to an error of  law
             although, as AJ (India) makes clear, what matters  is  not  so
             much the form of the inquiry but rather whether there has been
             substantive consideration of the best interests of the  child.
             The consideration must always be fact-sensitive and  depending
             on   its   workings-out   will   affect   the   Article   8(2)
             proportionality assessment in different ways. If, for example,
             all the factors weighed in the best  interests  of  the  child
             consideration point overwhelmingly  in  favour  of  the  child
             and/or relevant parent(s) remaining in the UK,  that  is  very
             likely to mean that only very  strong  countervailing  factors
             can outweigh it. If, at the other extreme, all the factors  of
             relevance to the best interests  of  the  child  consideration
             (save for the child's and/or parent(s)  own  claim  that  they
             want to remain) point overwhelmingly to the child's  interests
             being best served by him returning with his parent(s)  to  his
             country of origin (or to one of  his  parents  being  expelled
             leaving him to remain living here), then very little by way of
             countervailing considerations to do with  immigration  control
             etc. may be necessary in order for the conclusion to be  drawn
             that the decision appealed against was and is proportionate.""

46. Whilst the First-tier Tribunal found that  the  best-interests  of  the
    second Claimant were to remain in the UK, she did not make a finding as
    to how emphatic the answer to the question was: is it was in  his  best
    interests to remain? She did not consider whether it was overwhelmingly
    in his best interests or whether it was, but only on balance.  She  did
    not take the relevant public interests considerations into  account  in
    the  wider  proportionality  assessment  and  consider   whether   they
    cumulatively reinforced or outweighed the best interests of the child.

47. The second Appellant has lived in the UK since he was 11 months old. At
    the date of the hearing he had lived in the UK for nearly 6 years.  His
    school report for 2013-2014, his reception year, is at pages B18 to  23
    of the Claimants' bundle. He is clearly a happy and creative child  who
    enjoys school. It is clear from the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in
    Azimi-Moayed and Others (decisions affecting children; onward  appeals)
    [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) that in terms of length of residence seven  years
    from age four is likely to be more significant  to  a  child  than  the
    first seven years of life. Very young children are  focussed  on  their
    parents rather than their peers and are adaptable.

48. The second Claimant is not at a critical stage of his education. Whilst
    he will not remember having lived in Pakistan, he has  grown  up  in  a
    family  who  have  recently  moved  here  from  Pakistan  in  2008  and
    consequently will have a link with the culture and the language in  his
    home environment. His mother has only lived in the UK for a  relatively
    short  time  and  retains  cultural,  linguistic  and  social  ties  to
    Pakistan. Therefore in view of  his  young  age,  and  those  ties  his
    connection with Pakistan is likely to be reasonably  easily  renewable.
    He is not of course a  British  Citizen  and  has  no  right  to  enjoy
    education here.

49. I have also considered whether the consequences of his return would  be
    deleterious.   The First-tier Tribunal found that there would be a lack
    of accommodation, financial  resources,  societal  disapproval  of  his
    mother and that  his  father's  family  had  rejected  him.  The  first
    Claimant's evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was that her  family
    did not have sufficient funds to solely support her  in  Pakistan.  The
    First-tier Tribunal did not have any objective material  before  it  in
    relation to the question of the difficulties a single but married woman
    with a child could  face  in  Pakistan.  In  SM  and  MH  (lone  women-
    ostracism) Pakistan [2016] UKUT 00067 the Upper Tribunal considered the
    question of internal relocation for women who had a  well-founded  fear
    of persecution in their home area. The first  Claimant  in  this  case,
    does not of course, argue that she cannot return to her home  area  but
    SM  is  instructive  as  it  explores  the   question   of   employment
    opportunities,  childcare  and  accommodation.  Whilst  the  First-tier
    Tribunal accepted that the Claimants no longer have extended family  in
    Pakistan, it is clear from  her  mother's  evidence  that  they  retain
    friends there and in view of their short absence it would be surprising
    if they did not. The first Claimant was educated up to the  age  of  19
    and completed a computing qualification. Letters in her  bundle  attest
    to her employability as a shop assistant. The Upper Tribunal held in SM
    that it would  not  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  a  single  woman  to
    internally relocate in Pakistan if she can access support  from  family
    members. It would also not be unduly harsh for educated, better off, or
    older women to seek internal relocation to a city and it helps  if  she
    has qualifications enabling her to get well-paid employment and pay for
    accommodation and child care.

50. There is of course, no question of the First Claimant relocating as she
    could return to her home area of Faisalabad. Whilst there may be a lack
    of accommodation and financial resources at the outset, her parents are
    able on their own evidence to offer her some support  financially,  her
    family have social ties as they visited recently and met friends  there
    and she is likely to  be  able  to  find  employment.  Further,  whilst
    education may not be of the same standard in Pakistan, it is available.
    Whilst the second Claimant, has since his arrival here, enjoyed  family
    life with his grandparents and wider family  and  these  are  important
    relationships his focus at his age is  likely  to  be  on  his  mother.
    Whilst his best interests have been found to remain in the UK,  I  find
    that this is only on balance and not overwhelmingly so.

51. Since the impugned decision is  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  in
    furtherance of a legitimate aim, namely the maintenance of  immigration
    control,  the  next  question  to  be  addressed  is  whether   it   is
    proportionate.  Where the question of proportionality is  reached,  the
    'ultimate question for the appellate immigration authority  is  whether
    the refusal of leave to enter or remain,  in  circumstances  where  the
    life of  the  family  cannot  reasonably  be  expected  to  be  enjoyed
    elsewhere, taking full account of all considerations weighing in favour
    of the refusal, prejudices the family life of the applicant in a manner
    sufficiently serious to amount to a breach  of  the  fundamental  right
    protected by Article 8' Huang.

52. Proportionality is the "public interest question" within the meaning of
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act.  With regard to the factors in section 117B, I
    have taken account of the fact  that  the  maintenance  of  immigration
    controls is in the public interest. It is also in the  public  interest
    that a person seeking to enter or remain speaks English. The first  and
    second Claimants both speak English. It is in the public interest  that
    persons who  seek  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
    financially independent. The first Claimant is not working  and  cannot
    be said to be financially independent.  In any  event,  in  Forman  (ss
    117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal  held
    that the public interest in firm immigration control is not diluted  by
    the consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article  8  ECHR
    has at no time been a  financial  burden  on  the  state  or  is  self-
    sufficient or is likely to remain so indefinitely.  The significance of
    these factors is that where they are not present the public interest is
    fortified.

53. According to section 117B, little weight should be  given  to-  (a)   a
    private life, or (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying  partner,
    that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully. Little weight should be given to  a  private
    life established by a person at a time when  the  person's  immigration
    status is precarious. In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 the  Upper
    Tribunal held that a person's immigration  status  is  "precarious"  if
    their continued presence  in  the  UK  will  be  dependent  upon  their
    obtaining a further grant of leave.  I therefore can give little weight
    to the Claimants' private lives as they have  been  established  whilst
    they were here either precariously or unlawfully.  The  first  Claimant
    has also established her family life in the UK in  the  knowledge  that
    the circumstances in respect of which she was granted a visa no  longer
    pertained at the date of entry. She had established an independent life
    apart from her parents and chose to renew it despite knowing she had no
    lawful basis to be here. Further, I have found that in the light of her
    circumstances she  would  be  not  without  support  or  employment  in
    Pakistan.

54. In all the circumstances I conclude that it has  not  been  shown  that
    there  are  compelling  circumstances  which  operate  to  elevate  the
    Claimants' position to one which show that the application of the Rules
    does not provide an adequate answer to their circumstances. Whilst  the
    best interests of the second Claimant may be on balance  to  remain  in
    the UK, in the countervailing public interest considerations  are  such
    that this interest is outweighed.  I find that it would  be  reasonable
    for him to follow his mother to  Pakistan  and  that  the  Respondent's
    decision is a proportionate one.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

