
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33746/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th April 2016                            |On 18th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                               Miss Ida Mboge
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Peterson, Counsel, instructed by Stuart Karatas
                    Solicitors (Edmonton)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant appeals, with permission, against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge James, who dismissed the appellant's  appeal  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.   That  challenge
    was made on the  basis  that  there  was  no  proper  consideration  of
    paragraph 276ADE (vi).

 2. It was submitted by the appellant's representative that  the  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal had not made a  proper  Article  8  assessment,
    having accepted that the appellant had lived in the United Kingdom  for
    almost twenty years at the date of appeal.  The  Tribunal  should  have
    made an assessment whether the appeal  could  succeed  under  paragraph
    276ADE (vi) in that the appellant was

         "aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK for  less
         than twenty years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  has
         no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country  to
         which he would have to go if required to leave the UK."

    This required a rounded assessment as to whether  a  person's  familial
    ties could result in support to her in the  event  of  her  return,  an
    assessment taking  into  account  both  the  subjective  and  objective
    considerations and also consideration of what lay within the choice  of
    a claimant to achieve.

 3. It was asserted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred in law  in
    not making that assessment and the  failure  to  assess  the  paragraph
    276ADE(iii)  also  had   rendered   the   Determination   and   Reasons
    unsustainable.

 4. The appellant is a Gambian national born on 24th August  1971  and  she
    arrived in the United Kingdom in September 1995 with a visit visa valid
    for six months.  She made an application on 12th June 2013  which  were
    the subject  of  judicial  review  proceedings,  (followed  by  further
    representations by her solicitors on 11th August  2014)  in  which  she
    asked to have her case considered  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  In a decision  of  13th  August  2014  the
    Secretary of State noted that she had applied for asylum on  10th  July
    1996 and on 25th November 1996 her  application  was  refused  with  no
    right of appeal as she had failed  without  reasonable  explanation  to
    attend an interview.   On  12th  June  2013  her  client  submitted  an
    application for leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  outside  the
    Immigration Rules and on 10th July 2013 that  application  was  refused
    with no right of appeal.

 5. Further representations of 11th August 2014 were considered as part  of
    an application for leave to remain on  the  basis  of  her  private  or
    family life and was considered under Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE.
    In the reasons for refusal letter the Home Office noted that  in  order
    to be eligible for consideration for  limited  leave  to  remain  under
    Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE she must not be excluded on the grounds
    of suitability.

 6. In particular S-LTR.1.7. was cited:

         "S-LTR.1.7.    The applicant has failed without  reasonable  excuse
                    to comply with a requirement to -

                    a)  attend an interview;

                    b) provide information;

                    c)  provide physical data; or

                    d)  undergo a medical examination or provide  a  medical
                        report."

    It was considered that the appellant failed to meet the requirements of
    S-LTR.1.7.(a) as she failed to attend an interview in  respect  of  her
    application for asylum and has failed to provide  a  reasonable  excuse
    for this.  She implied that she was not kept informed by her solicitors
    but  her  subsequent  conduct  did  not  support  the  claim  that  her
    solicitors were not keeping her informed.

 7.  At  paragraph  51  of  his  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    specifically  stated  that  he  did  not  find  it  was  plausible   or
    understandable as to why the appellant had failed to make contact  with
    the authorities if she was intent on pursuing  her  asylum  claim.   He
    stated:

         "The appellant is an educated person who was  aware  of  her  claim
         being presented to the respondent.  She  knew  who  the  solicitors
         were and could have made contact with them to  enquire  as  to  the
         status of her claim.  Whilst I accept she may have had a period  of
         time when she was taking antidepressants there are long periods  of
         time, such as  between  ceasing  to  take  antidepressants  and  Mr
         Asante's letter, when she took no steps to pursue her claim without
         reasonable excuse.  I am satisfied that  the  appellant  was  aware
         that she was illegally present in the UK and  she  was  content  to
         remain in that status."

 8. I find there was nothing to unsettle the conclusion in the respondent's
    reasons for refusal letter to the effect that the appellant had  failed
    without reasonable excuse to comply with a  requirement  to  attend  an
    interview.  The judge found at paragraph  47  that  the  appellant  had
    failed to attend the appointment for an asylum interview on 9th  August
    1996 and she had failed to attend once again on 29th August 1996.   The
    judge at paragraph 48 considered the reasons put forward as to why  she
    did not seek to regularise her status in the UK before June 2013.   She
    claimed that she was living with her uncle who was organising her claim
    for asylum and that she had a falling out with her uncle and  that  she
    stated that she was not informed of the correspondence.  Thereafter she
    stated that she was not able to pursue her asylum claim because she was
    not mentally fit.

 9. The judge rejected the  appellant's  claim  that  she  was  fearful  of
    engaging with the authorities and indeed  at  paragraph  49  the  judge
    found that the appellant was not fearful of contacting the  respondent,
    only that she was not mentally fit or ready to make contact.   He  also
    found there were long periods of time  after  she  ceased  taking  anti
    depressants and by implication would  have  been  able  to  pursue  her
    claim.

10. At paragraph 51 the judge stated: "I do not find that it  is  plausible
    or understandable why the appellant failed to  make  contact  with  the
    authorities if she was intent on pursuing her asylum claim."

11. In sum the judge refused to accept the explanation for the rejection of
    the appellant's claim on  the  suitability  grounds  and  as  such  the
    appellant cannot comply with paragraph 276ADE as she  was  rejected  on
    the suitability grounds.   The  further  reasons  for  refusal  by  the
    Secretary of State are set out for the sake of  completeness  only  and
    this is made clear in the letter of refusal.

12.  Although  the  judge  did  not  cite   the   suitability   requirement
    specifically and it was an error not to specifically make a decision in
    relation to the Immigration S-LTR.1.7, I  find  on  the  basis  of  the
    findings of that judge [47 -  51],  and  which  I  preserve,  that  the
    respondent's rejection of the application  under  paragraph  S-LTR.1.7.
    (the  suitability  requirement)  albeit  that  it  is  a  discretionary
    paragraph under the Immigration Rules was  effectively  upheld  by  the
    judge and found by him to be justified

13. I have noted the skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal  from
    Ms Peterson but this is based essentially on an application in relation
    to Paragraph 276ADE (iii) and to Article 8 outside the Rules.

14. The judge did not specifically  cite  the  Immigration  Rule  Paragraph
    276ADE (iii) such that the appellant had not complied with the  ability
    to show twenty years' residence by the date  of  the  application,  but
    this would only undermine the appellant's case further.   There  is  no
    doubt that the judge considered the fact that the appellant has been in
    the UK for nearly twenty years prior to her application and there is no
    doubt that the judge was aware that the appellant  entered  the  UK  in
    1996 [63]. By the date of her application the appellant had not been in
    the UK for 20 years. She could not succeed under the Immigration  Rules
    Paragraph  276ADE  (iii).   The  rules  specify  that  time  is  to  be
    calculated as at the date of the application.

15. Albeit that the judge did not specifically cite paragraph 276ADE  (vi);
    at the date of the decision the test would be whether  there  would  be
    "very significant obstacles to the  appellant's  integration  into  the
    country to which she would have to go if she was required to leave  the
    UK". But the  suitability  requirements  were  not  met  and  thus  the
    appellant could not comply with this rule.

16. The judge proceeded, possibly generously, to  a  consideration  of  the
    appeal outside the rules in relation  to  Article  8.   The  judge  did
    consider  whether  the  circumstances  of  the   appellant   "make   it
    disproportionate to remove her from the  UK"  and  that  would  be  the
    correct test to  apply,  Huang  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  [2007]  UKHL  11  .   The  judge  specifically  states  at
    paragraph 63:

"The circumstances on which she relies  are  her  presence  in  the  UK  for
    nearly twenty years, waiting to regularise her status  for  four  years
    and the fact that her only family  are  in  the  UK,  referring  to  Mr
    Asante."

17. The judge was not  satisfied  at  paragraph  55  that  the  appellant's
    witness Mr Asante was credible or that there was a genuine and  ongoing
    subsisting relationship between him and the appellant.

18. The judge therefore rejected the fact that  the  appellant  had  family
    life with Mr Asante  although  accepted,  contrary  to  the  permission
    granted, that she had a private life of  which  that  relationship  was
    part,  but  noted,  applying  Section  117B  (4)  and  (5)   that   the
    relationship had been formed at a  time  when  the  appellant  remained
    illegally in the UK and whilst her status was precarious.

19. The judge considered that there was no risk to the  appellant's  return
    in relation  to  her  asylum  claim  or  that  she  would  face  severe
    persecution and harassment and that the judge concluded  that  she  did
    not face the risks that she had stated which were in existence in 1998.

20. Specifically the judge cites Huang and considered the evidence  of  the
    appellant  when  deciding  the  issue  of  proportionality.   He   made
    reference to 'exceptionality' but in practice applied Huang as  can  be
    seen from [66] and the correct test and took account  of  the  relevant
    factors.  He was fully aware of the length of time  the  appellant  had
    spent in the UK [63] and referred to this and he considered  the  point
    made that her time in the UK inhibited her ability to live a  full  and
    fulfilling life in Gambia [65].  He factored in that she did  not  have
    any ongoing medical conditions, appeared to be in good health  and  had
    not been waiting four years to regularise her  status  [63]  but  found
    that her position in Gambia was not different from her status in the UK
    whereby she had no means  of  supporting  herself  other  than  working
    illegally or receiving financial  support  from  Mr  Asante  which  was
    considered to be precarious.

21. An overall reading of the decision showed that the judge has  addressed
    his mind to whether there were significant obstacles to the appellant's
    return and clearly  found  that  there  were  not  and  he  included  a
    consideration of all the circumstances including those of the appellant
    in the United  Kingdom.  He  effectively  considered  the  matter  with
    regards the Immigration Rules, and also considered the  matter  outside
    the Rules, and, weighing all the relevant factors, the judge found  the
    decision to remove was proportionate.

22. I find that there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision and the decision shall stand.





Signed                                  Date 18th May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

