
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33931/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 February 2016                  |On 24 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                           MRS AREFE CHRISTOFOROU
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mills, instructed by Ahmed Rahman Carr
solicitors


                             DECISION & REASONS

1.    The Respondent is a national of Turkey, born on 1  June  1970.  On  13
September 2010, she married George Christoforou, a British citizen of  Greek
Cypriot origin. She applied for entry clearance as a spouse  on  1  November
2010 but this application was refused and her appeal against  this  decision
was dismissed on 22 February 2011 on the  basis  that  the  maintenance  and
accommodation requirements were not met, albeit the  Judge  found  that  the
relationship was genuine and subsisting and the  parties  intended  to  live
together. A second application for entry clearance  as  a  spouse  was  also
refused on 12 October 2012.

2.    On 11  December  2012,  the  Respondent  entered  the  United  Kingdom
utilizing a Bulgarian passport to which she was not entitled. On  8  January
2013, she gave birth to her son, [S] in the United Kingdom.  An  application
for leave to remain on the basis of the Respondent's family  life  with  her
husband and son was made on 30 October 2013. This  application  was  refused
on 22 January 2014 without the right of appeal. An application for  judicial
review was made and on 15 May 2014 a consent order was signed on  the  basis
that the Secretary of State would issue a removal  decision  triggering  the
right of appeal. That decision was made on 5 August 2014 and an  appeal  was
lodged against the decision.

3.    The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet for hearing  on
13 August 2015. In a decision and reasons promulgated on 28 August  2015  he
allowed the appeal under both  the  Immigration  Rules  [R-LTRP1.1.(d)]  and
Article 8, outside the Rules.

4.    An application for permission  to  appeal  was  made  in-time  by  the
Secretary of State for the Home Department on the basis that the  Judge  had
erred materially in law: (i) in failing to consider  section  117B  and  the
public interest; (ii) in failing at [43] to give reasons why  it  would  not
be reasonable to expect the Appellant's  spouse,  who  has  a  16  year  old
daughter in the UK by a previous relationship, to  relocate  to  Turkey  and
(iii) at [43] in  making  reference  to  the  fact  that  it  would  not  be
reasonable and proportionate for the Appellant to move to Turkey because  of
difficulties with employment  and  integration.  Permission  to  appeal  was
granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett on 31  December  2015  on  the
basis that the grounds were arguable.

Hearing

5.    At the hearing before me, Mr Jarvis, for the  Appellant  Secretary  of
State, sought to amend the grounds of appeal by way of a  skeleton  argument
dated 16 February 2016 with  reference  to  rule  5(3)(c)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to include a challenge to  the  First-
tier Tribunal Judge's interpretation of R-LTRP 1.1.(d) (iii)  on  the  basis
that there was no expectation that a British child would leave  the  UK  but
would remain with his father in the UK and thus the Judge should have  found
that EX1(a) did not apply. He acknowledged that  if  I  was  not  minded  to
admit the amendment to the grounds of appeal the grounds as  they  currently
stand do not challenge the findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in
respect  of  the  Appellant's  ability  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
Immigration Rules, but are concerned with Article 8 of ECHR.

6.    Mr Mills objected to the admission of a further ground  of  appeal  at
such a late stage and in light of VV (grounds of  appeal)  Lithuania  [2016]
UKUT 00053 (IAC) which provides inter alia at [30]:

    "But where points are abandoned, there is a tendency then  to  seek  to
    rely upon a skeleton argument, served only just before or even  on  the
    day of the hearing, so as to advance one  or  more  new  arguments  not
    previously notified to either party or to  the  Tribunal.  Raising  new
    points in this manner plainly can  cause  unfairness  to  the  opposing
    party and, if so, the Upper Tribunal may well refuse to allow  the  new
    point to be argued."

7.    Permission to appeal had been granted on 31 December  2015  and  there
was clearly sufficient time for the Secretary of State  to  seek  permission
to raise any further grounds of appeal  before  16  February  2016,  2  days
prior to the hearing date. I did not consider that acceding  to  Mr  Jarvis'
request to amend the grounds of appeal  would  be  in  accordance  with  the
overriding objective set out in rule 2  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 to deal with the case fairly  and  justly,  given  that
the  Respondent  has  been  married  to  a  British  citizen  and  has  been
attempting to resolve her immigration status for more than 5 years  and  now
has a British citizen child with her husband. Moreover, her appeal had  been
allowed by the First-tier Tribunal almost 6  months  ago  but  the  family's
circumstances remained uncertain pending the outcome of the  appeal  by  the
Secretary of State for the Home Department. Therefore, I refused  to  permit
Mr Jarvis to amend the grounds of appeal, drafted on 9 September 2015.

8.    It is clear that this is a case where  permission  to  appeal  to  the
Upper Tribunal ought not to have been granted, as the grounds of appeal  did
not challenge the findings by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  respect  of
his decision to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules. Even if  there
was merit in the challenge to the Judge's findings in respect of  Article  8
this matters  not  because  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision  in
respect of the Appellant's  ability  to  meet  the  requirements  of  R-LTRP
1.1.(d) of the Rules stands.

Decision

9.    The appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  is
dismissed. The decision by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Sweet  to  allow  the
appeal in respect of the Immigration Rules stands.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

18 February 2016
