
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33591/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 October 2014                            |On 21 October 2014           |
|Extempore judgment                            |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr Francis Reinis Kumah

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms D Ofei-Kwatia, Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of Mr Kumah, a Ghanaian citizen who  sought  an  EEA
    residence card as the spouse  of  a  Dutch  citizen  exercising  treaty
    rights in the UK.  The application was refused on 13 July 2013  and  Mr
    Kumah exercised his right of appeal.  The appeal  was  allowed  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge with a finding by the judge  that  the  proxy
    marriage certificate produced along with the additional  documents  was
    valid and evidence that the parties were married.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted on the  grounds  that  the  judge  had
    erred in law in failing  to  consider  and  make  findings  as  to  the
    validity of the marriage in accordance with Dutch law.

3.   Although valiantly argued by Ms Ofei-Kwatia that the  decision  of  the
    judge fell within the scope of Kareem [2014] UKUT  24  (IAC)  I  cannot
    agree with her.  In TA and Others [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC) it was  clear
    that following the decision in  Kareem  the  determination  of  whether
    there is a marital relationship for the purposes of the EEA Regulations
    must always be examined in accordance with the laws of the member state
    from which the Union citizen obtains nationality.  In this  case  there
    was no evidence in connection with the validity of the  proxy  marriage
    as per Dutch law, and in the absence of that it is plain that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge erred in finding  that  the  marriage  entitled  Mr
    Kumah to an EEA residence card.

4.   Mr Kumah through his representatives submitted a Rule 24 reply  seeking
    to in effect cross-appeal,  submitting  that  the  respondent  had  not
    discharged the burden of proof with regard to a  durable  relationship.
    The respondent in her letter accompanying  the  decision  refusing  the
    residence card did consider the existence or  otherwise  of  a  durable
    relationship.  The grounds seeking permission to appeal  that  decision
    to the First-tier Tribunal did not challenge that finding.  The  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal was  solely  around  the  issue  of  the
    validity of the proxy marriage.

5.   It cannot be an error of law for the First-tier  Tribunal  to  fail  to
    consider a ground of appeal that was not put to them and it  cannot  be
    an error of law  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  fail  to  consider
    something or to fail to make findings on a matter that was not pleaded.
     The applicant was legally represented both at the time of  the  making
    of this application, the submission of his grounds of appeal and before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

6.   I therefore set aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  and
    remake the decision by dismissing Mr Kumah's appeal against the refusal
    to grant him a residence card.




Signed                                  Date 20th October 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

