
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA333312015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 9 June 2017                           |On 31 July 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                             Mr Balwinder Singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian, Counsel, instructed by Lawise
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The applicant in this case is a national of India who was  born  on  15
    July 1990.  He arrived in this country in July 2010  with  leave  as  a
    student until 10 February 2012.  In March 2012 he applied  for  further
    leave to remain in the course of which he submitted an English language
    certificate which had been issued by ETS as evidence that  he  had  the
    required level of English proficiency.  His application was refused  on
    17 July 2012 without a right of appeal following  which  the  appellant
    remained without leave.

 2. Subsequently on 13 February 2015 the appellant made a  new  application
    for leave to remain on the basis of his family and private life in this
    country.   By  this  time  he  had  a  partner  (the  couple  had  been
    religiously but not civilly married) and had one  child  who  had  been
    born in 2013.  They subsequently had another child born in 2016.

 3. The application was refused by the Respondent,  who  also  found  after
    very careful consideration that the English  language  certificate  had
    been produced by fraud because the appellant had used a proxy  to  take
    the exam on his behalf.  It is not necessary for the purposes  of  this
    decision for the reasons which appear below to go into  the  merits  of
    this aspect of the decision.

 4. The appellant appealed against this decision.   His  appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge A J Parker sitting at  Bennett  House,
    Stoke-on-Trent on 7  November  2016  and  in  a  Decision  and  Reasons
    promulgated on 23 November 2016 Judge Parker dismissed the appeal.

 5. Essentially he found that the appellant had indeed exercised  deception
    in obtaining the English language certificate and as a result there was
    a large public interest in removing him from the country.  The findings
    with regard to  the  test  certificate  are  essentially  contained  at
    paragraph 33 in which the reasons are given.  In  this  paragraph,  the
    judge found as follows:

         "He says the test was taken over two days.  The appellant, for  the
         reasons explained, has  manifestly  failed  to  raise  an  innocent
         explanation of any element of the prima  facie  case  of  deception
         established against him.  It  follows  that  there  is  no  further
         transfer of proof to the Secretary of State.  We  have  no  further
         evidence on this point and I therefore have to find that  I  uphold
         the refusal on suitability grounds."

 6. I should mention at this  stage  that  in  evidence  submitted  by  the
    respondent there is a printout from the  ETS  SELT  source  data  which
    shows that the test relied on had in fact only been taken on  one  day,
    which was 21 March 2012, and not two days, as the appellant  had  given
    evidence it had.

 7. The appellant now appeals with limited  leave  against  this  decision.
    Although the  appellant  has  sought  to  challenge  the  finding  that
    deception was used in obtaining the English language certificate he was
    refused permission to argue this, in my opinion rightly so  because  it
    is clear that it was open to the judge on the evidence before  him  and
    especially the discrepancy between the  appellant's  evidence  and  the
    material which is in the file to reach this finding.  I note also  that
    the judge did make a finding that the relationship with  Ms  Kaur,  his
    partner/wife, was a genuine one and the couple  have  two  children  as
    claimed.

 8. Ms Kaur has indefinite leave to remain in this country and  accordingly
    her children, who were born in this country at a time when  she  was  a
    settled migrant, are British citizens.  A decision which will have  the
    effect  of  requiring  the  appellant  to  return  to  his  country  of
    nationality would have the effect that either his "wife"  and  children
    would have to leave with him or, if they do not, the  family  would  be
    separated.  It may be that the respondent would be able to  argue  that
    in the circumstances of this case  separation  would  be  proportionate
    because of the large public  interest  in  preventing  people  who  use
    deception from behaving in this way but before a decision can be  taken
    as to whether or not such a separation would be lawful/proportionate it
    is necessary to consider properly the best interests of  the  children.
    It is argued in the grounds that it is plain from the decision that the
    judge failed properly to consider the best interests of the children.

 9. Acting on behalf of the respondent, when considering this objection, Mr
    Wilding said as follows:

         "When the position of one family member is  considered,  there  are
         two possible outcomes; either the entire family go to India  or  is
         it proportionate to separate the  family?   The  appellant  has  to
         establish both that it would not be proportionate  to  require  the
         entire family to go to India and that it would not be proportionate
         to separate them either.

         The difficulty I have with this determination  is,  on  reflection,
         that I cannot point to any findings to show  that  the  failure  to
         consider the best  interests  of  the  children  and  the  knock-on
         effects, is not material.  The judge has effectively made a finding
         of  deception  and  held  this  against  the   appellant,   without
         considering anything else, and in  particular  the  effect  on  the
         children.

         While we can argue that separation is proportionate, that  has  not
         been considered in the decision.  There is also a slight tension as
         to how Section 117B(6) applies - we would  say  that  there  is  no
         expectation that a child would be expected  to  go  to  India,  but
         within the Immigration Rules the respondent would not argue that  a
         British citizen child should leave the  UK.   The  Act  presupposes
         that it is not offensive for a British citizen child to leave.

         So, on reflection, over the midday adjournment, I  would  say  that
         this decision is not sustainable."

10. I agree.  The judge was required to consider carefully whether  or  not
    in light of the disruption to the family, and in particular to the  two
    British children, which would be occasioned by the decision which would
    necessitate  the  appellant  leaving  the   UK,   such   upheaval   was
    proportionate in terms of the public interest of making him leave.   In
    order to give  proper  consideration  to  this,  the  judge  needed  to
    consider the best interests of the two children, which plainly  he  has
    not done.

11. Accordingly, the decision must be remade, and in the circumstances,  on
    application on behalf of the appellant that this is a  course  that  he
    would invite the Tribunal to follow, I consider that it is  appropriate
    to remit this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal, sitting at Taylor
    House, (because the family now live in Ilford),  for  consideration  by
    any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge A  J
    Parker.

12. As in my judgment the findings of fact both with  regard  to  deception
    having been used in obtaining the English language certificate and also
    that there is a genuine family relationship between the  appellant,  Ms
    Kaur and their children is wholly sustainable, I will also direct  that
    these findings be retained  for  the  purposes  of  the  rehearing.   I
    accordingly make the following decision:

    Decision

    The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge A J Parker is  set  aside  as
    containing an error of law.  The appeal will be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor House, to be reheard by any  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge other than Judge A J Parker.

    For the purposes of this appeal, the finding at paragraph 33  of  Judge
    Parker's decision, from the third sentence onwards is retained, and may
    not be reopened.  The effect is that for the purposes of  this  appeal,
    the appellant must be taken to have used deception in order  to  obtain
    his TOEIC certificate.

    The finding that the family relationship between the appellant, Ms Kaur
    and their children is a genuine and subsisting one, is also preserved.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 25 July 2017





