
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: Ia/33284/2014
                                                               IA/33297/2014
                                                               IA/33288/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 19 August 2015                    |On 14 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                                  ipek efe
                                 gulfer efe
                                  ozgur efe
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ian Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Seema Kansal, Counsel, instructed by Kings
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Telford)  allowing  the
    respondents' appeal against a decision taken on 6 August 2014 to refuse
    the respondents' applications for indefinite leave to remain in the  UK
    on the basis that the first respondent is the married partner of  Yusuf
    Efe who is a British citizen ("the  sponsor").  The  second  and  third
    respondents are child dependents.

Introduction

 3. The respondents applied for a variation of leave to remain on 6  August
    2014.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the application on the  basis  that  the
    required ESOL certificate had not been supplied by the date of decision
    and a letter was received from the sponsor on 10 July 2014 stating that
    the parties were no longer together and had decided  to  split  up  for
    good.

The Appeal

 5. The respondents appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  and  attended  an
    oral hearing at Hatton Cross on 26 February 2015. They were represented
    by Ms Kansal. The Secretary of State was not  represented.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal found that the argument was merely a temporary spat,  the
    parties were residing together and the  marriage  was  subsisting.  The
    judge offered some marital advice at paragraph 10 of the decision.  The
    judge had an ESOL certificate from June  2014  which  was  accepted  as
    valid and meeting the language criteria. The appeal was allowed.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in  law
    because it was not clear when or whether the ESOL certificate had  been
    submitted to the Secretary of State. The judge  had  acknowledged  that
    the certificate had been submitted too late to be considered before the
    decision. The proper course was to remit the case to the  Secretary  of
    State in order to allow proper consideration of the document.

 7.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hollingworth on 20 May 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that  the
    Secretary of State should have been given the opportunity of inspecting
    the certificate.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 9. Mr Jarvis initially submitted that the judge had fallen into  error  by
    allowing the appeal without reference to all of the Immigration  Rules,
    namely paragraph 27 of Appendix FM-SE which provides that the  evidence
    of passing the English language test in  speaking  and  listening  must
    take the form of a certificate and/or  other  documents  and  the  Home
    Office must be able to  verify  the  evidence  online.  Further  checks
    carried out had  established  that  Trinity  College  was  an  approved
    provider for the purposes of the appeal but further checks carried  out
    on 18 August 2015 to verify the document had  been  unsuccessful.  That
    was because there was no online verification of  the  ESOL  certificate
    submitted by the first respondent. The judge should have dismissed  the
    appeal on the basis that the ESOL certificate had not been verified  or
    at least adjourned the hearing for the requisite check to be made.

10. Ms Kansal  responded  that  the  ESOL  certificate  had  been  sent  by
    solicitors on 11 June 2014 and the Home Office had signed  for  receipt
    on 16 June 2014. That is confirmed by  documents  in  the  respondents'
    bundle. The Secretary of State chose not to attend the hearing  and  it
    was wrong to take issue with a document sent before  the  hearing.  The
    judge was entitled to make a decision. On line testing is discretionary
    but those Rules were not in force in August 2014 in any event. There is
    no mention of online verification in the Rules in force  in  2014.  The
    online verification requirement does not feature in the refusal letter.



11. After further exchanges of submissions,  Mr  Jarvis  conceded  that  he
    could not go so far as to submit that  the  ESOL  certificate  was  not
    genuine. However, the relevant date for  the  Rules  was  the  date  of
    hearing. Ms Kansal checked  the  archived  version  of  the  Rules  and
    submitted that the Rules in force as at the date of  hearing  were  the
    same as those in force as at the  date  of  decision.  Mr  Jarvis  then
    helpfully conceded that the judge might not have made an error  of  law
    and that he was happy for the Upper Tribunal to research the matter and
    determine the appeal.

12. Ms Kansal supplied a copy of the Rules in  force  as  at  the  date  of
    decision  and  hearing  shortly  after  the  Upper   Tribunal   hearing
    concluded. I have considered those Rules and find that paragraph 27  of
    Appendix FM-SE did not include any requirement for online verification.
    The ESOL certificate was submitted by 16 June 2014  and  there  was  no
    requirement for online verification  between  June  2014  and  February
    2015. The ESOL certificate meets all of the requirements  of  paragraph
    27 as it was at the dates of decision and hearing. The judge  correctly
    found that the English language requirement was met.

13. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal under the Immigration Rules did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and its decision stands.

Decision

14. Consequently, I dismiss the appeal of the Secretary  of  State  against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   [pic]    Date 12 September 2015

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
