
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33548/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15 January 2018                        |On 06 February 2018               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                          Norman Adolphus Robinson
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Kouma, Solicitor, Migrant Legal Action
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica  and  his  date  of  birth  is  1
    December 1966.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  on
    12 October 2015  to  refuse  his  Article  8  claim.   His  appeal  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson in  a  decision  that
    was promulgated on 26 April 2017 following a hearing on 6 April 2017.

2.    The  judge  proceeded  in  the  absence  of  the  Appellant  and   his
    representatives, having noted at  paragraph  2  of  the  decision  that
    neither his nominated representatives nor the Appellant  attended.  The
    judge recorded that the representatives were telephoned on  their  last
    supplied  telephone  numbers  and  those  numbers  were  found  to   be
    unobtainable.   There  was  no  explanation  given  to   the   Tribunal
    explaining the failure to attend.  The judge  was  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant and his representative had been duly served with  the  notice
    of the hearing and was satisfied  that  it  was  in  the  interests  of
    justice to proceed with reference to Rule 28 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.

3.   Permission was granted to the Appellant by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Grant-Hutchison in a decision of 10 November  2017.   Thus  the  matter
    came before me.

4.   The grounds assert that the non-attendance of  the  Appellant  and  his
    representative occurred as a  result  of  an  administrative  error  on
    behalf of the Appellant's solicitor. In support of this, Ms Kouma,  the
    Appellant's solicitor provided a witness statement.  She  attended  the
    hearing before me to explain that she became aware of the mistake on 24
    April 2017 and wrote to the Tribunal the  following  day  on  25  April
    2017.  She cannot explain why  the  Tribunal  were  not  able  to  make
    telephone contact on the day of the hearing.

5.   Ms Kouma indicated that Migrant Legal Action take  full  responsibility
    for the error and that the Appellant is not to blame. She brought to my
    attention  that  the  notice  of  the   hearing   was   sent   to   the
    representatives only and not  to  the  Appellant's  home  address.   Ms
    Pettersen did not add anything other than that the hearing was properly
    listed on 6 April 2017 and that a notice had been properly sent to  the
    Appellant's solicitors.

6.   The error is most unfortunate. I accept that the  Appellant  cannot  be
    held responsible for the mistake made by those representing  and  which
    has had such serious consequences.  I accept  that  had  the  Appellant
    been made aware of the date of hearing he would have attended and  this
    may have led to a  different  outcome.  There  has  been  a  procedural
    irregularity resulting in unfairness.

7.   I set aside the decision to dismiss the Appellant's  appeal  and  remit
    the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

8.   The Appellant's solicitor is directed to submit a copy of  her  witness
    statement which was purported to have been attached to the  grounds  of
    appeal within seven days of the hearing.

9.   I make the following observations in relation to ground  2.   The  date
    of the deportation order is not entirely clear to me but it may be that
    it  was  made  more  than  ten  years  ago.   However,  this  does  not
    necessarily lead to a conclusion that  it  should  not  be  taken  into
    account, bearing in mind  from  the  limited  paperwork  before  me  it
    appears that the Appellant never in fact left the UK and  has  remained
    here in breach of that order.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed. The decision of the FtT is set aside and  the  matter
is remitted to the FtT for a hearing de novo.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam               Date 30 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam








