
[pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33464/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7th October 2014                           |On 20th November 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                        mr oladipupo Anthony hamilton
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Shaw (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Vidyadharan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against decisions to refuse to  vary  his  leave
    and to remove him  by  way  of  directions  under  section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 was  dismissed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Vaudin d'Imecourt ("the judge") in a  determination
    promulgated on 17th June 2014.  The appellant's case  was  advanced  on
    the basis that his removal, together with his three children,  was  not
    in accordance with the law or the Immigration Rules ("the  rules")  and
    would breach the human rights of himself and his children.

2.   The judge took into account the appellant's  immigration  history.   He
    arrived in May 2009 as the dependant of his  wife,  present  here  with
    limited leave.  The three children joined their parents in August 2009.
     The appellant and the children were  included  as  dependants  in  his
    wife's application for further leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  Highly
    Skilled  (General)  Migrant.   This  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State in April 2011.  An appeal was brought and it emerged
    at the hearing in June 2011 that the appellant's wife had  returned  to
    Nigeria.  The appeal was allowed so  that  the  family's  circumstances
    might be  considered.   Discretionary  leave  was  then  given  to  the
    appellant and his children for a period of  three  months,  until  11th
    July 2012, to enable them to make  arrangements  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  Shortly before expiry of that leave,  the  appellant  applied
    for indefinite leave, apparently under paragraph 317 of the rules.

3.   The Secretary of State refused the application on the  basis  that  the
    requirements of the rules were  not  met.   The  appellant's  case  was
    considered under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention  and  in  the
    light of section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
    2009.  The rules contained in Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  formed
    part of the Secretary of State's consideration of the application.

4.   The judge made findings of fact  regarding  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellant and his family.  He accepted that  the  three  children  were
    doing well at school here.  He found that the appellant's wife remained
    in  Nigeria  and  that  the  marriage  continued  and  that  there  was
    communication between the appellant  and  his  wife.   The  judge  also
    accepted that the appellant was  being  financially  supported  by  his
    brother in the United Kingdom.

5.   The  judge  took  into  account  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that the children's best  interests  required  that  they  be
    allowed to remain in the United Kingdom, particularly to continue their
    education.   The  judge  concluded  that  there  were   no   compelling
    circumstances requiring consideration outside the rules and no evidence
    that the children would not be able to receive an education in Nigeria,
    on removal with their father.  They would rejoin their mother  who,  on
    the evidence, missed  her  children.   The  judge  concluded  that  the
    adverse decisions were in accordance with the  law  and  dismissed  the
    appeal.

6.   An application for permission to appeal was made,  on  the  basis  that
    the judge  failed  to  make  clear  findings  and  gave  an  inadequate
    explanation for his conclusion that the decisions did not amount  to  a
    disproportionate breach of the appellant's Article 8  rights.   It  was
    contended that the application for leave was made before "the new  rule
    came to effect (sic)".  Permission to appeal was granted on 11th August
    2014, the judge granting permission finding that the  judge's  approach
    was arguably in error in the light of MM [2014] EWCA Civ 985.  The same
    judge noted that there was no merit in the argument that the  appellant
    made his application before "the new rule" came into effect as  it  was
    made on 9th July 2012.

7.   In a rule 24 response, the Secretary of State opposed the appeal.   The
    grounds disclosed nothing to show a material error and the  judge  made
    sustainable  findings.   The  determination  showed   that   he   fully
    considered  the  case,  including  in  relation  to   any   exceptional
    circumstances present.

Submissions on Error of Law

8.   Ms Shaw handed up a short bundle, including part of the judgment in  MM
    [2014] EWCA Civ 985, the judgment in ZH (Tanzania) [2011]  UKSC  4  and
    section 55 of the 2009 Act.  She said that the judge erred  in  law  by
    adopting the wrong approach.  Paragraph 33 of the determination  showed
    that he had not taken into account  or  assessed  the  welfare  of  the
    children, in the light of the section 55 duty.  It was  clear  from  MM
    that it was not necessary to show  "exceptional  circumstances"  before
    proceeding to make an Article 8 assessment.  The ties established  here
    by the appellant and his family and the best interests of the  children
    fell to be considered.  The judge's failure to undertake this  exercise
    amounted to an error of law.  If the Upper Tribunal agreed, it would be
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal  for  findings
    to be made.

9.   Ms Vidyadharan said that the grounds revealed a disagreement  with  the
    outcome but the findings were  open  to  the  judge  on  the  evidence.
    Paragraph 28 on showed that he carried out a thorough exercise  in  the
    Article 8 context.  He  was  well  aware  of  the  factual  matrix  and
    accepted evidence showing that the children were doing well at  school.
    He was entitled to observe that there was nothing  to  show  that  good
    schools were not available in Nigeria.  The  appellant  and  his  three
    children had been present in the United  Kingdom  for  only  a  limited
    period of time.  The judge found that the appellant's wife remained  in
    Nigeria and the marriage continued.  The appellant's brother  would  be
    able to continue to offer support.

10.  In any event, paragraphs 32 and 33 showed that the judge  did  consider
    the position fully, including outside the rules.  He came  to  a  clear
    conclusion that it was in the best interests of the children to  return
    to Nigeria.  The only factor raised of substance  was  their  education
    here.   Other  than  that,  there  appeared  to  be  no   circumstances
    justifying leave outside the rules and Article  8  was  clearly  not  a
    freestanding right for  a  family  to  choose  the  location  of  their
    residence.  The judge was entitled to conclude, at paragraph  34,  that
    an assessment of proportionality outside the rules was unlikely to lead
    to any other result than the conclusion he reached in  accordance  with
    the authorities he identified in paragraph 33.  There was  no  material
    error.

11.  In a brief response, Ms Shaw said that although the mother was  clearly
    a key member of the family, her circumstances were almost irrelevant to
    the case.  Critical were the best interests of the children  and  their
    welfare while in the United Kingdom.  The three children were  thriving
    and there was a risk that by removing them from their  environment  and
    their education, this would have a detrimental impact on them.

Conclusion on Error of Law

12.  The determination is fully and clearly reasoned by a  very  experienced
    judge.  It contains a succinct summary of the  cases  advanced  by  the
    parties.  The judge had the appellant's immigration history clearly  in
    mind, as he did the circumstances of the three children.   He  accepted
    that the children were doing well at  school.   They  arrived  here  in
    August 2009.

13.  I find that the findings of fact made by the judge were open to him  in
    the light of the evidence.  The appellant and his three  children  were
    found to be healthy and to benefit  from  financial  support  from  the
    appellant's brother.  The judge found that this financial support would
    continue if the appellant and his children returned  to  Nigeria.   The
    judge was entitled to find that the marriage continued, the appellant's
    wife remaining in Nigeria, and that she missed her children, who missed
    her and, of course, the appellant missed his wife.  So far as education
    is concerned, having accepted that the children were doing well here he
    was entitled to find that there was nothing to show that there were  no
    good schools in Nigeria which they could not attend.

14.  At paragraph 32, the judge took into account the  limited  leave  given
    to the appellant and his children, as his wife's dependents.  She  left
    the United Kingdom, having been unable to meet the requirements of  the
    rules in relation to Tier 1 of the points-based system.

15.   The  judge  set  out  several  of  the  recent  authorities   on   the
    relationship between the rules in their post 9th  July  2012  form  and
    Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.  He did not expressly mention
    MM [2014] EWCA Civ 985 but as the judgment only appeared on  11th  July
    2014, nearly a month after promulgation of the determination, he cannot
    sensibly be criticised  for  that.    Ms  Shaw  drew  my  attention  to
    paragraph 128 of the judgment in that case, in which  it  was  observed
    that there was not much utility in  imposing  a  further,  intermediary
    test, that if a person is  outside  an  immigration  rule,  he  has  to
    demonstrate, as a preliminary to consideration outside the rules,  that
    he has an arguable case that there may be  good  grounds  for  granting
    leave outside them.  Ms Vidyadharan said that those remarks were obiter
    and that the best guidance was to be found in the judgment of the Court
    of Appeal in Haleemundeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558.

16.   In  making  a  primary  finding  that   there   were   no   compelling
    circumstances which would necessitate consideration outside the  rules,
    the judge was certainly deploying phraseology found in  Gulshan  [2013]
    UKUT 00640 and Haleemundeen.  On the other hand, even if paragraph  128
    of the judgment in MM is obiter, it followed a survey of  recent  cases
    by the Court of Appeal and clearly has weight.   I  conclude,  however,
    that there is no fundamental  difference  between  the  two  cases,  in
    relation to the guidance they contain.  What is clear from  the  recent
    authorities is that in any Article  8  assessment  outside  the  rules,
    consideration of "compelling circumstances" amounts to nothing more and
    nothing less than an assessment of whether the  decision  under  appeal
    produces a disproportionate outcome, as explained by Sir John Dyson  in
    MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

17.  In the present appeal, I accept Ms Vidyadharan's  submission  that  the
    judge did, in fact, consider whether the adverse immigration  decisions
    amounted to a disproportionate response.  This is clear from  paragraph
    34 of the determination, where he found that an assessment outside  the
    rules would be "unlikely to lead to any other result" i.e., any  result
    other than the conclusion that removal to Nigeria would not breach  the
    human rights of the appellant or those of his children.

18.  In reaching that conclusion, it is clear from  the  determination  that
    the judge had all the salient features of the case clearly in mind  and
    did not overlook any relevant factor.  Emphasis was placed on the  best
    interests of the children as requiring that  they  remain  here  to  be
    educated in  the  schools  they  attend.   The  judge  made  a  careful
    assessment of this case but found that it was not made out.  He did not
    in terms mention section 55 of the 2009 Act but this does not of itself
    reveal a material error,  in  the  light  of  his  careful  assessment.
    Overall, the judge's approach was, I  find,  entirely  consistent  with
    guidance given in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

19.  I conclude that the judge made no material error of law. He  cannot  be
    faulted for failing to take into account the judgment in  MM.   In  any
    event, he was entitled to find that an Article 8  assessment  conducted
    outside the rules  would  not  produce  a  result  different  from  the
    application of the rules themselves.  He made a careful  assessment  of
    the circumstances of the appellant and his children in the light of the
    evidence before him and his findings of fact are sustainable.

20.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of
    law and shall stand.

Decision

21.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, containing no  material  error
    of law, shall stand.



Signed        Date 19th November 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

