

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33550/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2nd September 2014                         |On 11th September 2014       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                             MR KOFI SARFO
                                  Claimant
                          (No anonymity order made)


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble ( Home office presenting officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Swain (Counsel instructed by Dot com
solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in the  determination  promulgated  by
    the First Tier Tribunal ( Judge  Thanki) on  23rd June 2014 in which he
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (  "EEA
    regulations" ).

Background

2.     The claimant is a citizen of Ghana whose date of birth is 8.8.1967.

3. The Secretary of State refused his application made  under  Regulation  8
   of the "EEA Regulations" on the grounds that he failed to  show  that  he
   was in a durable relationship.


4. The Tribunal found that the claimant was an extended family member  under
   Regulation 8 [32] and further that he qualified  under  Regulation  17(4)
   "EEA Regulations" for the grant of a residence card [33].

Grounds of appeal

5.    The Secretary of State argued that the Tribunal  erred  by  exercising
    discretion under Regulation 17(4), a)  where there was no  jurisdiction
    and b) the Tribunal  failed to apply YB( EEA reg17(4), proper  approach
    ) Ivory Coast [2008] UKAIT 00062.

6.     A written response was produced  under  Rule  24  on  behalf  of  the
    claimant.

Submisssions

7.      I  heard submissions from Mr Bramble and Mr Swain,  the  details  of
    which are set out in the Record of proceedings .  At  the  end  of  the
    hearing I announced my decision.  I found a material error  of  law  in
    the determination. I now give my reasons.

Discussion and conclusion

8.    The decision under Regulation 8 discloses no error of  law  and  shall
    stand. I am satisfied that the Tribunal did not  have  jurisdiction  to
    exercise  discretion  under Regulation 17(4) of the  "EEA  Regulations"
    (FD(EEA discretion - basis of appeal) Algeria 2007 EWCA Civ  981).  The
    discretion falls to the Secretary of State to exercise and arises as  a
    separate consideration after adopting a three stage approach. The first
    stage is to decide if Regulation 8 applies.  The fact that it  does  or
    does not apply cannot be treated as determinative of  the  question  of
    whether or not to issue a  residence  card.   There  must  then  be  an
    extensive examination of the circumstances of the applicant  which is a
    distinct stage exercised by the Secretary of State.   The  approach  is
    clearly set out in YB ( cited  above)  which  the  Tribunal  failed  to
    apply.

Decision

9.     There is a material error of law disclosed in the determination.
        The  decision under Regulation 8 shall stand.
        The decision made under Regulation 17(4) is set aside.
         The  matter  is  remitted  to  the  Secretary  of   State   for   a
    consideration under Regulation 17(4).



                               Signed                 Date 9.9.2014


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




                               NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE.
                               NO FEE AWARD MADE.




                               Signed                 Date 9.9.2014


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


