

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33822/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Determination Promulgated|
|On June 13, 2014                |On June 27, 2014         |
|                                |                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR JOSE JR MISOLA DORMIDO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Avery (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by Equalizers Limited

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department I will refer below to the parties as they were identified at
    the First-tier Hearing namely the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department will from hereon be referred to as  the  respondent  and  Mr
    Jose Jr Misola Dormido as the appellant.

 2. The appellant, born March 18, 1961, is a citizen of the Phillipines. On
    April 16, 2012 the appellant lodged form FLR(O) and applied  to  extend
    his leave to remain in order to give himself  more  time  to  pass  the
    "Life in the UK test "  or to obtain a relevant ESOL  with  citizenship
    material qualification.

 3. The respondent refused his application on July 24, 2013. The  appellant
    had not applied to remain  under  any  specific  Immigration  Rule  and
    considered his application under Appendix FM and  paragraph  276ADE  HC
    395. His application was refused under paragraph 322(1) HC 395 and  the
    respondent  further  stated  there  was  no  basis  to   consider   the
    application outside of the Immigration Rules for  article  8  purposes.
    The same day a decision was taken to refuse to vary his leave to  enter
    or remain and a decision was taken to remove him under  Section  47  of
    the Immigration, Asylum and nationality Act 2006.

 4. On August 15, 2013 the appellant appealed under section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 5. The matter was listed before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Adio
    (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on February 18, 2014 and  in  a
    determination promulgated on March 10, 2014  he  dismissed  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules but allowed  the  appeal  under  article  8
    ECHR.

 6. The respondent appealed that decision on March 18, 2014. Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Nicholson  on
    April  16,  2014  who  found  in  particular  that  ground  3  of   the
    respondent's grounds of appeal was arguable. Permission to  appeal  was
    given on all grounds.

 7. The matter was listed  before  me  on  the  above  date  and  both  the
    appellant and sponsor were in attendance.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 8. The appellant had lodged on May 19, 2014 an appeal out of time  against
    the refusal of the appellant's application under the Immigration Rules.
    I did not have that application  in  front  of  me  as  it  seemed  the
    paperwork was at the Hatton Cross Hearing centre.


 9. Ms Iqbal indicated at the start of the proceedings that she intended to
    seek to withdraw that appeal. She accepted  it  was  out  of  time  and
    whilst there may be good reasons she did  not  intend  to  pursue  that
    appeal further.

10. Rule 17 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 state:

    (1) Subject to paragraph (2), a party may give notice of the withdrawal
    of its case, or any part of it-


    (a)  at any time before a hearing  to  consider  the  disposal  of  the
    proceedings (or, if the Upper  Tribunal  disposes  of  the  proceedings
    without a hearing, before that disposal), by sending or  delivering  to
    the Upper Tribunal a written notice of withdrawal; or


    (b)  orally at a hearing.


    (2) Notice of withdrawal will not take effect unless the Upper Tribunal
    consents to the withdrawal except in relation  to  an  application  for
    permission to appeal.

11. In the circumstances, I gave  permission  for  the  appellant's  cross-
    appeal to be withdrawn.


12. I am therefore only left with the respondent's appeal.


    SUBMISSIONS


13. Mr Avery submitted the FtTJ had totally misunderstood  the  application
    before him and his whole approach amounted to an error.  The  appellant
    had not applied under the Rules but had  applied  to  extend  his  stay
    outside of the Rules. The FtTJ erred  by  finding  the  respondent  was
    wrong to deal with the application  under  the  new  Immigration  Rules
    because his application was not an application to extend his stay under
    the Rules but merely an application to allow him to remain  to  take  a
    test. Consequently, the respondent was right to deal  with  the  matter
    under appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE and the FtTJ  erred  by  firstly
    considering the application under the Immigration Rules and secondly by
    not following the approach set out in Gulshan [2013]  UKUT  00640.  The
    FtTJ should not have considered the application under paragraph 284  HC
    395 because the appellant's wife did not have  settled  status  at  the
    date of the application. The FtTJ having erred in his initial  approach
    he then erred by considering the application under  article  8  without
    following the Gulshan approach.  Even  if  the  FtTJ  was  entitled  to
    consider the case under article 8 be that under his own approach or  by
    finding it was a case that was arguable to be heard outside appendix FM
    and paragraph 276ADE the FtTJ failed to have regard  to  the  fact  the
    appellant had not passed his English language test. The Court of Appeal
    in Bibni and Anor [2013] EWCA Civ 322 confirms the FtTJ must give  full
    consideration to the respondent's public interest  policies.  The  FtTJ
    failed to have regard to these policies.  The  grant  under  article  8
    should be set aside.

14. Ms Iqbal submitted that the FtTJ had correctly considered  this  was  a
    case that fell under the old Rules. The respondent's own IDI's (Chapter
    9 Section 3.2 and 9) reiterate that the fact the appellant may not meet
    the Rules does not mean the respondent should not apply the appropriate
    Rule and then consider it  under  article  8.  She  submitted  this  is
    exactly what the FtTJ  did  and  there  was  nothing  wrong  with  this
    approach. On the basis this was the  correct  approach  the  FtTJ  then
    considered  article  8  between  paragraphs  [14]  and  [17]   of   his
    determination and he had regard to all of the factors in the  case.  It
    was open to him to allow the appeal. Alternatively, if the FtTJ  should
    have considered it as suggested by the respondent it is submitted  that
    this was a case that should be considered outside  the  Rules  and  the
    findings made by the FtTJ are sustainable.

15. Both parties agreed that in the event of there being an error in law  I
    would be able to conclude the case  without  taking  any  further  oral
    evidence.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

16. The appellant's immigration history reveals that he  first  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom with his son (aged 8) on October 13, 2010 as a  work
    permit dependant. His leave was valid until May 7, 2012. His  wife  had
    come to the United Kingdom as a work permit holder in August 2007.  She
    had submitted an application for indefinite leave to remain  on  behalf
    of herself and her son.


17. The appellant's application  was  accompanied  by  a  letter  from  his
    representatives dated April 13, 2012 that stated-


         "His wife ... and  their  child  ...  are  currently  applying  for
         indefinite leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  and  are  still
         awaiting a decision from the UKBA. Mr Dormido is yet  to  pass  the
         "Life in the UK Test" or obtain a relevant ESOL  ...  qualification
         hence this application for extension to give him more time. "


    Prior to April 6, 2012 such applications were  governed  by  paragraphs
    128-133 HC 395 but on April 6, 2012 these paragraphs were deleted by HC
    1888 except insofar as relevant to paragraphs 134 to 135.

18. The problem the appellant faced was he had not passed the English  test
    and unlike his son this  was  a  mandatory  requirement.  So  when  the
    appellant applied to extend his time in the United Kingdom  he  had  to
    meet the new Rules because his  application  was  not  submitted  until
    April 13, 2012. In order to be granted indefinite leave  to  remain  he
    would have needed to demonstrate he had "sufficient  knowledge  of  the
    English language and sufficient knowledge  about  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom, in accordance with paragraph 33BA of these Rules."


19. The FtTJ formed an opinion that the respondent should  have  considered
    this application under paragraph 284 HC 395 but  in  order  to  succeed
    under this Rule the appellant's wife had to be both present and settled
    in the United Kingdom.

20. "Settled in the United Kingdom" is defined in the Immigration Rules  as
    meaning-

         "(a) is free from any restriction on the period for  which  he  may
         remain save that a person entitled to an exemption under Section  8
         of the Immigration Act 1971 (otherwise than as a member of the home
         forces) is not to be regarded as  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom
         except in so far as Section 8(5A) so provides; and


         (b) is either:


         (i) ordinarily  resident  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  having
         entered or remained in breach of the immigration laws; or


         (ii)  despite  having  entered  or  remained  in  breach   of   the
         immigration laws, has subsequently entered  lawfully  or  has  been
         granted leave to remain and is ordinarily resident."

21. When the appellant submitted his application the appellant's  wife  did
    have a restriction on the period she could remain because she had  come
    to the United Kingdom as a work permit holder.


22. The reason for seeking an extension was not a  matter  covered  by  the
    Immigration Rules and he was refused under  paragraph  322(1)  HC  395.
    This states that leave is to be refused where the variation  sought  is
    not covered by the Rules.

23. The Court of Appeal in Edgehill and another v The  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 407 considered how  the  Courts
    should  approach  applications  made  before  July  9,  2012  but   not
    considered until after that date. They concluded-

         "29. Aided by this guidance, I now return to the central  issue  in
         the two current appeals. Mr Bourne submits that  applications  made
         under article 8 before 9th July 2012 did not fall under any of  the
         Immigration Rules, either old or new. The decision maker simply had
         to apply article 8, taking into  account  the  wealth  of  guidance
         provided by Strasbourg and the domestic courts.


         30. The next stage  in  Mr  Bourne's  argument  is  that  appellate
         tribunals make article 8 decisions  by  reference  to  the  current
         state of affairs, not by reference to the state of affairs when the
         Secretary of State reached her decision. In  both  of  the  present
         cases the current  state  of  affairs  included  new  rule  276ADE,
         providing a requirement for 20 years' continuous residence.


         31. I admire  the  dexterity  of  this  argument.  Nevertheless  it
         produces  the  bizarre  result  that  the  new  rules  impact  upon
         applications  made  before  9th  July   2012,   even   though   the
         transitional provisions expressly state that they do not do so.


         32. The Immigration  Rules  need  to  be  understood  not  only  by
         specialist immigration counsel, but also  by  ordinary  people  who
         read the rules and try to abide by them. I do  not  think  that  Mr
         Bourne's interpretation of the transitional provisions accords with
         the interpretation, which any  ordinary  reader  would  place  upon
         them. To adopt the language of Lord Brown in  Mahad,  "the  natural
         and ordinary meaning  of  the  words,  recognising  that  they  are
         statements of the Secretary of State's administrative  policy,"  is
         that the Secretary of State will not  place  reliance  on  the  new
         rules when dealing with applications made before 9th July 2012.


         33. Accordingly, my answer to the question posed in  this  part  of
         the judgment is no...."

24. Mr Avery has sought to argue that as this was not an application  under
    the Immigration Rules the transitional procedures did not apply.


25. Ms Iqbal referred me to the respondent's own IDIs at Chapter 9, section
    3.2 and 9. These state:
          "3.2.  Applications for leave outside the Rules
         Applications for leave or variation  of  leave  on  an  exceptional
         basis should be considered both under and outside the Rules.  Where
         the applicant does not qualify under the Rules, and the exercise of
         discretion outside the Rules  is  inappropriate,  refusal  will  be
         necessary.


         It  is  important  to  note  that  where  an  application  is  made
         specifically  for  "exceptional"  leave  to  remain,  it   is   not
         appropriate to refuse solely  for  the  reason  that  there  is  no
         provision within the Rules for leave to remain on that basis.  Such
         applications are by definition a request to depart from  the  Rules
         and are made in recognition of the fact that the applicant fails to
         meet the requirements of the relevant Rule or Rules, for example:


            . applications for leave  to  remain  here  exceptionally  with
              family members who are dependent on the  applicant  (and  not
              vice versa); or


            . applications for  exceptional  leave  to  remain  because  of
              temporary disturbance in  the home country.
         The first application falls under the dependent relative Rules but
         calls for careful consideration outside the Rules. The second
         application may on occasions fall to be considered under the
         visitor Rules, depending on the facts of the case (see paragraph
         9.1 below), but otherwise will fall to be refused under Paragraph
         322(1) of the Rules. Consideration should nevertheless be given to
         departing from the Rules.
         9. NO PROVISION IN THE RULES
         The Tribunal have previously held that  where  no  applicable  Rule
         exists the appellate authorities have jurisdiction  to  review  the
         merits of the decision (by virtue of Section  19(1)(a)(ii)  of  the
         1971 Act). However Paragraphs 320(1)  and  322(1)  of  HC  395  now
         provide  for  the  mandatory  refusal  under  the  Rules   of   all
         applications when either entry or variation of leave is sought  for
         a purpose not covered by the Immigration Rules.  Consequently,  any
         application not provided for elsewhere in the Rules will  fall  for
         mandatory refusal under one of these two rules and the jurisdiction
         of the appellate  authorities  will  be  restricted  by  virtue  of
         section 19(2).
         However, it is surprisingly rare that there really is  no  relevant
         provision in the Rules which apply to  a  case.  Such  "impossible"
         applications should not be confused with "inappropriate" ones  (see
         paragraph 6 above). The fact  that  a  person  does  not  seemingly
         qualify under any Rule does not mean there is no Rule applicable. A
         dependent cousin falls to be considered under Paragraph 317 because
         that is the Rule, which applies to dependent relatives. He does not
         qualify because he is not related to the sponsor in any of the ways
         set out in Paragraph 317(i).
26. The appellant submitted an application to remain. There does not appear
    to be a Rule that  covered  his  application  so  his  application  was
    properly refused under paragraph 322(1) HC  395.  Taking  into  account
    these IDIs and the guidance given in Edgehill, along with the statement
    in HC 194 concerning how applications for leave  to  remain  should  be
    treated, I am satisfied that Ms Iqbal's submissions have merit and this
    is an appeal that was submitted prior to July 9, 2012 and  was  refused
    under the Immigration Rules and it is a an application that  should  be
    dealt with by the Rules in place prior to July 9, 2012.

27. I accept Ms Iqbal's submission that the FtTJ was entitled  to  consider
    the appeal under article  8  ECHR  and  there  was  no  requirement  to
    consider the appeal under the Gulshan principles.

28. The FtTJ's assessment of article 8 can be found between paragraphs [14]
    and [17] of his determination. The FtTJ followed the Razgar  principles
    in paragraph [14] of his determination and identified  that  the  issue
    was one of proportionality.

29. The FtTJ took into account the following matters:-

     a. The appellant came to the United Kingdom on  a  visa  to  join  the
        sponsor. His son came with him and they had  been  living  together
        for three years.
     b. The appellant did not satisfy the Immigration Rules.
     c. The appellant had not passed an appropriate English  language  test
        but he had entered the United Kingdom at a time  when  the  English
        language test was not a requirement of the Rules.
     d. The appellant acknowledged he would have to take the  life  in  the
        United Kingdom test.
     e. Removal would mean the appellant would be separated from  his  wife
        and son.
     f. His son was doing well at school.
     g. He placed emphasis on the fact that the appellant and his son  were
        given permission to join the sponsor.

30. The FtTJ concluded that removal would be unjustifiably  harsh  and  was
    likely to lead to a long break up of the family and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable and he therefore found removal disproportionate and amounted
    to a breach of his right to family life. Ms  Iqbal  has  adopted  these
    findings and submits there is no material error in the FtTJ's approach.




31. Mr Avery has argued that the FtTJ materially erred  in  his  article  8
    assessment by:-

     a. Failing to attach sufficient weight to the fact the  appellant  had
        not passed an appropriate English test.
     b. Overlooked the fact that the appellant came to the  United  Kingdom
        not as a spouse dependant but as a work permit dependant.

32. In paragraph [16] of his determination the FtTJ clearly considered  his
    lack of an English test but also had regard to the fact  there  was  no
    such a requirement when he arrived. If there is a criticism to be  made
    it is the possible assumption of what visa the appellant was seeking to
    extend although in reality the appellant was seeking to extend his stay
    with the sponsor who in turn had applied for indefinite leave to remain-
    something I am told she has since been granted.


33. The FtTJ clearly had regard to all the factors  in  his  assessment  of
    article 8 and his conclusions are contained in paragraphs [15] to [17].



34. This was a well reasoned determination that had regard to  all  of  the
    factors and Mr Avery has not persuaded me that there has been an  error
    in law.

    DECISION

35. There is no material error of law. The original decision shall stand.

36. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.




Signed:                                 Dated:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

I uphold the fee award made in the First-tier Tribunal.


                                  Dated:

Signed:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
