
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/33528/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12th April 2016                       |   On 22nd April 2016               |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between


               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                              raHila sahebzada
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Ahmed of Counsel instructed by Harbans Singh
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge Buckwell  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 20th November 2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a female citizen of Afghanistan born 10th May 1980  who
    was granted entry clearance to the United  Kingdom  as  the  spouse  of
    Mohammad Daud Sahebzadah (the Sponsor) who is a British citizen.

 4. On 5th June 2014 the Claimant applied for further leave  to  remain  as
    the Sponsor's spouse.

 5. On 14th August 2014 the Secretary of State refused the  application  as
    the Claimant had failed to provide an English language test certificate
    as required by paragraph 284(ix)(a) of the Immigration Rules.

 6. The Claimant appealed to the FtT.  By the time  the  FtT  hearing  took
    place, the Claimant had obtained an  English  language  certificate  at
    Level A1 of the CEFR.  The FtT decided that as this certificate had not
    been considered by the Secretary of State, it was appropriate  to  find
    the Secretary of State's decision not in accordance with the  law,  and
    therefore the Claimant's application remained  outstanding  before  the
    Secretary of State, so that the English language certificate  could  be
    considered.

 7. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The grounds relied upon Appendix  FM-SE  paragraph  D  which
    states that the initial decision maker  will  only  consider  documents
    submitted with the application unless certain exceptions  apply,  which
    the Secretary of State contended did not apply in this case.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on 15th January 2015.

 9. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal Mr  Mills  conceded  that  the
    decision of the FtT disclosed no error of law, and  accepted  that  the
    application made by the Secretary  of  State  was  flawed,  in  placing
    reliance upon Appendix FM-SE, as  this  was  an  application  that  was
    considered pursuant to  paragraph  284,  and  Appendix  FM-SE  was  not
    relevant.  Mr Mills accepted that the decision of the FtT must stand.

10. In view of the concession made on behalf of the Secretary of  State,  I
    find no error of law was made by the FtT.   The  decision  of  the  FtT
    stands, and it is now for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  consider  the
    English language test certificate, the original of which is held by the
    Sponsor, and should be submitted to the Secretary of State.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FtT did  not  involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law such that the decision must be set aside.  I do  not
set aside the decision.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.  There has been no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and no anonymity order is made.

Signed                              Date: 13th April 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the decision of the FtT stands, so does the decision not to  make  a  fee
award.

Signed                              Date: 13th April 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


