



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33482/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                    |Decision & Reasons         |
|                                                |Promulgated                |
|On 9th September 2015                           |On 30th September 2015     |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                           mr ronnie aboagye poku
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Brown, of Counsel instructed by Greenland
Lawyers LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clark, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant Ronnie Aboagye Poku is  a  citizen  of  Ghana  born  27th
    February 1984. He makes the following claims;

      . he was born in the United Kingdom and spent part of  his  childhood
        years here before being taken back to Ghana.

      . he re-entered the UK in 1999 and has remained here ever since.

 2. The Respondent disputes both of  those  claims  and  asserts  that  the
    Appellant was born in Ghana and entered  as  a  visitor  only  in  1999
    remaining here periodically and returning to Ghana  in  between  times.
    Therefore he has not lived here continuously, as claimed, since 1999.

 3. On 13th February 2007 the Appellant, who was it is accepted, in the  UK
    at that time, made application for indefinite leave to  remain  on  the
    basis of his Article 8 ECHR rights. It was said  that  it  would  be  a
    breach of those rights to require him to return to Ghana since  he  had
    lived in the UK since  1999.  That  application  was  refused  and  his
    subsequent appeal against the decision was dismissed by Judge Ross in a
    determination promulgated on 14th October 2008.

 4. On 29th September 2012 the Appellant made  a  further  application  for
    leave to remain.  This application was also refused by the  Respondent,
    on 26th November 2013, with no right of appeal. The Appellant therefore
    issued Judicial Review  proceedings  and  consequently  the  Respondent
    agreed to reconsider her decision.  That reconsideration resulted in  a
    further refusal of leave but this time with a right of appeal  attached
    to it.  The Appellant exercised his right to appeal  and  this  is  the
    decision which came before FtT Judge Lawrence.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal.  The  Appellant
    sought and was granted permission to appeal to the UT. Thus the  matter
    comes  before  me  to  determine,  initially,  whether  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision contains an error of law requiring it  to  be
    set aside and remade.

UT Hearing - Error of Law

 6. The starting point, in any decision on this Appellant's case, has to be
    to make clear findings on his claimed history.   I  noted  earlier  the
    Appellant makes two significant claims;

      i) he entered the UK in 1999 and has remained since;

     ii) he was born in the UK and spent part  of  his  childhood  here  (UK
         birth certificate produced).

    It was therefore incumbent upon the First-tier Tribunal to  assess  the
    Appellant's history and make clear reasoned findings of fact  on  those
    two claims. Those findings of fact would then of course in turn, impact
    upon whether or not the Appellant meets the relevant Immigration  Rules
    and/or effect the proportionality test in Article 8. I find  the  FtT's
    fact  finding  unclear  and  therefore  lacking  in  reasons  for   its
    conclusions. I say this for the following reasons.

 7. At [11] and [12] the FtT considers the birth  certificate  provided  by
    the Appellant. The Judge acknowledges that  the  Respondent  challenged
    the birth certificate goes on to say,

         "...It is trite law to  assert  the  legal  burden  lies  with  the
         appellant from state (sic) to finish. However, when the  respondent
         challenges an assertion made by the appellant the respondent  bears
         the evidential, not legal-that  remains  with  the  appellant  from
         start to finish-burden to support her challenge. In the instant she
         has chosen to rely on assertions but not evidence. I  find  in  the
         absence of proper and lawful challenge, the  appellant  was  indeed
         born in the UK as he asserts."

    It is hard to follow what the FtT's reasoning is here.   The  challenge
    to the birth certificate raised by the Respondent was in the context of
    the fact that the Respondent had before her evidence in the form of the
    Appellant's "genuine" Ghanaian passport which  clearly  showed  him  to
    have been born in Ghana. I am satisfied the Judge failed to factor  in,
    what is  clearly  a  relevant  piece  of  evidence  when  reaching  his
    conclusion above.

 8. So far as the core issue of whether the Appellant has been  in  the  UK
    since 1999 is concerned, I find that at [13] the Judge appears to doubt
    that the Appellant entered  the  UK  as  far  back  as  1999  but  then
    announced at the close of the hearing that he was  satisfied  that  the
    evidence suggested that the Appellant had been in the UK since entering
    in 23rd October 1999. However not content with doing that he went on to
    record in his determination that he had made  a  premature  finding  in
    that regard. He then made a finding that the  Appellant  had  not  been
    continuously in the UK since 1999 but instead had been here only  since
    September 2005. Again his reasoning for that finding and his change  of
    mind is unclear.

 9. Likewise I find there are insufficient reasons  given  for  stating  at
    [19]

         "...There is no clear evidence as to when he returned to Ghana  but
         he must have been in Ghana when he made the 2002  six  month  visit
         visa."

    There is no identification of what evidence the  Judge  draws  upon  to
    form that conclusion.

10. It is of relevance that the Judge makes no reference whatsoever to  the
    decision of IJ  Ross  promulgated  on  14th  October  2008.  IJ  Ross's
    decision forms  part  of  the  Respondent's  case;  it  contains  clear
    findings of fact. Whilst the FtT  Judge  has  the  undoubted  right  to
    depart from those findings, he must nevertheless make it clear  why  he
    chooses to do so and what evidence it is that causes him  to  follow  a
    different course.

11. Finally I return to the point made at paragraph 8 of  my  decision.  At
    [19] the Judge said that he indicated at the end of  the  hearing  that
    the evidence suggested that the Appellant had  been  in  the  UK  since
    October 1999. I am satisfied that in this case, the consequence of this
    declaration  amounted  to  a  procedural  unfairness.  Miss  Brown  who
    appeared before me at the UT also appeared in the  FtT.  She  indicated
    that having received that concession, she curtailed her submissions and
    therefore did not address evidence which may well have led the Judge to
    find differently. I accept that submission and I am satisfied that this
    amounts to a clear procedural unfairness.

12. When I look at all  these  matters  cumulatively  I  find,  despite  Mr
    Clark's valiant attempt to urge otherwise, that the decision of the FtT
    is unsustainable. It must be set aside for legal error.

13. Because of the lack of clear cogent fact finding  and  because  I  find
    there was procedural unfairness before the FtT,  I  consider  that  the
    appropriate course in this case must be to remit  the  matter  to  that
    tribunal for a full re-hearing. The decision of the FtT is set aside in
    its entirety; nothing  can  be  preserved  from  it.   New  full  clear
    findings of fact will need to be made.

Decision

14. The decision of the FtT promulgated on 17th March 2015  is  set  aside.
    The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Judge  NMK
    Lawrence) for that Tribunal to re-make the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


