
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/33917/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th April 2015                     |On 21st May 2015                     |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        monika zenobia janicka babel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Atkinson made following a hearing at Bradford on 4 November 2014.

Background

 2. Judge Atkinson heard two linked appeals, against two linked  decisions,
    the first against Mr  Hussain,  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  born  on  3rd
    September 1984 and the  second,  the  respondent  in  this  appeal,  in
    relation to an EEA national from Poland born on 14th November 1969.

 3. The Secretary of State was satisfied that the couple had entered into a
    sham marriage.  The judge agreed and he dismissed Mr  Hussain's  appeal
    against the refusal to issue a residence  card  as  confirmation  of  a
    right to reside in the UK.  There is no challenge to that decision.

 4. The Secretary of State also made a decision under  Regulations  19  and
    21(b) of the Immigration (EEA  Regulations)  2006  to  remove  the  EEA
    national respondent on the grounds that she had  abused  her  right  to
    reside in the UK.

 5. The judge allowed her appeal in the following terms:

         "I find that in the personal circumstances of the second  appellant
         the evidence does not show that she is likely to engage in  further
         such actions.  I find that the second appellant's behaviour was not
         motivated by financial gain and that she took the  steps  that  she
         did as a means of managing her social circumstances that she  faced
         at the time.

         In  coming  to  my  decision  I  take  the  view  that  the  second
         appellant's personal conduct amounted to  a  serious  threat  to  a
         fundament interest of  society,  however,  significantly,  for  the
         reasons given above, the appellant is not a present threat to  such
         interests.

         Given my findings above and in particular the  lack  of  a  present
         threat and taking account of the fact that it would be improper  to
         remove the appellant on the grounds of general  prevention  I  find
         that in all the circumstances it  would  not  be  proportionate  to
         remove the second appellant."

 6. The Secretary of State challenged that decision on the basis  that  the
    judge had not properly applied the relevant Regulations in reaching his
    decision and permission was given on that basis by Judge Lever on  19th
    January 2015.

The Hearing

 7. Under Regulation 19(3)(c) of the 2006 Regulations, an EEA national  who
    entered the UK, may be removed if the Secretary of  State  has  decided
    that the person's removal is justified on grounds of abuse of rights in
    accordance with Regulation 21(b)(2).

 8. Regulation 21(b)(2) states that the Secretary of State may take an  EEA
    decision on the grounds of abuse of rights where there  are  reasonable
    grounds  to  suspect  the  abuse  of  a  right  to  reside  and  it  is
    proportionate to do so.

 9. The reference by the judge to there not being a  present  threat  is  a
    reference to Regulation 21(5)(c) which relates to  the  deportation  of
    EEA nationals on public  policy,  public  security  and  public  health
    grounds  which  requires  that  the  personal  conduct  of  the  person
    concerned must represent a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental issues of society.  It  is  not
    relevant to Regulation 21(b).  Whilst clearly, whether  the  respondent
    represents a present threat is a relevant factor in the proportionality
    exercise, it is clear from the wording of the  determination  that  the
    judge had the wrong Regulation in mind and thereby erred in law.

10. His decision is set aside.

Re-making the decision

11. The judge recorded that Ms Babel gave a vague and hesitant  account  of
    her relationship with Mr Hussain, often evading answering the questions
    put directly to her.  She was unable to say when they first met  or  to
    give a detailed account of her first meeting with him or how  they  had
    been introduced.  She could not say how the relationship developed  and
    was unable to give an account  of  her  understanding  of  the  Islamic
    marriage ceremony in  January  2014.   She  demonstrated  virtually  no
    knowledge of Mr Hussain's circumstances save that he was a student  and
    could not even say where he studied.  The  judge  concluded  that  both
    entered into a marriage of convenience.

12. He took account of the fact that there was  medical  evidence  that  Ms
    Babel had suffered a miscarriage in April 2014 which potentially showed
    that there was a degree of intimacy between the  parties.   However  he
    said that it had little probative value in relation to the arrangements
    for the marriage and their intention.  He concluded that she reasonably
    knew that there were significant concerns  about  whether  the  Islamic
    ceremony was undertaken as a matter of convenience  and  that  she  had
    abused her right to reside in the UK.

13. So far as proportionality was concerned he recorded  that  she  was  46
    years old with no significant medical conditions.  She lives  with  her
    adult son but he only arrived in the UK relatively recently in December
    2013 and has no other family living here.  She had integrated into life
    in the UK only to a limited extent and spoke only basic  English.   The
    evidence did not establish that she had no links with Poland.   On  the
    other hand there  was  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  there  was  any
    financial  arrangement  between  the  parties  and   medical   evidence
    supporting the view that there were some  elements  of  a  relationship
    albeit not sufficient to amount to a marriage.

14. His findings are the starting point for my decision.

15. I heard further oral evidence from Ms Babel in an attempt to understand
    a little more about her  part  in  the  arrangement  but  it  was  very
    difficult indeed to obtain any  proper  answers  from  her.   Mr  Mills
    carefully explained to her the reasons for his questioning and the risk
    she ran, if she  failed  to  attempt  to  answer  them,  that  negative
    inferences might be drawn.  In spite of his advice she continued not to
    give any clear answer at all about how long she lived  with  Mr  Husain
    after the marriage.  She seemed to suggest that they had lived together
    for about six months, which would mean that they separated in June 2014
    but she also suggested that she and her son moved to a council house in
    May, without Mr Hussain and was most unclear as to  whether  they  were
    living  together  in  August  when  the  couple  were  interviewed   in
    Liverpool.  Her testimony was similar to that given before  the  First-
    tier Judge.  She was  wholly  incapable  of  giving  a  straightforward
    answer to a straightforward question.

16. She said that she was suffering because  she  had  lost  the  baby  and
    subsequently had had surgery and that she had nothing to gain from  the
    marriage.

17. Ms Babel is a person who has been found, properly in my view,  to  have
    entered into a marriage of convenience.  There is no hard  evidence  of
    her motive.  In the first determination it is suggested  that  she  had
    had a relationship with an alcoholic and she believed that  Mr  Hussain
    was a kind man who did not drink alcohol.  As Mr Mills very fairly  put
    it, the issue of proportionality will be governed at least in  part  by
    an assessment as to whether she is telling the  truth  deliberately  in
    order to hide her part in the arrangement or whether she has  been  the
    victim of a scam.

18. I gained the clear  impression  that  Ms  Babel  she  was  deliberately
    withholding information.  She is a 46 year old woman who has been  able
    to travel across Europe, no doubt in search of work, and has been  able
    to find employment as a seamstress with a major  company.   She  speaks
    some basic English.  She did appear anxious and indeed agitated  but  I
    conclude that the reason that she  was  unable  to  answer  very  basic
    questions about how long she lived with her husband was because she was
    trying  to  conceal  facts  from  the  Tribunal.   They  could   barely
    communicate and she knew very little about his personal  circumstances.
    There is evidence of a miscarriage, although not of  the  paternity  of
    the child.  I conclude that the couple did not live together at all.

19. There is no evidence that she has any strong ties to the UK  save  that
    she has been able to get a council house and she lives with  her  adult
    son who has recently  arrived  from  Poland.  She  speaks  very  little
    English, and whilst there is no reason to doubt that she works,  little
    evidence of private life here, and no  family  life.  Her  motives  for
    entering into the marriage of convenience remain unknown, but there  is
    no doubt that she did so.  Contrary to the first tier judge, I find, in
    view of her persistent failure to tell the truth, that on  the  balance
    of probabilities, there was some kind of financial  inducement.  Whilst
    she may well have felt vulnerable as  a  consequence  of  a  previously
    abusive partner, she did not  enter  into  this  marriage  because  she
    wanted to start another relationship, and whilst  this  experience  may
    well have dissuaded her from doing anything like this  again,  that  in
    itself does not mean that removal is inappropriate.

20. She has abused her right to reside here and in all of the circumstances
    it is proportionate for her to be removed from the UK.

Notice of Decision

21. The judge's  decision  is  set  aside  and  re-made  as  follows.   The
    respondent's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed        Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
