
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33198/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 August 2017                     |On 8 September 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               A.F.M Giasuddin
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Slatter of Counsel instructed by Londonium
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Barker promulgated on 22 December 2016 in which  he  allowed  on  human
    rights grounds the appeal of Mr Giasuddin against  a  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 7 October 2015.


2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the Appellant and Mr Giasuddin is  the  Respondent,  for  the  sake  of
    consistency with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall
    hereafter refer to Mr Giasuddin as the Appellant and the  Secretary  of
    State as the Respondent.

3.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 20 December 1975.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 26 July 2004 with a  visa  as  a  student
    valid until 31 January 2006.  Thereafter he made a number of successive
    in-time applications for variation of leave to remain up until  October
    2010.  On 26 October 2010 he made an application for leave to remain as
    a Tier 4 Student  Migrant  which  was  refused  on  26  November  2010;
    however, the Appellant successfully appealed to the  IAC  against  this
    decision and in due course and in consequence he  was  granted  further
    leave to remain until 31 May 2012.  Towards the end of that  period  of
    leave he made a further application as  a  Tier  4  Student  which  was
    successful, and leave was granted until 31 July 2015.  On  28  November
    2013 the Respondent made a decision to curtail  the  Appellant's  leave
    with effect from 27 January 2014.  During the period between the notice
    of the curtailment and the curtailment taking effect the Appellant made
    a further application as a Tier 4 Student - on 22 January 2014.  During
    the currency of this application the Appellant made an  application  to
    vary the application, seeking indefinite leave to  remain  on  30  June
    2014.   The  application  to  vary  was  initially  rejected,  but  the
    Appellant again made an application for indefinite leave to remain on 1
    August  2014  on  the  grounds  of  'long  residence'  with  particular
    reference to paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules  -  the  so-called
    '10 year rule'.  It may be recalled that the Appellant had entered  the
    United Kingdom on 26 July 2004 and therefore  by  August  2014  he  had
    completed ten years' residence in the  UK;  all  such  periods  of  his
    residence were  pursuant  to  the  grant  of  leave  or  the  statutory
    variation of leave pending the resolution of an application or, in  one
    instance, an appeal.


4.   The Appellant's application was  refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
    'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 7 October 2015.


5.   In particular  the  Respondent,  upon  reviewing  the  history  of  the
    Appellant's various applications, identified a TOEIC  test  certificate
    issued  by  Synergy  Business  College  in  respect  of  an  assessment
    conducted on 18  April  2012  and  submitted  in  the  context  of  the
    Appellant's  variation  application  of  May  2012.    The   Respondent
    determined that the Appellant had made use of a 'proxy tester' in order
    to secure  the  certificate.   In  such  circumstances  the  Respondent
    invoked paragraphs 322(2) and 322(5) of the Immigration Rules and  also
    determined that the Appellant failed to  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276B(ii) and (iii) by reason of the utilisation of  deception
    in the course of an earlier application.


6.   The RFRL also gave some consideration  to  the  Appellant's  case  with
    respect to Appendix FM and, more particularly, paragraph 276ADE of  the
    Immigration Rules.  In respect of paragraph 276ADE it was decided  that
    the Appellant could not satisfy sub-paragraph (i) because  he  did  not
    meet the suitability criteria with reference to paragraph S-LTR 1.6  of
    Appendix FM.  It  was  also  determined  by  the  Respondent  that  the
    Appellant did not satisfy the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(vi),
    that is to say in respect of significant obstacles  to  integration  in
    his country of nationality.
7.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.  It is to be noted  that  the  scope
    of his appeal was governed by section 82(1)(b) and section 84(2) of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 - that is to say it was an
    appeal confined to human rights grounds with reference to section 84(2)
    and section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.


8.   The particular factual issue that was at the core of  the  Respondent's
    decision and informed  the  unfavourable  outcome  on  the  Appellant's
    application in respect of both paragraph 276B and  paragraph  276ADE(i)
    was in relation to the allegation that he  had  used  deception  in  an
    earlier application by obtaining  and  utilising  an  English  language
    certificate  through  a  proxy  tester.   Inevitably  that  contentious
    factual issue dictated the core of the materials filed  in  support  of
    the  Appellant's  appeal,  and  indeed  much  of  the  focus   of   the
    consideration  of  evidence  and  submissions  before  the   First-tier
    Tribunal.  Suffice to say for  present  purposes  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge found in the Appellant's favour  on  this  point.  After
    lengthy and  careful  consideration  of  the  evidence,  including  the
    generic evidence filed by the Respondent in cases such as this as  well
    as the case specific evidence filed by  both  the  Respondent  and  the
    Appellant, and consideration of  the  Appellant's  oral  evidence,  the
    Judge reached a favourable conclusion at paragraph 36 of  his  Decision
    in these terms:

         "On the basis of all the evidence presented to me I find that I  am
         not satisfied that  the  Appellant  used  a  proxy  test  taker  to
         complete his test.  I find that I am not satisfied to the  required
         standard that the test was invalid and therefore that the Appellant
         had used fraud in making a previous application."


9.   The Judge went on, in light of this  finding,  to  consider  the  Rules
    that had been invoked  by  the  Respondent.  His  Decision  states  "it
    follows that it has not been proved to the required standard  that  the
    Appellant fulfils the criteria in paragraph 322 for the refusal of  his
    application on the grounds within paragraph 322(2)  or  322(5)  of  the
    Immigration Rules."


10.  This, then, constituted clear -  and  on  the  face  of  it  adequately
    reasoned - findings and conclusions in respect of the  key  contentious
    issue in the Appellant's application and appeal.  It  is  to  be  noted
    that the Respondent in bringing the challenge to the Upper Tribunal has
    not sought to impugn this particular aspect of the Judge's decision.


11.  The Judge went on to consider where this left the  Appellant  in  terms
    of the appeal that was  before  him.   Paragraphs  37  and  38  of  the
    decision are in these terms


         "37.  The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  application   for
             indefinite leave to remain on the  basis  that  he  could  not
             fulfil paragraph 276B(ii) and (iii) of the Immigration  Rules.
             These subsections were found not to be fulfilled on the  basis
             of the use of a fraudulent document in a previous application.
              As stated above I was not satisfied  that  the  Secretary  of
             State had proved this matter having considered the Home Office
             evidence together with the appellant's evidence.   It  follows
             therefore  that  the  issues  raised  in  respect  of   subset
             subparagraph (ii) and (iii) are not made out.  I find that the
             appellant fulfils the criteria in those two parts  of  section
             paragraph 276B.  No other objections were raised in respect of
             the appellant's fulfilment of the requirements for  indefinite
             leave to remain on the ground of long residence in the  United
             Kingdom.  I therefore conclude that the officer was  satisfied
             that  he  fulfilled  all  other  requirements.   It   follows,
             therefore, that I find that the Appellant  has  satisfied  the
             Tribunal that he meets all  the  requirements  for  indefinite
             leave to remain.


         38.  However the grounds of appeal do not permit  the  Tribunal  to
             look at  the  Immigration  Rules  and  determine  whether  the
             appellant fulfils the Immigration Rules.  The date of decision
             was after the change  in  the  law  and  a  finding  that  the
             decision is not in accordance with the Immigration Rules is no
             longer a valid ground of appeal.  This can only be  looked  at
             on the basis of the appellant's  human  rights.   However  the
             Immigration Rules are considered to  be  in  line  with  human
             rights.  The fact  that  an  appellant  fulfils  the  relevant
             requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  would  diminish  the
             public need to remove the appellant.  In line  with  case  law
             and the circumstances above I find that  the  refusal  of  the
             application and removal of  the  appellant  would  breach  the
             appellant's human  rights  in  respect  of  his  rights  under
             Article 8 of the ECHR.   It  follows  that  I  find  that  the
             decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
             1998.  In view of this finding I do not need to consider human
             rights any further under paragraph 276ADE or under  any  other
             heading."


12.  The Respondent has sought to challenge the Judge's conclusions in  this
    regard. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Saffer on 5 July 2017.  In particular Judge Saffer in brief reasons for
    the grant of permission states "it is  arguable  that  the  Judge  gave
    inadequate consideration to s117 NIAA 2002."  The Respondent's  grounds
    in this regard are, in material part, in the following terms.

         "It is respectfully submitted that the FTT has materially erred  in
         law by failing to consider the mandatory  public  interest  factors
         outlined in Section 117B of part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 when  considering  the  appellant's  article  8
         claim outside of the Immigration Rules. In particular there was  no
         evidence that the appellant would be financially  independent.   It
         is asserted that the FTT's failure to correctly consider the public
         interest  as  stipulated   in   section   117B   means   that   the
         proportionality balance had not been carried out correctly in  line
         with  statutory  consideration.   As  such  the  finding  that  the
         decision to remove the appellant is disproportionate is flawed."


13.  The Respondent also raised a further line of  argument  with  reference
    to the case of Patel and others [2013] UKSC 72 and  in  particular  the
    observations therein at paragraph 57 that Article 8 "is not  a  general
    dispensing power."  It was submitted in the grounds of  challenge  that
    the Judge appeared  to  have  utilised  Article  8  as  if  it  were  a
    'dispensing power' in order to give effect to the  favourable  findings
    under paragraph  276B  -  which  was  not  a  congruent  exercise  with
    consideration of Article 8 as a freestanding basis of challenge.


14.  This case brings into stark relief issues and conundrums in respect  of
    the  inter-relationship  between  paragraphs  276B  and  276ADE,   both
    generally and specifically in  the  context  of  an  Article  8  appeal
    pursuant to section 84(2) of the 2002 Act.


15.  It may readily be appreciated that the provisions of  276B  and  276ADE
    are very different in their requirements. Paragraph 276B,  relating  to
    ten years' lawful residence, essentially sets out a series of  criteria
    to be considered in the event that an individual is able  to  establish
    ten years' continuous lawful residence - and if those  matters  do  not
    reveal anything adverse in  nature  then  an  applicant  is  ordinarily
    granted indefinite leave to remain.  Paragraph 276ADE sets out a number
    of different criteria depending upon age and length of residence in the
    UK: for somebody who has not yet been present in the UK for 20 years  -
    and who does not otherwise meet the criteria of subparagraph (v)  -  it
    is  necessary  to   demonstrate   "very   significant   obstacles"   to
    reintegration into the country to which they are likely to  be  removed
    (which in the  ordinary  course  of  events  will  be  the  country  of
    nationality).  An individual who can bring him or  herself  within  the
    requirements of paragraph 276B might yet not satisfy  the  requirements
    of 276ADE. For example, a person who is  well  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom after 10 years lawful residence but has nonetheless  maintained
    strong links with family in his or her country of nationality - and  is
    perhaps a frequent visitor thereto - could not easily  plead  obstacles
    to reintegration into their country of  nationality;  moreover  such  a
    person - who cannot satisfy 276ADE - is entitled to a more secure grant
    of leave to remain (indefinite leave to remain) than a person who could
    satisfy 276ADE.


16.  Further, I note the following. Paragraph 276B in a form approximate  to
    how  it  currently  appears  pre-dates  the  Human  Rights  Act   1998.
    Notwithstanding the existence of the so-called '10 year rule', when the
    Rules were amended with the declared  intention  of  giving  effect  to
    obligations under Article 8 in respect of both family life and  private
    life, this was done by the  inclusion  of  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE. To that extent 276ADE was expressly introduced as a measure  of
    proportionality in respect of Article 8 private life. And,  as  matters
    now stand, the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is  in  respect  of  'human
    rights' grounds rather than 'not in accordance with the Rules' grounds.
    This might suggest that the 'yardstick' for a Tribunal Judge is  276ADE
    rather than  276B  when  considering  'private  life'  cases  based  in
    significant part on length of residence. On such a  basis  there  would
    appear to be scope for argument that because 10 years lawful  residence
    does not inevitably satisfy paragraph 276ADE, 10 years lawful residence
    does not inevitably render a decision to remove disproportionate absent
    very significant obstacles to reintegration.
17.  I invited some guidance or clarification from the Respondent  today  as
    to the nature of the relationship between these two provisions  in  the
    Rules and how they were to be reconciled either  generally  or  in  the
    context of an Article 8  appeal  before  the  Tribunal.   Ms  Willocks-
    Briscoe emphasised that these  were  indeed  different  provisions  and
    identified in particular that paragraph 276B was one in respect of long
    residence  and  compliance  with  the  Rules,  whilst  suggesting  that
    paragraph  276ADE  was  more  by  way  of  a  'catch-all'  focussed  in
    particular on ties that may have been established in  the  UK  and  the
    ability to reintegrate - that  is,  in  other  words,  the  ability  to
    establish a private life in the country to which the applicant might be
    removed. Consideration of reintegration is relevant to an evaluation of
    the extent and gravity of any interference with private  life  -  which
    may inform the second and fifth  Razgar  questions.   In  this  way  Ms
    Willocks-Briscoe  emphasised  that  the  Rules  focussed  on  different
    elements. Nonetheless she acknowledged that an individual who was  able
    to demonstrate that they met the requirements of paragraph  276B  would
    thereby have established a very favourable set  of  circumstances  that
    would very significantly inform the wider consideration  of  Article  8
    under the jurisdiction of the Tribunal - irrespective of  the  position
    under paragraph 276ADE.  Even so, she argued that  in  the  context  of
    proceedings before the Tribunal it was necessary for  the  Tribunal  to
    recognise that it was indeed embarked upon  a  freestanding  assessment
    under Article 8 and to conduct such an assessment with reference to the
    usual jurisprudence and principles and to evaluate the particular  case
    on its own facts accordingly.


18.  In respect of paragraph 276B itself, Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  acknowledged
    that an individual who is able to demonstrate a  continuous  period  of
    ten  years'  continuous  lawful  residence  and  otherwise  meets   the
    requirements of paragraph 276B, may take advantage of that circumstance
    at any point at which he is present with leave in the United Kingdom  -
    it is not necessary to have made the relevant  application  immediately
    upon completion of the period of leave.  It is to be recognised in such
    circumstances, and perhaps in any event, that the findings of the Judge
    at paragraphs 36 and 37 necessarily are findings to the effect that the
    Appellant should indeed have the advantage  of  paragraph  276B  -  not
    within the confines of the Tribunal's jurisdiction  but  outside  those
    confines, such that he would be able to  present  himself  now  to  the
    Respondent on the basis of those findings and assert that in accordance
    with the Rules he should now be formally granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe does not deny this scenario - although, of
    course, this is not the particular issue before me.  Be that as it may,
    and in recognition of this scenario - i.e. that on the Judge's findings
    the Appellant has demonstrated an entitlement to  indefinite  leave  to
    remain pursuant to paragraph 276B (the paragraph upon which  he  relied
    in his application) - I cannot help but  observe  that  it  is  thereby
    unclear as to why the Respondent considered it  appropriate  to  pursue
    this appeal to the Upper Tribunal rather than acting on the facts found
    (which are not themselves the subject of challenge).  Nonetheless,  the
    Respondent  persists  in  advancing  the  appeal  and  I  consider   it
    accordingly.

19.  Mr Slatter argues that an application under paragraph  276B  is  indeed
    in itself a human rights application, and that success under 276B is in
    substance success under Article 8 of the ECHR,  and  that  that  should
    really be determinative of any Article 8 appeal.  In any event, further
    or alternatively he argues that on the facts of this particular case it
    was abundantly clear that private life was engaged  with  reference  to
    the relatively low threshold under the first two Razgar questions,  and
    that the public interest in maintaining effective  immigration  control
    would in no way be offended against by  permitting  an  individual  who
    qualifies for indefinite leave  to  remain  under  the  Rules  to  take
    advantage of that circumstance by placing reliance upon  it  within  an
    Article 8 application or appeal. Indeed, it is submitted that this  was
    exactly what the Judge did in stating at paragraph 38  that  "The  fact
    that  an  appellant  fulfils  the  relevant  requirements   under   the
    Immigration  Rules  would  diminish  the  public  need  to  remove  the
    appellant".


20.  In respect of the Respondent's ground that the  Judge  failed  to  have
    regard to section  117B,  Mr  Slatter  highlights  the  nature  of  the
    requirements of paragraph 276B and submits that to a substantial extent
    the public interest considerations  under  section  117B  are  subsumed
    within the considerations required under paragraph 276B:

     (i) The public interest in the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    control (s.117B(1)) is necessarily subsumed by a consideration  of  the
    case by reference to the Rules: this in substance was  the  observation
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

     (ii) The ability to  speak  English  (s.117B(2))  is  subsumed  by  the
    requirement of  paragraph  276B(iv)  which  requires  demonstration  of
    sufficient knowledge of the English language as well as knowledge about
    life in the United Kingdom. On the facts of the Appellant's  case,  the
    Respondent raised no issue.

     (iii) The 'continuous lawful residence' requirement  under  276B  meets
    the public interest concern expressed in s.117B(4).

      (iv)  Whilst  up  until  the  grant  of  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    immigration status is to be characterised as 'precarious'  (s.117B(5)),
    this is substantially ameliorated by the fact of a sustained period  of
    continuous lawful residence, and by regard to the  non-exhaustive  list
    of considerations at 276B(ii) and the requirement of 276B(iii).


21.  In short, save in one respect,  the  'public  interest'  considerations
    applicable by virtue of section 117A are in substance addressed and met
    by the favourable finding in respect of paragraph 276B.


22.  It is nonetheless acknowledged that there is no express requirement  to
    demonstrate financial self-sufficiency under  paragraph  276B,  and  to
    that  extent  the  provision  of  section  117B(3)  is  not  echoed  or
    replicated directly in paragraph 276B.  However, it is argued  that  if
    the Rules themselves do not  recognise  a  requirement  to  demonstrate
    financial independence, then the maintenance of  effective  immigration
    control does not accord significant weight to  that  particular  public
    interest in the context of a person who has a lawful extended  presence
    in the United Kingdom; to that extent, it is  submitted,  at  the  very
    least section 117B(3) becomes substantially marginalised in an  overall
    balance.


23.  I  am  not  at  all  unsympathetic  to  the  Respondent's  position  as
    articulated by Ms Willocks-Briscoe before me today as to the nature  of
    the different considerations at paragraph 276B and paragraph 276ADE.  I
    am persuaded that paragraph  276B  is  not  inevitably  congruent  with
    Article 8; more particularly paragraph 276B is  plainly  not  congruent
    with paragraph 276ADE which expressly seeks to give effect to Article 8
    under the Immigration Rules. In particular  there  is  the  distinction
    with regard to the reintegration issue.  I also acknowledge  the  force
    of Ms Willocks-Briscoe's submission that a Tribunal decision  maker  is
    required to give close  and  careful  consideration  to  Article  8  in
    accordance with the established  jurisprudence,  and  insofar  as  this
    involves taking the Rules as a 'starting point', the relevant  rule  is
    indeed 276ADE. However, in my judgement 276ADE is not to be  considered
    determinative one way or the other of an Article  8  claim,  given  the
    freestanding nature of the analysis now to be conducted by the Tribunal
    pursuant  to  the  change  in  the  appeal  regime  introduced  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014.   It  nonetheless  is  an  important  aspect  for
    consideration.  Consideration  must  also  encompass  the   statutorily
    identified public interest considerations.


24.  The Judge's consideration of the Article 8 issues  is  really  confined
    to paragraph 38, which I have set out in its entirety  above.   On  its
    face  it  does  not  appear  to  follow  the  careful   approach   that
    jurisprudence requires.  It might  also  be  noted  that  there  is  no
    express finding in  respect  of  private  life  -  whether  as  to  its
    existence or its quality.  To that extent  I  understand  the  concerns
    expressed by  the  Respondent  in  the  grounds  of  challenge  further
    articulated before me today by the Presenting Officer. However  I  also
    consider that there is  much  force  to  the  submissions  made  by  Mr
    Slatter.


25.  Starting with the issue of private life itself, as I have said  earlier
    in this decision the primary focus before the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    was very much on the issue of the 'proxy  tester'  and  the  manner  in
    which the Appellant had acquired the certificate presented  in  support
    of  his application in May 2012.  Nonetheless  my  attention  has  been
    drawn to his appeal bundle and witness statement before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appeal bundle itself contains  a  number  of  supporting
    documents, but they are also focussed on the English  language  ability
    and the 'proxy tester' issue.  The  witness  statement,  however,  does
    make a number of observations and  assertions  in  respect  of  private
    life. From paragraph 23 through to paragraph  28  the  Appellant  makes
    comment as to the time that he has been  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and
    expresses the view that he feels fully adapted to the way  of  life  in
    the UK and accustomed to the norms and values of British  society.   He
    talks  about  having  gained  valuable  experience  and  qualities  and
    educational attainment which would be of use in the UK and would  allow
    him to make a contribution to the UK  economy.   He  also  talks  about
    having been fortunate  to  meet  many  people  and  to  establish  many
    friendships in the UK and to have accustomed himself to life in the  UK
    by building many new bonds with friends.


26.  To a certain extent those matters set out in the witness statement  are
    matters with which most members of the Tribunal will be  familiar  from
    exposure to many similar cases.  There is a degree of rote in asserting
    a sense of being  'accustomed  to  the  norms  and  values  of  British
    society' and so on, such that it  takes  on  the  appearance  of  empty
    platitude in the absence of concrete illustrations.  It is also  to  be
    noted that the Appellant did not produce any supporting evidence of any
    of  the  friendships  or  acquaintanceships  that  he  claims  to  have
    established.  It is also  be  noted  that  the  Judge  found  that  the
    Appellant had produced very little by way  of  supporting  evidence  of
    educational  qualifications  actually  obtained  whilst   in   the   UK
    (paragraph 35).


27.   However,  the  Appellant  did  make  clear  assertions   as   to   the
    establishment of private life in the United Kingdom, and it  is  to  be
    recalled - and in no  way  in  my  judgment  can  it  be  significantly
    diminished - that he had been lawfully resident in the UK for over  ten
    years by the time of the decision before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    accept, as Mr Slatter urges  upon  me,  that  it  is  not  a  difficult
    inference to draw that an individual resident in the United Kingdom for
    a period of more than ten years will more than likely have  established
    something of a private life - and enough of a private life to  overcome
    the low threshold of the first two Razgar questions.  Indeed whilst  it
    seems to me that the Judge has made no explicit finding in  respect  of
    private life it cannot reasonably be inferred that the  Judge  in  some
    way when turning his mind to the specific issue of Article 8 overlooked
    this vital component of the exercise.  It seems to me  that  the  Judge
    has not made any express reference to it almost because it was a matter
    that was so obvious it barely needed to be stated. Whilst that  is  not
    necessarily the most  satisfactory  way  of  proceeding  with  decision
    making, I am not persuaded that the Judge  in  someway  fell  into  the
    error of overlooking the issue of private life; rather I infer from the
    overall context of the decision and the circumstances of the Appellant,
    that the Judge did indeed consider that the length of residence in  the
    UK was such that the Appellant had established a private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom that that demanded a degree of protection and needed  to
    be considered in the context of  proportionality.   In  this  regard  I
    accept, pursuant to Mr  Slatter's  submissions  rehearsed  above,  that
    although the Judge does not seem to have explicitly embarked  upon  the
    exercise, in substance the finding in respect of paragraph 276B  -  and
    in particular the favourable findings  in  respects  of  sub-paragraphs
    (ii) and (iv) - were such as  to  meet  the  substance  of  the  public
    interest considerations identified in  section  117B  with  the  single
    exception of the financial requirements.

28.  As  regards  the  financial  requirements,  I  am  sympathetic  to  the
    Secretary of State's position that the Judge does not  appear  to  have
    expressly taken this into account. But again it seems to me that  there
    must be considerable weight accorded to Mr  Slatter's  counter-argument
    that this is largely immaterial in circumstances where the Rules  under
    paragraph 276B do not consider it in the public interest to  demand  an
    applicant who has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  ten  years  or
    more to demonstrate financial sufficiency.   Moreover  the  purpose  of
    demonstrating financial sufficiency so far as section 117B is concerned
    is in significant part to demonstrate a 'better ability' to integration
    into society in the UK.  A person who has been present in  the  UK  for
    ten years may be properly considered to  be  well  past  the  point  of
    needing  to  embark  upon  the  process  of  integration.    In   those
    circumstances it seems to me that the failure to make express reference
    to section 117B(3) was not a material  error  on  the  very  particular
    facts of this case.


29.  In  those  circumstances  whilst  I  accept  that  the  Respondent  has
    correctly highlighted that there is a  departure  from  the  usual  and
    recommended approach to a human rights case in the Judge's analysis  at
    paragraph 38, I am not ultimately persuaded that the Judge has  thereby
    fallen into any material error of law such that the decision should  be
    set aside.


Notice of Decision

30.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error  of
    law and is to stand.


31.  The Appellant's appeal remains allowed on human rights grounds.


32.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 6 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

