
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Numbers:
IA/33059/2015

                                                    IA/33060/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28 September 2017                       |On 04 October 2017               |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between


                                     S A
                                     S S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants, S A and S S, were born in 1995  and  1999  respectively
    and are female citizens of Bangladesh.  They appeal  against  decisions
    dated 30 September 2015 to refuse them leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on human rights  grounds  (Article  8  ECHR).   The  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Broe) in a decision promulgated  on  10  January  2017,
    dismissed the appeals.  The appellants now appeal, with permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the Upper Tribunal hearing at Birmingham on 28  September  2017,  Ms
    Aboni, a Senior  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  appeared  for  the
    respondent.  There was no appearance by either of  the  appellants  nor
    were they represented by the immigration consultants (Samad &  Co)  who
    are recorded on the Tribunal file as acting for them.  No communication
    had  been  received  from  either  the   appellants   or   from   their
    representatives to excuse or explain their  absence.  I  see  from  the
    court file that  the  notices  of  hearing  were  served  both  on  the
    representatives and on the appellants at their last known addresses  by
    second class post on 14 August 2017.  There was nothing on the Tribunal
    file to indicate those notices of hearing did not reach their  intended
    addressees.  In the circumstances, I decided that  the  appeal  may  be
    disposed  of  justly  in  the  absence  of  the  appellants  and  their
    representatives.

 3. The appellants arrived in the United Kingdom as  visitors  in  December
    2010.  Although they had travelled with their parents, the parents  had
    left the United Kingdom in  June  of  2011,  the  appellants  remaining
    living in this country with an aunt.  The appellants claimed that  they
    had  had  no  contact  with  their  parents  since  they  returned   to
    Bangladesh.  Before the First-tier Judge, the respondent had maintained
    that the appellants could not satisfy  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE of HC 395 (as amended).  The appellants  had  argued  that  they
    could satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276ADE on  the  basis  that
    there were "very significant obstacles" to their return to  Bangladesh.
    I note that, as at  the  date  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing,  both
    appellants are adults.  The second appellant was not an  adult  at  the
    time of the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

 4. The judge did not find the evidence of the  appellants  credible.   The
    judge did not accept that the departure of the appellants' parents  and
    brother from  the  United  Kingdom  had  been  connected  to  political
    problems in Bangladesh.  The judge did not accept that  the  appellants
    would have stopped trying to contact their parents some years prior  to
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  The judge found that  the  appellants
    had failed to prove that they were without family support in the United
    Kingdom or indeed in  Bangladesh.   The  parents  and  brother  of  the
    appellants  had  not  disappeared  in  Bangladesh,  as  the  appellants
    claimed.

 5. The first ground of appeal asserts that the judge had failed to address
    the test of "very significant obstacles ... to integration" as provided
    for under paragraph 276ADE.  I find the ground has no merit.  At  [38],
    the judge found  that  there  were  no  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellants reintegrating into Bangladeshi society.  The judge's finding
    was based primarily upon the fact that he had found that the appellants
    would have (contrary to their assertion) family support  on  return  to
    Bangladesh.  The appellants had also  failed  to  establish  that  they
    would be at risk in any way on return.  As far as the second  appellant
    is concerned, it is implicit in the judge's findings that  there  would
    be proper reception facilities (in the form of reintegration  into  the
    family  of  the  appellants'  parents  and  brother)  upon  return   to
    Bangladesh.

 6. The second ground of appeal complains that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider the length of time that the appellants had spent  respectively
    in Bangladesh and the United Kingdom whilst the third ground  complains
    that the judge failed to give proper and full consideration to  Article
    8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules  and,  in  particular,  failed  to
    consider the vulnerability of the appellants  on  return.   The  fourth
    ground of appeal asserts that the appellants had not been  involved  in
    the decision to leave them in the United  Kingdom  as  overstayers  and
    should not, therefore, be punished for that decision.

 7. I find that none  of  those  grounds  of  appeal  have  merit.   It  is
    abundantly clear that the judge based his  conclusions  upon  his  firm
    finding  that  the  appellants'  parents  and  brother  are  living  in
    Bangladesh and will look after the appellants upon their return to that
    country.  I acknowledge that the judge's analysis is somewhat brief but
    it is apparent that  the  judge  found  that,  because  they  would  be
    received back into the home of their closest family members, return  to
    Bangladesh would be in the  best  interests  of  the  appellants.   The
    argument does not appear to  have  been  put  to  the  judge  that  the
    appellants' best interests would be served by their  remaining  with  a
    more distant relative in  the  United  Kingdom,  a  country  where,  as
    overstayers, they have no right to  remain.   Further,  the  appellants
    would not be vulnerable because they would be living with their parents
    in Bangladesh.  Likewise, it is difficult to see how the fact that  the
    appellants, as children, are not responsible for the decision to  leave
    them in the United Kingdom as overstayers should in  some  way  "trump"
    their interests in returning to live with their closest family  members
    in their country of nationality.  It  is  arguable,  following  Agyarko
    [2017] UKSC 11 (a judgment which post-dated  the  promulgation  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision), that the  judge  should  have  proceeded
    with a full proportionality assessment of Article 8  ECHR  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  However, at [39], the judge has initially indicated
    that  he  need  not  consider  Article  8  but  then  he  has,  in  the
    alternative, concluded that if he  were  to  consider  Article  8,  the
    decision to remove the appellants would be  proportionate.   Given  the
    judge's findings and in particular  his  finding  that  the  appellants
    would be received by and would then live with their parents and brother
    in Bangladesh, I find  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  have  failed  to
    establish that the judge has  erred  in  law  either  for  the  reasons
    asserted or at all.

 8. I note in passing that both appellants have now made claims for  asylum
    in the United Kingdom.   The  making  of  these  claims  may,  perhaps,
    explain their absence at the Upper Tribunal hearing.



Notice of Decision

These appeals are dismissed.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 5 October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeals and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date 5 October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
