
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/33186/2014
                                                               IA/33188/2014
                                                               IA/33184/2014
                                                               IA/33189/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 7 July 2015                       |On 13 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                              HAFSAT AYO JIMOH
                               MOHAMMED JIMOH
                         AMIRA ABOLA MOBOLAJI JIMOH
                       SHERIFFDEEN DAYO MOHAMMED JIMOH
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mrs E Narh, of Imperial Visas Limited, Croydon
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are a wife, husband and two children,  all  citizens  of
    Nigeria.  They appeal against a determination  by  First-Tier  Tribunal
    Judge Boyd, promulgated on 3 March 2015, dismissing their appeals under
    the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. As to the Immigration  Rules,  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal led the Judge granting permission to think  it  arguable  that
    the Judge based his decision on a point in the refusal notice  about  a
    bank statement, when that point had been abandoned by  the  respondent.
    Mrs O'Brien was able to demonstrate that this  was  misconceived.   The
    reference recorded at paragraph 7 of the  determination  was  historic.
    The respondent's decision under appeal was not based on use of a  false
    bank statement.  It turned on the finding that  claimed  earnings  from
    self-employment did not arise  from  genuine  employment,  for  reasons
    specified in detail at pages 2 to 5 of  the  decision.   That  was  the
    issue considered by the Judge in his determination at paragraphs 20  to
    29, leading to the conclusions that the appellant had  not  established
    her financial circumstances and was  not  entitled  to  any  points  in
    relation to previous earnings.  At best the grounds of  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal (insofar as they make any point  about  those  findings)
    amount only to disagreement.

 3. Mrs Narh acknowledged that there had been confusion around this  issue.
    Nevertheless, her final submission was that there had been a concession
    by the Presenting Officer which should have led  to  the  appeal  being
    allowed under the Immigration Rules.

 4. There is no basis for that submission.  The point recorded at paragraph
    7 of the determination has nothing to do  with  the  substance  of  the
    outcome under the Immigration Rules.  In that outcome, no  legal  error
    has been indicated.

 5. The second point on which permission was  granted  is  that  the  Judge
    "engaged with the risk of FGM [to the female child appellant] on return
    to Nigeria", when earlier in proceedings it had been directed that this
    element was not part of the  appeal,  and  so  there  might  have  been
    procedural unfairness in failing to allow the appellants  a  reasonable
    opportunity to submit further evidence [which, I note, they did not ask
    for in the First-tier Tribunal].

 6. Mrs Narh submitted on this ground as follows.   The  Judge  should  not
    have engaged at all with the issue of FGM, but  should  have  left  the
    matter for the respondent to decide.  The  first  appellant  has  since
    claimed asylum at an asylum screening unit, on 13 April 2015.   She  is
    waiting to be called for substantive interview on that claim, when  she
    plans to raise the issue.  The determination should  be  set  aside  on
    that point and the matter left to be resolved in course of  the  asylum
    claim.

 7. Mrs O'Brien said that the Judge was asked to consider Article 8 outwith
    the  Rules,  which  inevitably  involved  consideration  of  the   best
    interests of the children and of the materials regarding FGM which  had
    been placed before him.  The Judge had not gone wrong in  finding  that
    the claim was not made  out  on  the  materials  before  him.   It  was
    unsatisfactory that there were now two sets  of  proceedings  in  which
    this was raised but as the matter had not been tackled head on  in  the
    present proceedings it was unlikely that the  further  claim  would  be
    certified as clearly unfounded on this basis.  In any event, there  was
    no error of  law  by  the  Judge  on  the  case  put  to  him  and  the
    determination should stand.

 8. The records from the First-Tier Tribunal are not entirely  clear.   The
    notices of decision to the appellants invite them to  state  all  their
    possible grounds of appeal.  An FGM issue does not appear to have  been
    raised in the initial grounds of appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal.   A
    record of proceedings on  29  October  2014  suggests  that  the  first
    appellant sought to amend her grounds to include  issues  of  the  best
    interests of the children, but this was refused and the case adjourned.
    The records read rather as if  the  respondent  sought  to  resist  the
    inclusion of this issue in the proceedings.  The matter has  also  been
    confused by changes of representation of the  appellants.   It  is  not
    clear how many changes there were, or at what stages those changes took
    place.  A record of proceedings of 10 December 2014 records  a  further
    adjournment and the Judge has clearly written, "Parties  agreed  -  FGM
    element of claim is not part of this appeal".

 9. The important point for present purposes is that the appellants  raised
    the matter at the hearing on  28  January  2015  (when  they  were  not
    represented by Mrs Narh but by a Ms Taiwo) by asking (paragraph 30) for
    consideration of the best interests of the children and of Article 8 of
    the ECHR outside the Rules.  It does not appear to have been put to the
    Judge that he could consider such issues separately from  any  risk  of
    FGM.  I do not see how (if he had been asked) the matter could sensibly
    have been isolated and ignored.  To consider the best interests of  the
    children inevitably involved taking account of  materials  produced  by
    the appellants about FGM risks in Nigeria.  The appellants  cannot  now
    complain that the Judge did what they asked him to do.  It is not  said
    that he came to the wrong decision on the  evidence  before  him.   The
    appellants did not ask to add to that evidence.

10. This is all rather unsatisfactory.   It  is  not  desirable  that  such
    matters should be developed in concurrent  sets  of  proceedings.   The
    final  resolution  perhaps  remains  to  be  accomplished  through  the
    impending asylum claims.  That should not be prejudiced  by  the  half-
    hearted presentation in these proceedings.  However, the responsibility
    lay with the appellants for the presentation of  their  case,  and  the
    only question for the Upper Tribunal however is whether the  First-Tier
    Tribunal went wrong as a matter of law by  determining  the  Article  8
    ECHR issue as it did on the evidence  before  it.   The  Judge  had  to
    decide  the  case  put,  including  Article  8,  and  there  could  not
    realistically have been any other outcome.  The  determination  of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal shall stand.


           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
           10 July 2015
