
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33701/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 July 2017                                |On 12 July 2017               |
|Prepared 6 July 2017                          |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              GAGANPREET SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr K Khan, Legal Representative instructed by GK
Associates


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision  of
    Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Maxwell  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 23 November 2016 allowed the  appeal  of  Mr  Gaganpreet
    Singh against a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse him  leave
    to remain.

2.   For ease of reference I will refer to the Secretary  of  State  as  the
    respondent in this decision as she was the respondent in the First-tier
    Tribunal.  Similarly I  will  refer  to  Mr  Gaganpreet  Singh  as  the
    appellant as he was the appellant in the First-tier.

3.   The appellant's human rights application was  made on  24  March  2015.
    It was for  leave to remain because of  his relationship  with  Manmeet
    Gulati, an Afghan born on 1 January 1990 who had been granted leave  to
    remain until 22 December  2017.   The   application  was  been  refused
    because the Secretary of State considered that he  had  used  deception
    when he had taken an English language test in  2012:  the  reasons  for
    refusal stated that he did not  meet  the  requirements  for  leave  to
    remain as a partner because he had submitted a TOEIC  certificate  from
    ETS which was fraudulently obtained because a   proxy  test  taker  had
    been used.  It was considered therefore that his presence in the United
    Kingdom was not conducive to the public good.

4.   The determination is unusual in that in the first paragraph  the  judge
    missed out the country from which the appellant came  and  merely  said
    that he was "born on" . He also   stated  that  the  appeal  had   been
    decided without a hearing under  the  provisions  of  Rule  25  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure Rules.  That in fact was  incorrect  as  it  appears
    that the appellant did give evidence  although  that  is  not  entirely
    clear from the determination.  The judge,  who appears to have  used  a
    number of pro forma paragraphs relating to those who had  been  refused
    leave to remain because it was  considered  they  had  used  fraudulent
    English language tests,   set  out  his  findings  and  conclusions  in
    paragraphs 15 onwards of the determination.  He  stated  following  the
    judgment in Gazi (ETS - JR) [2015] UKUT 00327 the issue of  whether  or
    not a test had been obtained fraudulently  was  fact-sensitive.  Having
    then referred to the determination SM & Qadir (ETS - evidence -  burden
    of proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC) he stated that  he  had  been  provided
    with evidence from the respondent in the form of a report  commissioned
    from Professor French which considered in detail the issue  of  suspect
    fraudulent tests. He then said that on the evidence  the respondent had
    discharged her evidential burden.  However he went on to  say  that  he
    had to look at the totality  of  the  evidence  and  in  paragraphs  19
    onwards he said as follows:

         "19. In the  present  instance,  I  note  the  appellant  undertook
             further testing about 15 months after the  suspect  TOEIC  was
             undertaken.  It is not suggested that  this  was  in  any  way
             obtained fraudulently and, in any event, the certificate bears
             photographic likeness of the appellant.  Added to this  is  my
             own assessment of the appellant's command of English  which  I
             would  describe  as  colloquial.    He   gave   his   evidence
             unhesitatingly  and  without  any   apparent   difficulty   in
             understanding  some  relatively   complex   question   or   in
             expressing himself idiomatically when answering.

          20. I note the respondent was unable to adduce any evidence  other
             than the generic evidence ordinarily relied on in  cases  such
             as this.  This is not intended as a criticism as  the  reality
             is that it is most unlikely such evidence would  be  available
             in the ordinary course of events.   The  fact  remain  however
             that the evidence adduced by the appellant  gives  rise  to  a
             number of significant factors that have the effect  of  making
             the respondent's burden of proof more difficult  to  discharge
             to  the  required  standard,  that  is  on  the   balance   of
             probabilities.  I find that the generic evidence relied on  in
             the present instance is insufficient to discharge  the  burden
             of proving, on a  balance  of  probabilities,  the  TOEIC  was
             obtained by fraudulent means.

         21.  Given that this was the sole issue taken  by  the  respondent,
             the  appellant  does  meet  the  suitability  requirements  of
             Appendix FM and ought therefore to have been granted leave  to
             remain under the Immigration Rules.  I must  however  look  at
             this appellant in terms of an  appeal  limited  to  Article  8
             grounds."

5.   Having said that  it  would  be  difficult  to  envisage  circumstances
    wherein an applicant who met the requirements of Appendix FM could  not
    be regarded as someone whose Article 8 rights have been interfered with
    disproportionately he said  that  he  found  that  the  appellant  then
    succeeded under Article 8 "whether within or  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules".

6.   Having  briefly  mentioned  the  public  interest  in  the  appellant's
    removal he referred to Section 117B before stating that he  found  that
    the appellant's circumstances were  such  the  decision  to  allow  his
    appeal would not have the effect of undermining the public interest  as
    the appellant would have  "an  entitlement"  under  the  Rules  as  the
    appellant had demonstrated both his command of English and his  ability
    to be self sufficient and not a drain on the state.  He went on to  say
    that:

         "He is a party to a stable marriage with children who were born  in
         the United Kingdom and a degree of responsibility in respect of his
         step-daughter.  Although his life here has been established  whilst
         his immigration leave has been precarious, the diminution in weight
         this attracts does not so undermine  his  case  as  to  render  the
         interference proportionate."

     He therefore stated that the decision caused the United Kingdom  to  be
    in breach of the law and its obligations under the ECHR.  He  therefore
    allowed the appeal.

7.   The grounds of appeal on which  Mr  Whitwell  relied  argued  that  the
    judge had failed to give adequate reasons for a finding upon a material
    matter in that he had not properly considered the report  by  Professor
    French and the ETS SELT source data - this is a reference to the  "look
    up tool".   That  had  shown  that  the  appellant's  test  result  was
    "invalid".  Having set out the way  in  which  the  test  results  were
    considered the grounds went on to state that the judge had erred in his
    consideration of the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

8.   Mr Whitwell relied on the grounds of appeal.  He referred to  the  look
    up tool which was in  the  bundle  and  to  the  determination  of  the
    Tribunal in MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 00450 (IAC) where  the
    importance of the evidence put forward by the Secretary  of  State  was
    emphasised as was the  integrity  of  the  test-taking  procedures  and
    systems established by ETS.  Mr Whitwell argued that the  evidence  did
    not show that the Secretary of State had not discharged the  burden  of
    proof and that he had erred in stating that the evidence before him was
    merely generic as the evidence did include the look up tool.   Moreover
    he argued that the Article 8 assessment was inadequate.

9.   In reply Mr Khan having referred to the terms of  Section  117B  stated
    that this was a case where the balancing  exercise  had  properly  been
    undertaken by the Immigration Judge and that he  was  correct  to  find
    that the removal of the appellant would be disproportionate.  He argued
    that  the  appellant's  leave  to  remain  in  Britain  had  not   been
    precarious.  Furthermore, he stated that it was not  a  material  error
    that the judge had not considered the "look up tool"  evidence  in  the
    bundle and suggested that it was for the Secretary of State to  produce
    the tapes on which the evidence and conclusions of ETS were based.   He
    stated that the applicant must have gone  through  relevant  procedures
    and indeed he had given evidence in that regard  at  the  hearing.   He
    argued moreover that the appellant was entitled to switch from being  a
    student to being a husband and the fact that the application  had  only
    been refused on suitability grounds and that the  appellant  had  shown
    that it was wrong to raise that ground  as  he  had  not  committed  an
    offence by producing a false ETS case and  that  therefore  that  meant
    that the appellant fulfilled the requirements of the marriage Rules and
    was entitled to remain as a husband.

Discussion

10.  I consider that there are material errors of law in  the  determination
    of  the  Immigration  Judge.   Given  the  evidence  submitted  by  the
    Secretary of State which included the look up tool the decision of  the
    judge that,  although the  respondent  had  discharged  the  evidential
    burden somehow that the further evidence put forward by  the  appellant
    had discharged the burden upon him and that therefore   the  burden  on
    the Secretary of State had not been discharged,  was plainly wrong.

11.   The statement by the judge at paragraph 20  that  the  respondent  had
    been unable to adduce any evidence  other  than  the  generic  evidence
    ordinarily relied on was  wrong  in  that  the  look  up  tool,   which
    specifically referred to the appellant,  was not generic evidence.

12.   Moreover although it appears that the judge  did  hear  the  appellant
    give evidence the reality is that he has not recorded what evidence was
    given and his statement that  he had determined the  appeal  without  a
    hearing appears to be wrong.

13.   As I consider that the judge was wrong to consider that the  Secretary
    of State had not discharged the burden of proof and therefore was wrong
    to reach the conclusion that therefore  the  suitability  criteria  was
    met.

14.  Moreover Mr Khan's argument that because the  Secretary  of  State  did
    not refuse on any basis other than that  the  suitability  requirements
    were not met it was implied that all the other matters required  of  an
    applicant for leave to remain as a spouse were met, is  clearly  wrong.
    There was no evidence whatsoever that the appellant would have met  the
    criteria for leave to remain as a husband, not  least  because  of  the
    lack of financial information  and the  fact  that  Ms  Gulati  is  not
    settled here .

15.   Moreover the  evidence  before  the  judge  is  not  set  out  in  the
    determination and it is difficult to understand on what  basis  he  can
    have reached his conclusions regarding the private and family  life  of
    the appellant.

16.  It is clear law that the appellant's status under the  immigration  law
    was precarious and that that is a factor which  should  be  taken  into
    account when considering the provisions of Section 117B.  Moreover,  it
    does not appear that there are any British children  involved  in  this
    case.  It appears that the appellant and his partner have two children.
     They are clearly not British as neither the appellant nor his wife  is
    a British national and his wife  does  not  have  indefinite  leave  to
    remain here.  The judge moreover does not go  into  any  factors  which
    would indicate that there would be any insurmountable obstacles to  the
    appellant and his wife living together  in  India.   Although  Mr  Khan
    indicated that the appellant's wife would not be able to live in  India
    there was no evidence to show that  that  is  the  case.   I  therefore
    cannot see any basis upon which the judge was  entitled  to  allow  the
    appeal on human rights grounds.

12.  I consider therefore it is appropriate to set  aside  the  decision  of
    the First-tier judge.  The reality is that there  are  no  findings  of
    fact which are sustainable in this  case  and  I  therefore  remit  the
    appeal for a hearing afresh by the First-tier  Tribunal.   I  therefore
    set aside the decision of the Judge in the First-tier.


Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed. The appeal is  remitted  to
the First-tier for a hearing afresh on all grounds.
No anonymity direction is made.








Signed   [pic]                      Date: 11 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

