
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/33668/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21st April 2016                       |  On 16th May 2016                  |
|Prepared 3rd May 2016                    |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                              ms nudrat jabeen
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A. Alam of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1st January  1975.   She
    appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kanagaratnam
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 12th August 2015 in which he  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 11th July
    2014.  That decision was to  refuse  the  Appellant's  application  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of Article 8 of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.


2.   The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 7th October  2000  as  a
    visitor and thereafter stayed on as her sister, Mrs Mirza, who she  had
    come to visit was unwell and there were domestic problems to deal with.
     The Appellant resided with her sister in London and assisted with  the
    family as the Appellant's sister was pregnant (giving birth to a  child
    Z on 1st January 2001).  The sister  had  medical  problems  after  Z's
    birth and the Appellant took care of household duties.   Z  is  now  at
    school and the Appellant's case was that she was assisting  largely  in
    bringing Z up.  Her sister's other child Uzma was 13 when she  came  to
    the United Kingdom and was at a vulnerable age.  Uzma was herself now a
    mother having given birth to  a  child  H  on  1st  August  2012.   The
    Appellant assisted Uzma in looking after  this  child.   The  Appellant
    felt she could not return  to  Pakistan  as  the  children  had  become
    emotionally attached to her.  In Pakistan her father was 74  years  old
    residing with the Appellant's younger sister but  the  Appellant  could
    not live in the same house as them.  As a single woman she  would  have
    difficulties in Pakistan.


The Explanation for Refusal


3.   The Respondent made reference to the fact that the Appellant had  lived
    for 25 years in Pakistan before coming to the United  Kingdom  and  she
    still had ties to Pakistan despite her absence.  The Appellant had  not
    lived in the United Kingdom for at least twenty years and there were no
    factors that would lead the  application  to  be  allowed  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.


The Decision at First Instance


4.   The Judge attached no credence to the Appellant's  claim  that  it  was
    not possible for her to live in Pakistan as a  single  woman.   It  had
    been conceded  in  evidence  that  there  was  no  difficulty  for  the
    Appellant to be supported by her sister and brother-in-law Mr  and  Mrs
    Mirza.  The Judge  considered  whether  the  appeal  could  be  allowed
    outside the Rules under Article 8 and directed  himself  in  accordance
    with the step-by-step approach required by the case  of  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27.


5.   At paragraph 18  he  considered  the  duty  under  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 in the following terms:-


         "The Appellant states that she has got attached to her nephews  one
         of whom is said  to  be  overactive.   She  has  also  developed  a
         relationship with the children in the extended family.  Her  nephew
         who gave evidence at the hearing is 14 years of age and is able  to
         go to school independently.  There is no evidence that any  of  the
         other children in the family are without their  parents  so  as  to
         persuade me to  find  that  the  welfare  of  the  child  would  be
         adversely affected by the Appellant's refusal.  This  is  a  family
         that has used the services of an aunt  who  stayed  in  the  United
         Kingdom in contravention of the Immigration Rules and now seeks  to
         be regularised.  I find  that  her  removal  would  not  cause  the
         children to be adversely affected."


6.   The Judge found that there were no  insurmountable  obstacles  for  the
    Appellant to return to Pakistan and live there.   Any  requirement  for
    assistance which the Appellant's sister  or  niece  required  might  be
    obtained by using the services available in the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Judge dismissed the appeal.


The Onward Appeal


7.   In her grounds of onward appeal  it  was  argued  that  the  Judge  had
    failed to make clear findings on the credibility of the  witnesses  and
    had not had regard to the  welfare  or  best  interests  of  the  minor
    children in the case.  The real question in the case was whether  there
    were very significant obstacles to the Appellant returning to  Pakistan
    rather than whether or not she had ties there.  There were no  findings
    as to what private life there was or how strong that private life  was.
    The test was not whether there were insurmountable obstacles for her to
    live in Pakistan but  whether  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  her  to
    relocate.


8.   The  application  for  permission  to  appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Nicholson on the papers on 2nd February 2016.  He  found
    that contrary to the grounds the  Judge  had  taken  into  account  the
    evidence of the witnesses when reaching findings.   When  the  decision
    was read as a whole it was sufficiently clear as to what the Judge made
    of the witness's  evidence  on  the  salient  issues.   The  Judge  had
    specifically considered the best interests of the children at paragraph
    18 (see above).  He did not state that there was no family life between
    the Appellant and her family members here.  On the contrary he referred
    to family life.  His point was that the children would not be adversely
    affected by the removal of the Appellant.  It was clear why  the  Judge
    had reached the conclusions he had and that was all that was  required.




9.   In considering whether there were significant obstacles to  integration
    into another country the  Judge  was  entitled  to  take  into  account
    whether a person had ties there.  The Judge had taken  the  view  there
    were no obstacles whatsoever to the Appellant living in Pakistan.   The
    Judge was clearly aware of the nature and  extent  of  the  Appellant's
    private life that the Appellant had been here illegally for many  years
    and was bound by Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 to afford little  weight  to  the  Appellant's  private
    life.  In paragraph 8  of  the  decision  to  refuse  permission  Judge
    Nicholson  dealt  with  the   insurmountable   obstacle   test   versus
    reasonableness test stating that "the reasonableness test  referred  to
    in the grounds applies in the context  of  a  family  member  from  the
    United Kingdom enjoying family life outside of this country".


10.  The Appellant renewed the application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal in longer grounds.  Referring to the argument  that  the
    best interests of the children had  not  been  considered  the  grounds
    argued that those interests were to be determined by reference  to  the
    children alone and not any adverse immigration history of  the  parents
    or other family members.  It was contradictory for the  Judge  to  find
    that there was family life between the children and the  Appellant  but
    at the same time say that the Appellant was providing a service to  the
    family.  The Judge failed to give due weight to  the  evidence  of  the
    children that the Appellant was like a  mother  to  them.   In  Bossadi
    [2015] UKUT 00042 and YM (Uganda) [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 it was said that
    the test was not as stringent as significant obstacles  as  adopted  by
    the Judge.  Both objective and  subjective  considerations  had  to  be
    taken into account to determine  whether  an  Appellant  had  no  ties.
    There were inadequate reasons for the findings under Article 8.

11.  The renewed application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers
    before Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on 26th February 2016.   In  granting
    permission to appeal she wrote that the removal of the Appellant  would
    breach the Appellant's Article 8 private life.   However  she  was  "an
    illegal entrant" [in fact an overstayer] who had  never  had  leave  to
    remain here [once her leave had expired]. The key question was  whether
    the Appellant's removal would be proportionate.   The  Appellant  could
    not rely on the children treating her as  a  mother  although  she  had
    formed  bonds  with  the  children  in  the  extended  family  setting.
    Nevertheless she  did  not  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with them for the purposes of Section 117B(6) of the  2002
    Act.

12.  The reason why Upper Tribunal Judge Finch granted permission to  appeal
    became clear in the next paragraph where she wrote:

         "However the best interests of the children in the extended  family
         were a  primary  consideration  to  be  taken  into  account.   The
         consideration of the children's best interests in  paragraph  8  of
         the decision appears to have been partly lifted from  another  case
         and does not give sufficient consideration to  the  facts  of  this
         particular case and the views and needs of the individual children.
          As a consequence I find that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did
         make arguable errors of law."

13.  The Respondent replied to the grant for permission by letter dated  7th
    March 2016 stating that the Appellant's complaint that  the  Judge  had
    failed to apply the correct "ties"  test  under  paragraph  276ADE  was
    without merit.  The appeal was determined on  9th  September  2015  and
    Paragraphs 3.4 and  4.7  of  the  Statement  of  Changes  required  the
    Tribunal  to  apply  the  Rules  at  the  date  of  his  hearing.   The
    Appellant's interpretation of YM was wholly flawed.  Immigration  Rules
    are a statement by the Respondent of how she will exercise  her  powers
    of control over immigration.  Thus in the absence of any  statement  to
    the contrary the most natural  reading  of  the  Rules  was  that  they
    applied to decisions taken by the Respondent until  such  time  as  she
    promulgated new Rules after which she would decide according to the new
    Rules.

14.  The Tribunal had had regard to the  claimed  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and the children but found that the  children  would  not  be
    adversely affected by the  Appellant's  removal  as  the  children  had
    parents living in the same household as the children.  The existence of
    family life was not determinative of this appeal.   Whilst  Section  55
    was a primary consideration it must  still  be  weighed  against  other
    cumulative factors.  The Appellant had failed to identify the  evidence
    of an adverse effect on the children that the Judge had failed to  take
    in to account.  The Judge's findings were open to him on the  evidence.







The Preliminary Issue

15.  When the case was called on for hearing before me  on  the  morning  of
    21st April 2016 there  was  no  attendance  by  the  Appellant's  legal
    representative Mr Alam who had represented the Appellant in  the  first
    instance and settled the onward grounds of appeal.  Mrs Uzma Mirza  the
    Appellant's  niece  stated  that  the  family  were   expecting   their
    representative to attend.  Meanwhile the Tribunal  received  an  e-mail
    during the morning which stated that Mr Alam was  extremely  unwell  to
    attend having suffered a very severe temperature and flu  the  previous
    night and was hoping to get better in the  morning  having  taken  some
    tablets.  Unfortunately he was said to have only become  worse  in  the
    morning with the addition of stomach ach to the bad flu he already  had
    the previous night.  The letter requested an adjournment.

16.  I indicated to the Appellant  that  it  was  very  unsatisfactory  that
    there was no one to replace Mr Alam to enable the hearing to  go  ahead
    or otherwise make an application to the Tribunal for an adjournment.  I
    put the matter back until 2pm for  the  Appellant  and  her  family  to
    contact their legal representatives Shehzad Law Chambers  to  see  what
    was happening.

17.  When the case re-convened in the afternoon Mr Alam himself was  present
    although indicating that he was still feeling under  the  weather.   He
    further requested an adjournment as he had a very runny  nose  and  had
    suffered from a high fever and  a  bad  throat.   Whilst  the  Tribunal
    inevitably had sympathy for a representative who was not well,  it  was
    apparent that Mr Alam was more than capable of presenting his  client's
    case which he was fully familiar with. The  issues  in  the  case  were
    whether there was or was  not  an  error  of  law  in  the  First  Tier
    decision.  It was not proposed that in the event of  an  error  of  law
    being found there would be  a  re-hearing  of  the  evidence  (see  the
    Tribunal's letter to Shehzad Law Chambers of 13th April 2016).

18.  In considering the request for an adjournment I  directed  myself  that
    the test is one of fairness alone.  Could the  Appellant  have  a  fair
    hearing if the case proceeded?   As  Mr Alam  was  fully  briefed  and
    despite his recent illness was fully able to present his client's  case
    and make all of the relevant arguments, (as in fact it became  apparent
    during the course of the hearing) I considered that it was not  in  the
    interest of fairness that this case should  be  adjourned  further  for
    another day.  The case therefore proceeded.

The Error of Law Hearing

19.  Mr Alam submitted that  there  were  two  issues  which  arose  out  of
     paragraph 18 of the determination.  The  first  part  of  paragraph  18
     appeared to refer to a different case altogether when  it  spoke  about
     the Appellant's relationship with  "his  grandchildren  in  the  United
     Kingdom" and a very recent relationship with "their grandfather".   The
     Respondent's guidance to case workers issued in November 2005 cited  by
     the Judge at paragraph 18 was too restrictive.  The  Judge  had  formed
     the view that because the children's parents were here there  would  be
     no impact on the children if the Appellant were removed.  That was  not
     an adequate consideration of the children's best interests.  The  Judge
     had before him witness statements of the children including the  nephew
     who gave evidence at the hearing.  He had said that the  Appellant  was
     like his second mother and talked about the role she  had  played.   He
     was 14 at the date of hearing.  Further there  was  evidence  from  the
     niece who had spoken of the role of the Appellant in the  life  of  the
     children at paragraph 10 onwards.  The bundle was available at the time
     of  the  hearing.   The  question  was  whether  Section  55  had  been
     considered and Counsel read from paragraph  18  of  the  determination.
     The Judge had based his conclusion on whether  the  children  would  be
     without their parents but the consideration of the  best  interests  of
     the children was not limited to such a restrictive interpretation.  One
     had to be scrupulous in the assessment of the  best  interests  of  the
     children.

20.  In reply the Presenting Officer stated that if one looked at page 7  of
    the Appellant's bundle (which was  the  statement  of  the  Appellant's
    brother-in-law Mr  Mirza)  he  had  referred  at  paragraph  6  of  his
    statement to "the Appellant also takes care of my grandchildren  as  my
    daughter works full-time  and  her  son  is  under  the  care  of  [the
    Appellant].  My grandson is very attached to her  and  whenever  he  is
    away from her he becomes distressed".  Thus nothing turned on the point
    that the Judge appeared to  be  talking  about  the  wrong  case.   The
    Appellant was an aunt who had been here  to  look  after  a  relative's
    children.  The Judge had found it proportionate that she  should  leave
    the country.  The grounds were a  disagreement  with  the  outcome  and
    there was no material error of law in the determination.

21.  In conclusion Counsel responded to  the  Presenting  Officer  that  the
    objection to paragraph 18 of the determination was that it  related  to
    different circumstances.  The Appellant did have  a  relationship  with
    grandchildren but the paragraph referred to  in  Mr  Mirza's  statement
    showed that the  relationship  with  the  grandchildren  had  been  for
    sometime whereas paragraph 18 of the Judge's determination spoke  about
    the Appellant having developed "a very recent relationship  with  their
    grandfather".  That was clearly wrong.

22.  The grounds referred to the question of insurmountable  obstacles  when
    considering the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE.   These  obstacles
    could be seen from the Appellant's bundle which had background material
    from the Country of Origin Information  Reports  and  referred  to  the
    difficulties women faced in Pakistan.  Section 2.4.1 referred to single
    women living alone and  their  lack  of  economic  independence.   This
    evidence, counsel argued, had been  available  to  the  Judge  but  not
    considered.  The Appellant's family  were  there  but  his  father  was
    dependent on his sister-in-law in Pakistan and he would not be able  to
    support the Appellant.

Findings

23.  The issue in this case is whether the Judge made any material error  of
    law such that his determination should be set aside and the decision re-
    made.  I would agree with the submission  of  the  Respondent  that  in
    essence both sets of grounds of appeal are no more than a  disagreement
    with the outcome of the case.  The Appellant was an overstayer and  any
    private life which she  may  have  formed  whilst  here  would  in  the
    proportionality exercise (outwith the Rules) only  be  afforded  little
    weight.  The Appellant could not succeed under the  Immigration  Rules,
    having no leave to be here but  something  of  an  irrelevant  argument
    arose as to the correct test to be applied  on  whether  the  Appellant
    could be expected to relocate to Pakistan.

24.  Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) states that one of the requirements  for  leave
    to remain on the grounds of private life is that "there would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into  the  country
    to which they would have to go if required to leave the UK".  What  the
    Judge referred to at paragraph 19 was that on the  facts  of  the  case
    there would not  be  any  insurmountable  obstacle  for  the  Appellant
    described as a healthy woman to live in Pakistan "as she has  done  for
    several years".  In looking at the determination as a whole it is clear
    that the Judge means that there are no very  significant  obstacles  to
    the Appellant's return to Pakistan.  He did not accept the  Appellant's
    argument that she would  face  difficulties  as  a  single  woman  (see
    paragraph 15 of the determination).  He found that there  would  be  no
    difficulty in her being supported by  Mr  and  Mrs  Mirza  upon  return
    (ibid).  The Judge was mindful of the fact that the Appellant had lived
    the first 25 years of her life in Pakistan.

25.  As Judge Nicholson  correctly  pointed  out,  at  paragraph  6  of  his
    decision to refuse permission to appeal, the Judge was entitled to take
    into account whether a person had ties to the  country  to  which  they
    would be returned when considering whether there were very  significant
    obstacles  to  integration.  I  would  agree  with  Judge   Nicholson's
    characterisation that at paragraph 15 of the  determination  the  Judge
    had taken the view that there  were  no  obstacles  whatsoever  to  the
    Appellant living in  Pakistan.   In  any  event  when  considering  the
    private life claim of the Appellant it has to be borne in mind that she
    has no leave to be in this country.  Her private life has  been  formed
    during the brief period her status here was precarious because she  had
    leave as a visitor but  for  most  of  the  time  while  she  was  here
    unlawfully as an overstayer.  Very little  weight  could  therefore  be
    attached to that private  life  when  considering  the  proportionality
    exercise.  The argument therefore as to whether the Appellant had  ties
    to Pakistan or whether there were significant obstacles to  her  return
    is something of a red herring.

26.  The second argument made in this case is whether the  Judge  has  dealt
    adequately with the best interests of the children.  As Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Finch noted the best interests of the  children  were  a  primary
    consideration to be taken into account.  Although some confusion  arose
    at the beginning of the paragraph 18  with  the  reference  to  a  very
    recent  relationship  with  grandchildren  when  it  appears  from  the
    evidence before the Judge that this relationship had been going on  for
    sometime, the Judge did make it clear at paragraph 18 he was  aware  of
    what the claim was in relation to  the  children.   The  Appellant  had
    become attached to her nephews and had developed  a  relationship  with
    them.  However the plain fact of the matter was that the children  were
    being looked after by their respective parents.  The expression used by
    the Judge at paragraph 18 that this was a  family  that  had  used  the
    "services" of an aunt did not indicate that the Judge felt there was no
    family life but rather that the relationship which the aunt had to  the
    rest of the family was that she was helping the rest of the family with
    the care of the children.  Nevertheless  if  household  assistance  was
    still required once the Appellant had returned to Pakistan  that  could
    be obtained from outside sources as the Judge pointed out.

27.  It is clear from a fair reading of the determination as  a  whole  that
    the Judge was fully aware of the best interests of the children and  of
    the  weight  to  be  ascribed  to   those   best   interests   in   the
    proportionality exercise which he had to conduct when  considering  the
    Article 8 appeal outside the Immigration Rules.   The  Appellant  could
    not succeed under Appendix FM  as  she  did  not  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with the children.  On  the  basis  of
    the facts as found by the Judge there were no compelling  circumstances
    to allow this appeal outside the Rules.  The determination of the Judge
    did not disclose any error of  law  in  the  treatment  either  of  the
    Appellant's claim to a private life under Article 8 or in  relation  to
    the claim to family life with the children and the extended family.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the appeal.

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so  doing.



Signed this 9th day of May 2016


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee was payable and the appeal has been dismissed there can be no  fee
award.

Signed this 9th day of May 2016


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft




