
IAC-AH-KEW-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33643/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th February 2015                |On 6th March 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                               MR CUMALI YURUK
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N S Ahluwalia, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Turkey born on 8th August 1985.  On  11th
    March 2013 the Appellant's instructed solicitors applied on his  behalf
    for leave to remain in order to establish himself in business under the
    Turkey-European  Community  Association  Agreement.   The   Appellant's
    application was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 23rd July 2014.  The
    Secretary of State noted that in order to succeed  on  the  Appellant's
    application  it  was  necessary  for  the  Appellant  to  satisfy   the
    requirements of paragraph 21 of HC 510 namely that he must  demonstrate
    a genuine intention to establish in business.  The Secretary  of  State
    was not satisfied that that intention was shown.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Khan  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  13th  June  2014.   In   a
    determination promulgated on 1st July 2014 the Appellant's  appeal  was
    dismissed.

 3. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  10th
    July 2014.  That application was refused by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Davidge on 4th September 2004.  Renewed Grounds of Appeal were
    lodged on 25th July 2014.

 4. On 8th December 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun granted  permission  to
    appeal.   Judge  Eshun  noticed  that  the  grounds  at   paragraph   6
    highlighted the Appellant's past experience in business  and  submitted
    that this  was  directly  relevant  to  the  question  of  whether  his
    investment in the UK was a genuine attempt to  take  over  an  existing
    business.  At paragraph 7 it was argued  that  the  provenance  of  the
    investment was clear and that the judge's rejection of the  credibility
    of the Appellant's investment and past experience was flawed.

 5. On 24th December 2014 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.  Those grounds contended that  the  Respondent
    refused the application on the basis that the  business  plan  was  not
    genuine and that the judge had  concluded  on  the  evidence  that  the
    Appellant lacked the experience in the work of running a fish bar.  The
    Rule 24 reply contends that that was a decision entirely  open  to  the
    judge.  Further it contends that the judge was  not  convinced  of  the
    provenance of the funds relied upon and that he had given valid reasons
    for this concern.  In particular it was contended  that  there  was  no
    adequate evidence to support the assertion that the Appellant, with  no
    past experience, could obtain better prices than his brother  and  that
    the Appellant had never run such a business in the past.  In  short  it
    was contended that the judge had given sound reasons for rejecting  the
    Appellant's claim.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Mr Ahluwalia.  Mr Ahluwalia is familiar with this matter having
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.  The  Secretary  of  State  is
    represented by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Jarvis.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. I am considerably assisted in this matter by Mr  Jarvis  intimating  at
    the beginning of the hearing that he agrees with  the  criticisms  made
    about the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in the renewed
    Grounds of Appeal.  He acknowledges that there has  been  a  procedural
    irregularity and a failure to involve  with  later  evidence  that  was
    produced and he considers that the correct approach is to set aside the
    decision and to remit the matter to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
    hearing by any judge other than Immigration Judge Khan.

 8. Mr Ahluwalia acknowledges he is grateful for the concession made by the
    Secretary of State and does no more than endorse that view and rely  on
    the Grounds of Appeal.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. Obviously a judge's task is to a considerable extent made  easier  when
    there is agreement between the advocates as  to  the  approach  that  I
    should take.  However it is still for me to determine whether there  is
    a material error of law.  I am satisfied  that  having  considered  the
    Grounds of Appeal that  there  is.   The  Appellant  explained  in  his
    witness statement that his past experience in business was relevant  to
    the business he wished to enter into and I accept that just because the
    Appellant has never run a fish and chip shop in Turkey given  his  past
    work experience that cannot rationally  be  regarded  as  a  basis  for
    concluding that the Appellant could not run such a business in  the  UK
    or that this was not a genuine attempt  to  set  up  a  business.   His
    experience in running successful ventures is directly relevant  to  the
    question of whether his investment in the UK is a  genuine  attempt  to
    take over an existing business.

12. Further  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  asserted  that  the
    Appellant had given no explanation as to why he was  not  part  of  the
    family business and why he  had  worked  for  other  people.   That  is
    contradictory to the  Appellant's  evidence  particularly  his  witness
    statement that he had worked in the family business  between  2001  and
    2004 and had then decided to leave the business to work in  shops.   He
    built up the relevant  experience  for  the  running  of  his  proposed
    venture in the  UK.   There  was  a  considerable  amount  of  evidence
    produced by the Appellant which  has  not  been  scrutinised  in  depth
    seemingly  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   including   detailed
    documentation with regard to  the  provenance  of  funds  held  by  the
    Appellant.  The failure to provide proper and anxious scrutiny to these
    documents along with the failure to give due and  proper  consideration
    to the Appellant's previous work experience constitutes material errors
    of law which show that the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    unsafe.  In such circumstances I set aside the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and remit the matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal  at
    Hatton Cross.

13. I would add that at the present time I am advised by the administration
    that listings for remits to Hatton Cross are not taking place and  that
    such a date will be forwarded to the parties' legal representatives  in
    due course.  I conveyed this information to the  legal  representatives
    who were present.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  The matter is remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
sitting at Hatton Cross  on  a  date  to  be  fixed  before  any  First-tier
Tribunal Judge other than Immigration Judge M A Khan.

The following directions are given for the re-hearing of this matter.

    1.   None of the findings of fact are to stand.


    2.   The matter be heard before any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other
    than Immigration Judge Khan sitting at Hatton Cross on  a  date  to  be
    fixed with an estimated length of hearing of three hours.


    3.   That there be leave to both parties to file and serve  an  updated
    bundle of documents and evidence upon which they seek to rely at the re-
    hearing of this matter at least seven days pre-hearing.


    4.   Turkish interpreter required.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 20th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.



Signed        Date 20th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

