
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33245/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On  23rd April 2015                  |On 28th April 2015                   |


                                   Before

                      deputy upper Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MISS LILLIETH MARIE SMITH
                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Brown, Counsel instructed by Sheirs Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Cox to allow the appeal of Miss Lillieth Marie Smith against  the
    refusal of her application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on
    private and family  life  grounds.  For  ease  of  reference,  I  shall
    hereafter refer to the parties by reference  to  their  status  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Background to the appeal

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who was born on  the  15th  April
    1963. She arrived in the United Kingdom, on the 20th July 2002, with  6
    months' limited leave to remain as a visitor. She thereafter overstayed
    her leave, only seeking to regularise her immigration status by way  of
    an application for leave to remain that was made in October 2011.  That
    application  was  founded  upon  her  relationship  with  one   'Samuel
    Hendricks', a British  citizen  with  whom  she  has  cohabited,  in  a
    relationship akin to marriage, since 2004. It was refused on  the  20th
    August 2012, on the ground that the respondent was not  satisfied  that
    the relationship was genuine and subsisting. The appellant submitted  a
    further application on the 13th November 2013. This was refused on  the
    6th January 2014, and it is the appeal against this  refusal  that  was
    allowed by Judge Cox on the 23rd December 2014.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. Judge Cox began by noting that the respondent  now  accepted  that  the
    appellant was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a  British
    citizen  and  thus  met  the  threshold  suitability  and   eligibility
    requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules [paragraphs 24 and
    25]. At paragraph 26, the judge said this:

         However, the Appellant's Counsel acknowledged  that  the  Appellant
         has to rely on  Ex.1  of  Appendix  FM,  as  she  cannot  meet  the
         Immigration Status (D-LTRP 2.1-2.2) and the  English  Language  (E-
         LTRP 4.1-4.2] requirements of Appendix FM. I note that the  parties
         dispute  whether  or  not  the  Appellant   meets   the   financial
         requirements of  the  rules,  but,  in  light  of  the  Appellant's
         counsel's concession, I do not have to determine this issue.

 4. The judge thereafter noted that whilst the respondent accepted that the
    appellant's relationship with  Samuel  was  genuine,  she  nevertheless
    considered that there were no "insurmountable obstacles" (as defined by
    Section Ex.2) to their relationship continuing in  Jamaica.  The  judge
    expressed the reasons for his  disagreement  with  this  conclusion  at
    paragraphs 35 to 37:

        35. On the totality of the evidence, I am  satisfied  that  if  the
            Appellant's partner had to uproot himself at this stage of  his
            life,  then  this  would  cause  considerable  hardship.  I  am
            satisfied that the Appellant's partner has very strong ties  to
            the UK. The  Presenting  Officer  did  not  seek  to  challenge
            Samuel's evidence as to the strength of his  ties  to  the  UK,
            which was supported by the evidence of his family and  friends.
            In particular Samuel is over 80 years old and has  been  living
            in the UK for over 50 years. He considers the UK  as  his  home
            and provided substantial  evidence  of  his  ties  to  the  UK,
            through the evidence of his friends and family.

        36. On the totality of the evidence and  having  given  significant
            weight  to  the  Appellant's  partner's  circumstances,  I   am
            satisfied that he would face considerable  difficulties  if  he
            had to go to Jamaica to be with his partner and these amount to
            'insurmountable obstacles'.

        37.  Accordingly,  I  am  satisfied   the   Appellant   meets   the
            requirements of EX1 and therefore  meets  the  requirements  of
            immigration rules. I allow the appeal.

 5. The judge thereafter considered whether the respondent's  decision  was
    compatible with Article 8, lest he subsequently be held  to  have  been
    wrong "as to the meaning of 'insurmountable obstacles'  as  defined  by
    the immigration rules". He thereafter adopted the  structured  approach
    suggested by Lord Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and, in relation  to
    the issue concerning proportionality of the  appellant's  removal,  had
    regard to the considerations relating to the public  interest  question
    listed in Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002. He stated that he  attached  little  weight  to  the  appellant's
    relationship with Samuel because it had been entered  into  at  a  time
    when the appellant's immigration status was  precarious.  Nevertheless,
    he attached some weight to it due to his earlier  finding  that  Samuel
    had been unaware of the Appellant's immigration status when he  entered
    into that relationship [paragraphs 31 and 43]. He  concluded  that  the
    couple were "financially independent" [paragraph  44]  and  once  again
    attached significant  weight  to  his  finding  "that  the  Appellant's
    partner would face  considerable  difficulties  if  he  had  to  uproot
    himself from the UK now", stating that he was therefore satisfied  that
    "it would be unreasonable to expect him to do so"  [paragraph  45].  He
    concluded that  the  appellant's  rights  outweighed  the  respondent's
    legitimate  interests  in  ensuring  economic  and  social   order   by
    maintaining effective immigration control [paragraph 46].

The grounds of appeal

 6. The first ground of appeal asserts that, contrary  to  authority,  "the
    judge considered section EX1 as free standing". It further states that,
    "if an appellant does not meet the requirements of certain  immigration
    rules, then compelling circumstances have to  be  established  for  the
    purposes of Article 8".  It  is  then  asserted  that  failure  of  the
    appellant to meet the Immigration Rules by reason of the fact that  she
    is an overstayer meant that she would  need  to  establish  "compelling
    circumstances" in order to rely upon Article 8, and  further  complains
    that it is not clear from the judge's determination on  what  basis  he
    found that such circumstances existed.

 7. The second ground of  appeal  asserts  that  the  Tribunal  "failed  to
    demonstrate" that it had attached  little  weight  to  the  appellant's
    relationship, entered into as  it  was  at  a  time  when  she  was  an
    overstayer.

 8. The third ground asserts that there are no  "insurmountable  obstacles"
    and neither would it be "unduly harsh for the relationship to  continue
    in Jamaica, bearing in mind the judge's finding  that  the  appellant's
    partner is originally from Jamaica and that adequate health care  would
    be available to him in that country.

Analysis

 9. Despite Mrs Pettersen's best efforts to persuade  me  otherwise,  I  am
    satisfied that the first ground of appeal is wholly misconceived. It is
    predicated upon the erroneous assumption that it was  not  possible  to
    navigate to Section EX from within the terms of Appendix FM itself.  In
    fact, both the eligibility requirement concerning overstayers  and  the
    financial requirements of  Appendix  FM  are  subject  to  the  caveat,
    "unless paragraph Ex applies" [see the concluding words  to  E-LTRP.2.2
    and  E-LTRP.3.1(c)].  It  is  not  therefore  necessary  to  cross   an
    intermediate threshold in  order  to  arrive  at  Section  EX.  On  the
    contrary, it is clear that Section EX provides an  alternative  to  the
    requirements in question. Moreover,  as  Mr  George  pointed  out,  the
    appellant was exempted from the English  language  requirement  because
    she is a citizen of an English-speaking county [see GEN.1.6]. There was
    thus no requirement for the judge to find compelling  circumstances  in
    order to apply Section EX, and the  only  error  of  law  lies  in  the
    contrary assertion that is made in this particular  ground  of  appeal.
    Interestingly, it was not an error made by the original decision-maker.

10. The second ground of appeal is dependent upon it  being  accepted  that
    the judge was not entitled to allow the appeal on the ground  that  the
    respondent's decision is not in accordance with immigration rules,  and
    that it was therefore necessary for the Tribunal to have regard to  the
    factors in Section 117B when considering the public  interest  question
    under Article 8. However, as previously noted, the judge  was  entitled
    in principle to allow the appeal within the  terms  of  Section  EX  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, wherein there is no reference  to
    little  weight  attaching  to  a  relationship  entered  into  when  an
    applicant's immigration status is unlawful. In this respect, the  terms
    of the Immigration Rules may be regarded  as  more  generous  than  the
    public interest considerations to  which  a  decision-maker  must  have
    regard when considering a case under Article 8.

11. The third ground of appeal is in my judgement simply a quarrel  with  a
    conclusion that was reasonably open to the judge;  namely  that  Samuel
    would  face  "very  significant  difficulties"  (to  quote   from   the
    definition of 'insurmountable obstacles' within Section Ex.2) were  he,
    as an 80-year-old man who has continuously resided in the  UK  for  the
    last 50 years, now  to  relocate  to  Jamaica.  The  judge  quoted  the
    definition of 'insurmountable obstacles' that is contained  within  the
    immigration rules at paragraph 27 of his determination. Moreover, it is
    clear from paragraph 35 that he applied it [see  paragraph  4,  above].
    His conclusion that Samuel would face "very  serious  difficulties"  in
    relocating to Jamaica that "would entail  very  serious  hardship"  for
    him, was one that in my judgement fell comfortably within the range  of
    reasonable decisions.

Notice of Decision

12. The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity is not directed



Signed        Date

Judge D Kelly
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
