
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33949/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 July 2015                       |On 8 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                              Mirza Imran Baig
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Mairs, instructed by Prolegis Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mirza Imran Baig, was born on 2 December 1987 and  is  a
    male citizen of Pakistan.  The appellant entered the United Kingdom  on
    a valid visit visa in May 2006.  He subsequently applied to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom on the basis  that  he  has  contracted  an  Islamic
    marriage to Shabnum Nazli (hereafter referred to as the sponsor).   His
    application was refused  by  a  decision  of  the  respondent  dated  3
    September 2013.  The appellant was not given a right  of  appeal.   The
    appellant applied for permission to bring judicial  review  proceedings
    and a further refusal dated 13 August 2014 (granting a right of  appeal
    to the appellant) was issued by the Secretary of State.  The  appellant
    appealed against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Robson) which, in a determination dated 21 November 2014 dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. Mr Diwnycz, for the respondent, at  the  hearing  on  8  July  2015  at
    Bradford acknowledged that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in  law.
    Accordingly, I allow the appeal and set aside Judge Robson's  decision.
    The appeal will  be  returned  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  that
    Tribunal (not Judge Robson) to re-make the decision.

 3. The reasons for my decision are as follows.   The  judge  had  accepted
    that the appellant and sponsor had contracted an Islamic marriage on  4
    November 2011.  He was, however, doubtful as to the subsistence of  any
    relationship between the couple, in particular during 2014.  The  judge
    found [71] that "[the documents in the appellant's bundle] simply  show
    however that the parties have been in  a  relationship  this  year  and
    there is a  huge  gap  to  demonstrate  the  relationship  between  the
    beginning of this year and the date of  the  Islamic  marriage."   Both
    parties accept that the  judge  appears  to  have  ignored  documentary
    evidence relating to the relationship in  the  appellant's  bundle  and
    covering the period November 2011 - September 2013.  The documents  are
    detailed in the grounds of appeal [9].   If  the  judge  rejected  that
    evidence, he should have given his reasons for doing so.

 4. I also  find  that  the  judge's  findings  regarding  the  appellant's
    relationship with the sponsor's  child  are  not  entirely  consistent.
    Given the judge found that there was a  lack  of  evidence  as  to  the
    subsistence of the relationship between the appellant and sponsor  [E6]
    it is not clear how he might, in those circumstances, have any kind  of
    relationship with the sponsor's child.  It  is  clear  that  the  judge
    believed that there was a relationship although he did find  [88]  that
    the appellant's "presence has [not] in any way improved  [the  child's]
    behaviour."  The judge  had  not  accepted  that  this  was  a  "family
    splitting case" (sic)  [86]  but  he  does  not  seek  to  define  what
    relationship, if any, exists between the child and  the  appellant  nor
    has he considered the best interests of the child and  how  those  best
    interests might be affected by the appellant's removal to Pakistan (see
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009).

 5. For these reasons, I have set aside the decision.  None of the findings
    of fact shall stand.  The matter will be re-heard and the decision  re-
    made in the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Bradford.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Robson) is set  aside.   None
of the findings of fact shall stand.  The appeal shall be  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Robson) for  that  Tribunal  to  re-make  the
decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 2 September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
