

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal No:
IA/33946/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House
Determination Promulgated
On 1 September 2014                                          On 9 September
2014


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DIGNEY


                                 JIN HEE KIM
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the respondent: Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the appellant:  Mr  Richardson

                               DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, a citizen of South Korea, applied for indefinite  leave
      to remain on the basis of ten years' residence.   The application  was
      refused because the respondent concluded that there had been breaks in
      the continuous residence.  A First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  an  appeal
      against the decision. The judge concluded that the first gap  was,  in
      law, not a gap at all, the second was one that should  not  have  been
      treated as a gap and in any event, should she  be  wrong  about  those
      matters she would have allowed the appeal under article 8 of the ECHR.
      Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.


   2. The first ground of appeal concerns the first gap. The facts  are  not
      in dispute. The appellant had valid leave until30 June 2004 and so was
      an overstayer until she left the United Kingdom on 4 July 2004. On  29
      August 2004 she re-entered the united Kingdom with valid leave.

   3. The relevant law is to be found in paragraphs 276A(a) and  276B(v)  of
      the Immigration Rules. Paragraph 276A(a) reads:

             "continuous residence" means residence in the  united  Kingdom
             for an unbroken period, and for these purposes a period  shall
             not be considered to be broken where an  applicant  is  absent
             for a period of six months or less at any one  time,  provided
             that the applicant in question has existing limited  leave  to
             enter or remain upon their departure and return.

   4. Paragraph 276B(v) reads:

             the applicant must not be in the United Kingdom in  breach  of
             immigration laws except that  overstaying for a period  of  28
             Days or less will be disregarded.

   5. The grounds of appeal argue that the appellant falls foul of  276A(a).
      She was absent from the United Kingdom for a period of less  than  six
      months and she did not have leave to remain when she departed.  I have
      to say that I do not understand the judge's reasoning at paragraph  24
      of the determination, where she talks of periods of overstaying  being
      disregarded. Here it is not the overstaying  alone  that  breaks   the
      continuous residence but the fact that  the  appellant  did  not  have
      leave both on departure and return in connection with her absence.


   6. The appellant was granted leave until 31 October 2007 and she did  not
      apply for further leave until 24 July 2008 and she was in fact granted
      further leave on 16 February   2010 until 31 October 2010. There was a
      gap of nine months until the application was made and of two years and
      three months before leave was granted. It is not necessary to consider
      whether the leave  is  retrospective  as  there  is  in  any  event  a
      considerable gap. The appellant had argued  that  the  delay  was  the
      fault of her solicitors.

   7. The judge concluded that the  respondent  should  have  exercised  her
      discretion and disregarded  the  gap  as  it  was  the  fault  of  the
      appellant's solicitors. She therefore (I do not  entirely  follow  the
      logic as the gap was clearly there) concluded that the appellant could
      show ten years continuous residence. The grounds of appeal accept that
      there was a discretion to overlook gaps, but note that  significantly,
      negligence by a representative is not given as an example of something
      that may lead a caseworker to exercise a discretion outside the rules.

   8. In fact the respondent did consider whether to exercise  a  discretion
      outside the rules  in  the  light  of  what  the  appellant  had  said
      concerning her representatives; fist whole paragraph on page 3 of  the
      Reasons for Refusal Letter. AS the discretion has been considered, and
      it is a discretion  outside  the  rules  I  cannot  exercise  s  fresh
      discretion and the respondent's can only be impugned on the basis that
      it is not in accordance with the law. That may be the case  where  the
      discretion is exercised on a false basis, which is not the case  here,
      or where the exercise is perverse.

   9. The judge said that it was  unreasonable  of  the  respondent  not  to
      exercise his discretion in the appellant's favour when she had done so
      previously when an out of time application had been made.  It  is  not
      clear to me that a discretion was exercised on that occasion,  but  if
      it was the situation was quite different as then the appellant clearly
      met the requirements of the rules. On this occasion she did not and  I
      can see nothing perverse or irrational in  the  respondent's  decision
      not to overlook the considerable gap in the "continuous residence" and
      exercise a discretion in her favour outside the rules.

  10. The remaining grounds of appeal deal with  the  judge's  treatment  of
      article 8.Given the date of the application  the   judge  should  have
      dealt with family and private life under appendix FM. She did  not  do
      so. This would appear to be an error of law because any  consideration
      of article 8 outside the rules has to take into consideration why  the
      application failed under the rules as that is clearly relevant  as  to
      whether the case is one of those rare cases that need to be considered
      outside the rules.   The matter was so considered in the  Reasons  for
      Refusal Letter and I can only conclude that the judge did not consider
      it because he concluded that there was no chance of  success  by  that
      path.

  11. The grounds of appeal  argue  that  the  judge  in  carrying  out  the
      proportionality exercise did not give sufficient weight to the  public
      interest generally or with regard  to  the  public  interest  in  firm
      immigration control. I have read the determination with great care and
      I can find no reference to the public interest at all.  It  cannot  be
      said that the judge carried  out  a  balancing  exercise  at  all  and
      therefore fell into legal error. I have to remake the decision

  12. As I am remaking the decision  I have to consider the new section 117B
      of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, that reads:


                        The maintenance of effective immigration controls is
   in the public interest




  13. The first ground of appeal states that the judge's conclusion that  he
      could  not  be  satisfied  that  the   appellant's   father   had   no
      responsibility for the  appellant  was  perverse.  The  second  ground
      states that adequate reasons were not given for  the  conclusion  that
      the appellant's mother did not have sole responsibility for  her  son.
      It is then said that  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  is  self-
      sufficient in China with other family members is based on  speculation
      rather than evidence and the conclusion is at odds with  paragraph  16
      [it is actually paragraph 15] of the determination,  where  the  judge
      accepts that the sponsor has transferred  money to the  appellant.  It
      is finally said  that  the  decision  on  article  8  is  inadequately
      explained.





  14.   Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  Judge  Cruthers.     After
      summarising the grounds he concluded:

             Given, amongst other things, the history  of  the  appellant's
             mother, I suspect that in the last  analysis  it  is  unlikely
             that  the  appellant  will   be   able   to   establish   sole
             responsibility  here.  However,  it  is  arguable   that   the
             appellant and  the  sponsor  are  entitled  to  a  less  brief
             treatment of such case as the appellant does have  as  regards
             sole responsibility.  Overall,  there  is  sufficient  in  the
             grounds to make a grant  of permission appropriate.


             As already intimated, the appellant  and  sponsor  should  not
             take this grant of  permission  as  any  indication  that  the
             appeal will ultimately succeed.

  15. This is a case  where  various  relations  and  acquaintances  of  the
      appellant were interviewed by or on behalf of the respondent in  China
      and their evidence was before the trial judge.  There  are  interviews
      with  two  uncles.,  the  appellant's  sister  and  someone  from  the
      appellant' school. The appellant was also interviewed.


  16. The first ground states that the judge was wrong to conclude  that  he
      could not rule out that the appellant's father  had  some  involvement
      with the appellant. In the light of the interviews I have to  conclude
      that the judge's conclusion was so strongly against the weight of  the
      evidence that it must amount to a factual error. However, it seems  to
      me that even if this is an  error of law, it is not material. That  is
      because the absence or  otherwise  of  the  father  is  irrelevant  to
      whether the mother had sole responsibility. There is nothing in any of
      the interviews that suggest that the mother had any responsibility for
      the   appellant   other   than   occasionally   sending   money.   The
      responsibility appears to have been shared at  various  times  between
      the grandparents, one of the uncles and the sister. The appellant says
      in his statement that his mother made the major decisions in his life,
      and the mother says the same in her statement. She also  said  at  the
      hearing that she made all the decisions for  her  son.   Unfortunately
      these are mere statements and the  evidence of the relations in  China
      gives no   factual  support  for  these  statements.  It  is  for  the
      appellant to prove that his mother had sole responsibility for him and
      there is no evidence to that effect. The judge was certainly  entitled
      to reach the decision he did on this point and I find it difficult  to
      see how he could have reached any other  conclusion  on  the  evidence
      before him. It follows that there is no error of law  in  the  judge's
      conclusion  that  the   appellant's   mother   did   not   have   sole
      responsibility for him. The  evidence  points  overwhelmingly  to  the
      appellant's  various  relations  in  China  having  responsibility  at
      various times.


  17. I am not sure what the relevance of the third ground is and Mr Lam did
      not refer to it at the hearing. The evidence does in  fact  show  that
      the appellant is now self-sufficient in China, in the sense that he is
      living on his own with no day to day help. It  is  accepted  that  his
      mother sends money but the judge was  describing  the  life  that  the
      appellant was leading, which it must be admitted does not appear to be
      a very happy one, living as he does on his own. The third ground  does
      not identify any error either of law or fact.

  18. It is finally said that article 8  is  not  properly  treated.  Having
      concluded that the appellant could not succeed under the  rules  there
      would have had to be something compelling before an  article  8  claim
      could be successful and there is nothing of that sort. Mr Lam did  not
      in fact mention article 8 in his submissions.


  19.  It follows that the original judge made no error of law. The original
      decision stands.

The appeal is dismissed


Designated Judge Digney      2 September 2014
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


