
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/33207/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 October 2017                         |On 17 October 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                   MR A B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes, Kesar and Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of the Ivory Coast (Cote D'Ivoire) born  on
    19 February 1997.  He arrived clandestinely in the United Kingdom on  2
    March 2013 and was detected by Kent Police and subsequently  placed  in
    the care of Kent Social Services as an unaccompanied minor.  He made an
    asylum claim on 5 April 2013 on the basis that he was a  Christian  and
    would  face  persecution  if  returned  to  the  Ivory   Coast.    This
    application was refused on 28 June 2013 but the Appellant  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain from that date until 19 August 2013.  The
    Appellant made a subsequent application for  further  leave  which  was
    refused and his appeal against  that  decision  was  dismissed  and  he
    sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   His  appeal  in
    respect of the risk on return  to  Christians  was  dismissed  but  his
    appeal in respect of Article  8  was  allowed  and  the  Appellant  was
    granted further discretionary leave to remain.

 2. On 27 February 2015 the Appellant made a further application for  leave
    which was refused in a decision dated 7 October 2015.  The  Appellant's
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Khawar for hearing  on  18
    October 2016.  At the outset of  the  hearing  the  Presenting  Officer
    raised a preliminary issue,  which  was  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    obtained the Secretary of State's consent to raise asylum as  a  ground
    of appeal by way of a section 120 notice being served on  the  Tribunal
    and the Respondent, albeit that the grounds of appeal filed in  October
    2015 plainly raised such issues.  The judge  ruled  that  it  would  be
    inappropriate to summarily dismiss an appeal given that the  Respondent
    has  effectively  been  on  notice  in  relation  to  the   Appellant's
    protection claim since the filing and serving of the grounds of  appeal
    which addressed that issue.

 3. The new basis of the Appellant's claim was centred  around  his  sexual
    orientation. This is set out in his  statement  of  19  September  2016
    where he stated that, whilst he had always known this and has never had
    a relationship with any girl he had attempted to kiss a boy in  Morocco
    when he was 10 but was advised against this activity by his mother.  In
    2013 whilst travelling from France to  the  UK  he  had  disclosed  his
    sexual orientation to a number of individuals as a consequence of which
    he had been raped and as a consequence  of  that  he  had  been  tested
    positive for rectal chlamydia and  had  received  treatment  for  three
    weeks in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant also stated he suffers from
    depression and has symptoms of PTSD and that he would  be  at  risk  by
    virtue of his sexual orientation if returned to the Ivory Coast.

 4. In a decision and reasons promulgated on 30  December  2016  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal essentially because he did not find the  Appellant
    credible in his claim to be gay holding at [27]:

         "Indeed taking a global view of all of the evidence I am led to the
         inevitable conclusion that the evidence in  this  case  amounts  to
         little more than an assertion by the Appellant that he is gay;  the
         evidence  of  various  witnesses  called  to  give  oral   evidence
         indicates in effect that the Appellant is known by them to  be  gay
         because he said so, and he appears to have  commenced  making  such
         assertions in or about mid-2015."

    The judge further held at [45]:

         "However taken at its highest even if the  Appellant  is  genuinely
         gay, there is no objective evidence to establish that  if  returned
         to the Ivory Coast he would  suffer  ill-treatment  or  persecution
         which crosses the Article 3 threshold.  The reality is  that  while
         there is considerable evidence and potential discrimination against
         gay individuals there is also considerable  objective  evidence  to
         establish that homosexuality is not illegal  in  the  Ivory  Coast.
         Furthermore there is also objective evidence (examples being  pages
         348 and 349 of the Appellant's bundle and elsewhere) which  clearly
         showed that in  Abidjan  Ivory  Coast  gay  men  have  considerable
         freedom as part of the 'gay scene'."

 5. The judge went on to find that at [47] that there were  no  exceptional
    circumstances to warrant a  grant  of  leave  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Permission to appeal  was  sought  in  time  on  the  following
    grounds: firstly, that the judge erred in his assessment of credibility
    and in particular had failed to take account of relevant considerations
    in the following respects: (i) that the judge failed  to  consider  the
    critical issue in the appeal, which is the corroborative  support  that
    the historic rape gives to the Appellant's claim to have been unable to
    put forward his asylum claim based on gender preference  until  a  late
    stage in his stay in the United Kingdom.  The judge does not reject the
    fact the Appellant had been sexually assaulted and  the  evidence  that
    the Appellant had to be treated thereafter  for  rectal  Chlamydia  and
    (ii)   the judge failed to take account  of  the  core  status  of  the
    determination principles under the Qualification Directive and  as  set
    out in the UNHCR guidelines on international protection No.9 "Claims to
    refugee status based on sexual orientation and/or gender identity"  and
    the UNHCR document "Beyond proof: credibility assessment in  EU  asylum
    systems."

 6. The second ground of appeal was that, in  the  alternative  to  finding
    that there was no objective evidence to establish  a  risk  of  serious
    harm or persecution if returned to the Ivory Coast, the judge failed to
    take into consideration country evidence from the United  States  State
    Department Report which was expressly cited in the skeleton argument at
    [14] that "gay men were subjected  to  beatings,  imprisonment,  verbal
    abuse, humiliation and extortion by police, gendarmes  and  members  of
    the armed forces."  It was essential that the judge determined  whether
    this evidence constituted a real risk of persecution and whether if the
    Appellant acted discreetly to avoid the risk to him that this would  be
    contrary to the judgment in HJ (Iran) [2010]  UKSC  31  that  a  person
    cannot be expected to conceal an essential aspect of  his  identity  in
    order to avoid persecution.   However  the  judge  entirely  failed  to
    conduct such an enquiry.

 7. It was further argued in the alternative that, even if the risk did not
    reach the level of persecution, it nevertheless  represented  an  issue
    which needed assessment as to whether it represented a very significant
    obstacle to the Appellant's ability to  integrate  in  his  country  of
    origin pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(vi) and/or a flagrant  interference
    with his Article 8 rights, which is clearly set  out  in  the  skeleton
    argument before the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Storey  in  a
    decision dated 15 August 2017 in the following terms

         "The grounds, which  contend  that  the  judge's  approach  to  the
         Appellant's late disclosure of his  gay  identity  (postdating  the
         previous unsuccessful asylum appeal) was  contrary  to  established
         case law principles and that the judge also failed to undertake any
         proper enquiry of the  background  country  evidence,  disclose  an
         arguable error of  law.   The  judge's  cursory  treatment  of  the
         Appellant's claim to have been raped in Calais (see  paragraph  41)
         and the apparent dismissal of its potential relevance to  his  late
         claim based on gay identity require further scrutiny."

 9. In a Rule 24 response dated 29 August 2017 the Respondent set  out  her
    position as follows.

         "3.  The determination  shows  that  the  judge  conducted  a  very
             thorough analysis  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  as  to  his
             sexuality.  Although there were witnesses their  evidence  was
             essentially based on what the Appellant had told them and  the
             judge noted  that  ultimately  it  simply  came  down  to  the
             Appellant's own assertion.  His findings were  fully  reasoned
             and open to him on the evidence."

     Hearing

10. At the hearing before me, the Appellant was represented  by  Mr  Symes,
    who sought to rely on his grounds of  appeal.  He  submitted  that  the
    evidence before the judge required the judge to  consider  whether  the
    Appellant's late claim was consonant with that  evidence,  rather  than
    him having invented a claim based on his sexual  orientation,  but  the
    judge failed so to do.

11. In respect of the second ground of appeal, Mr Symes submitted that,  in
    addition to his grounds of appeal, it was clear both from the  evidence
    from the USSD and UNHCR that whilst it was not illegal to be gay in the
    Ivory  Coast  there  were  serious   issues   of   discrimination   and
    persecution.  The judge in this case had simply  taken  the  view  that
    other aspects of the country evidence took precedence but that was  not
    a rational approach and  the  weighty  material  from  USSD  and  UNHCR
    clearly demanded consideration  and  adjudication.   Mr  Symes  further
    submitted that the judge should have but  failed  to  consider  whether
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) applied and this did  require  adjudication  given
    that it had been considered fully by  the  Respondent  in  the  refusal
    letter and was fully pleaded in the skeleton argument before the First-
    tier Tribunal at [20] and [21].

12. Mr Kotas, on behalf of the Respondent, put up a robust defence  of  the
    judge's decision.  He submitted that the starting point  was  that  the
    second and third grounds were only material if an error was to be found
    in respect of the first  ground  of  appeal.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge's conclusions as to the Appellant's sexual orientation could  not
    simply be reduced to the judge's  reliance  on  the  delay  in  putting
    forward the claim. At [27] of the decision  the  judge  also  described
    inconsistencies, contradictions and highly improbable events.  Mr Kotas
    took me through the judge's findings at [27] through  to  [42]  of  the
    decision and noted in particular  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    disclose his  sexual  orientation  to  either  his  lawyers  or  Social
    Services.  There was no evidence from the Social Services at the appeal
    hearing and that was a matter to which the judge was entitled to attach
    weight.  Mr Kotas also sought  to  rely  on  the  jurisdictional  point
    raised by the Presenting Officer and recorded by the judge at [13]  and
    [14] of the decision albeit he accepted that  the  Respondent  had  not
    cross-appealed on this basis.  He  submitted  that  the  judge  had  no
    jurisdiction to consider this aspect of the appeal given the  Secretary
    of State had not considered the asylum claim based on  the  Appellant's
    sexual orientation.  Mr Kotas also relied on the fact that at [42]  the
    judge noted that the Appellant stated he had not had any gay  relations
    with anyone since coming to the United Kingdom in 2013.

13. In his response, Mr Symes focussed on the issue  of  jurisdiction.   He
    pointed out that this had not been pleaded in a formal notice of appeal
    and it was too late  to  be  raised.   He  submitted  that  the  proper
    procedure at first instance would be to follow the policy guidance  and
    the decision in Mandalia [2015] UKSC  59  which  makes  clear  that  if
    consent is refused in respect of jurisdiction at the same  time  it  is
    incumbent upon the Respondent to do everything possible to ensure  that
    a new claim or a new aspect  of  a  claim  is  considered  prior  to  a
    hearing.  The Presenting Officer  in  this  case  failed  to  cite  the
    Respondent's guidance as to how cases in such circumstances  should  be
    handled.  This is the guidance set  out  in  the  document  "rights  of
    appeal" which relate to the rights of appeal post April 2015.

     Decision

14.  I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Khawar made  material  errors  of
law in his    decision for the reasons set out in the grounds of appeal  and
for the following      reasons. Firstly, the judge found at  [27]  that  the
evidence by the Appellant  amounted     to little  more  than  an  assertion
that he is gay. However, in so finding, in my    considered view, the  judge
failed to give proper or sufficient weight to  the      cumulative  evidence
of a number of witnesses,  including  the  project  caseworker  for      ex-
detainees, Mr Mark  Connorton,  the  Department  Manager  at  the  Volunteer
Centre   in Folkestone; Mr Kevin Hobbs  a  highly  specialised  psychosexual
therapist and the      Reverend Stephen Bould who is a priest  and  who  set
out his knowledge of the   Appellant in  his  letter  of  13  October  2016,
noting the Appellant had in 2013 and early   2014 regularly  attended  Mass.
The judge quotes an extract from the Reverend's letter    at [35]  where  he
stated:

         "I gain the impression not only from  my  own  intuitions  but  the
         people that I saw him with that he had  formed  a  new  network  of
         friends of his own age and upwards whose concerns were not those of
         the church.  I venture the speculation that the  options  that  are
         open or perceived to be open to a young lone francophone black  man
         with only dubious  residential  qualifications  without  background
         experience of British society and moreover of an open and  engaging
         manner must be few and narrow.  I regret  to  say  that  it  is  no
         surprise to me that-although I deprecate  the  outcome-that  A  has
         chosen to identify as a  member  of  the  homosexual  community  in
         Britain."

15.  I find that the judge erred in the manner in which he  approached  this
evidence in   that  he  appeared  to  take  a  view  on  the  issue  of  the
Appellant's  sexual  orientation  and   then  interpreted   the   supporting
evidence of the witnesses to  fit  his  view  rather  than      the  correct
approach which  would  have  been  to  consider  all  the  evidence  in  the
round and then reach a fully informed view as  to  the  credibility  of  the
Appellant's   claim to be gay, in light of  the  delay  in  putting  forward
that basis of claim.  Moreover  in respect of  [42]  the  judge  appears  to
place weight on the fact that the  Appellant  has   not  had  any  same  sex
relationships when the Appellant was, at the time the appeal    came  before
the judge, only 19 years of age and in my considered view is    unreasonable
to expect him to have had relationships in light of his  young  age  and  in
the context of the discrimination  experienced  by  gay  men  in  the  Ivory
Coast.

16.  In light of my  finding  that  the  judge's  credibility  findings  are
unsustainable, the     points raised in ground 2 parts (i) and (ii)  of  the
grounds of appeal i.e.  the  manner  in     which  the  judge  assessed  the
background evidence as to the treatment of gay men in      the  Ivory  Coast
and  the  judge's  failure  to  engage  with  paragraph  276ADE(vi)   and/or
Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules also constitute material errors.

Notice of decision

17.  I find that there are material errors of law in  the  decision  of  the
FtTJ. I remit the      appeal for a hearing  de  novo  before  a  First-tier
Tribunal Judge other than Judge     Khawar.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date     16 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


