

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/33982/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5th of December 2017                    |On 22nd of December 2017       |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                           MR ATIQULLAH JABARKHAIL
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Bustani of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 3rd of August 1997. He
    appeals against a decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Scott-
    Baker sitting at Taylor House on 21st of  December  2016  in  which  she
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 28th of October 2015. That decision was to refuse to  grant  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom. The Appellant claimed that his  removal
    would breach this country's obligations under the Refugee Convention and
    Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the Human Rights Convention as his life would  be
    in danger if returned. He relied upon a request from the Afghan Minister
    for Repatriation and Refugees who had asked for returns to be ceased for
    the time being. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2012 and was
    granted discretionary leave to remain as an  unaccompanied  child  valid
    until 3rd of February 2015.
The Appellant's Case

 2. The Appellant's claim was set out by the Judge at paragraph  21  of  her
    determination: "The  Appellant  claimed  that  his  father  had  been  a
    security guard for Abdul  Haq  and  his  father  had  been  killed  when
    burglars came to Abdul Haq's family home  in  Pakistan  and  killed  the
    Appellant's father and Abdul Haq's wife and son.  His  mother  told  him
    that the nephews blamed his father for what had happened to Abdul  Haq's
    family and that those nephews - Haji Abdul Zahir Kadir, Haji Jamal Kadir
    and Nasratullah - now hold positions in  the  Afghan  government.  Abdul
    Haq's nephew had a property in Isarak and people in his village had said
    that these men would return and harm him as they believe that his father
    had brought harm to their family. He once received a letter  from  Abdul
    Haq's family approximately 2 years earlier but his mother could not read
    it but it said that his father had committed a crime and they would take
    revenge for him. He had also received threats from the  Taliban  because
    his father had links with Abdul Haq".

The Decision at First Instance

 3. The Judge heard oral evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  his  uncle  Mr
    Jabarkhel who had lived in United  Kingdom  since  2002.  She  also  had
    supporting evidence from Sophie Kitchener a character witness, a  letter
    from Melina Alexander at the Appellant's  college,  a  letter  from  the
    Appellant's GP and a letter from Meg Futton  who  worked  with  the  Red
    Cross in Maidstone who had been asked to trace the  Appellant's  family.
    The Judge also had an expert report from Dr  Giustozzi  who  stated  the
    Appellant could relocate to Kabul in order to lessen the threat deriving
    from the Taliban but that Kabul was not immune from Taliban  activities.
    The police would not be able to protect the Appellant from  the  Taliban
    and even less so from the Arsalai family.


 4. The Home Office Presenting Officer argued that even if  the  Appellant's
    father had been killed there was no basis to conclude that the family of
    Abdul Haq would seek revenge. It seemed illogical to hold a  grudge  for
    so long. There was no risk to the Appellant's uncle who had returned  on
    at least four occasions to Afghanistan. This was  important  because  at
    the time that he was seeking to demonstrate that it was not safe  to  be
    in Afghanistan he had returned and fathered  children  which  undermined
    the uncle's evidence. The uncle would not have made the trips  if  there
    was any risk to himself and if there had been no risk to him then  there
    would be no risk to the  Appellant.  The  uncle's  wife  was  living  in
    Jalalabad when Kabul would have been much safer for  her.  There  was  a
    reasonable degree of protection for the Appellant in Kabul and Jalalabad
    would also be safe for the Appellant. It was not accepted  that  he  had
    lost touch with his family. The  Respondent  had  requested  information
    about the Appellant's family in 2012 but this had not been provided. The
    Respondent's overall  submission  was  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
    credible witness.


 5. For the Appellant counsel argued that the Appellant was credible.  There
    was a blood feud between  two  families  and  the  Appellant's  evidence
    should be seen within the context of Dr Giustozzi's report.
 6. At paragraphs 51 to 66,  taking  up  some  2  �  pages  of  her  15-page
    determination, the Judge gave her reasons for rejecting the  Appellant's
    claim for international protection. She described the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's uncle Mr Jabarkhel as "extremely  vague  and  he  could  add
    nothing to the claim that his brother-in-law had been the bodyguard  for
    Abdul Haq and that he had died in the circumstances described  in  1999.
    It would be expected that as the Appellant's uncle had  been  living  in
    Afghanistan at the time of  the  Appellant's  father's  death  that  the
    witness would have been able to provide some details to  the  claim  but
    none were forthcoming".


 7. The Judge found that the report  from  Dr  Giustozzi  was  based  on  an
    acceptance of the credibility of the Appellant but at paragraph  56  she
    said that the Appellant's claim was not  credible.  If  the  Appellant's
    father had been killed in 1999 it was not plausible that the Haq  family
    would have waited for 11 years before approaching the Appellant's mother
    through a letter. Nor was it credible that  the  Appellant's  uncle  was
    unable to give some evidence concerning the Appellant's father  and  his
    family after this claimed incident.


 8. The Appellant's uncle returned to visit his wife and family in Jalalabad
    which was 4 to 5 hours journey or 70 km from the Appellant's  home  area
    of Isarek. If the Taliban attempted to forcibly  recruit  the  Appellant
    that would be traumatic but the Appellant would not be obliged to return
    to his home area as the Respondent intended to remove the  Appellant  to
    Kabul. The Judge cited the 2012 Upper Tribunal authority  of  AK  [2012]
    UKUT 163 in which the Upper Tribunal held that there was little evidence
    of significant numbers  of  the  urban  poor  and  internally  displaced
    persons population in Kabul suffering destitution  or  an  inability  to
    survive at subsistence levels. Return and reintegration packages for  UK
    returnees to Kabul should not be exaggerated but did place returnees  in
    a better position than other persons.


 9. The Appellant was on medication but it  had  not  been  established  the
    Appellant was  currently  undergoing  counselling.  The  medication  and
    dosage did not indicate  that  the  Appellant's  level  of  anxiety  and
    depression had reached the threshold where  were  removal  would  engage
    either Article 3 or Article 8 upon return. As  an  explanation  for  the
    Appellant's depression the GP had placed some reliance on the fact  that
    the Appellant was transitioning into a new culture  and  return  to  his
    home country would remove this concern.  The  Appellant  had  no  family
    living in Kabul on his account but there  was  nothing  to  indicate  he
    would be considered as vulnerable on return. He  had  family  living  in
    Afghanistan although his mother had not been traced. His  aunt  and  her
    family  lived  in  Jalalabad  and  the  uncle  made  regular  visits  to
    Afghanistan to visit the uncle's family at  which  time  he  could  also
    visit the Appellant.


10. The Appellant was now of  the  age  of  majority  and  in  no  different
    position to other young men  who  are  returned  to  Kabul  having  been
    granted a period of refuge in the United Kingdom.  The  Appellant  would
    not be at risk from the Taliban as the evidence was that  the  Taliban's
    enquiries were more general and they were not specifically targeting the
    Appellant. He would not be at risk from the family of Abdul Haq as  that
    claim was not considered credible by the Judge for the reasons she gave.
    Dr Giustozzi had  ruled  out  any  risk  to  the  Appellant  from  being
    considered as westernised as the Appellant would be able to avoid  areas
    where that danger might arise. She dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

11. The Appellant appealed against this decision in two sets of grounds  one
    dated 30th of March 2017 prepared by counsel who had appeared  at  first
    instance and the 2nd dated 12th of July 2017 by different  counsel  (who
    did not appear before me). In the first set of grounds it was argued the
    Judge had not made any findings of fact and it was not clear what  parts
    of the Appellant's case  were  accepted.  At  paragraph  3  the  grounds
    complained that the Judge disposed of the case  "by  agreeing  with  the
    Home Office refusal letter." The Judge  had  medical  evidence  and  the
    evidence of Ms Futton about the tracing of the Appellant's family  which
    lent weight to the credibility of the Appellant's claim that his  family
    had disappeared and that he had sought medical help because of his  time
    in Afghanistan.


12. The lengthy 2nd set of grounds of appeal which ran  to  4  pages  argued
    that the Judge had failed to reach adequate or  any  findings  regarding
    the core of the Appellant's claim that his father had been  a  bodyguard
    for Abdul Haq and his father and Abdul  Haq's  wife  and  son  had  been
    killed in 1999, although the grounds appeared to concede that there  was
    a lack of sufficient detail from the Appellant's uncle.  The  Judge  had
    failed to engage with the expert  evidence  of  Dr  Giustozzi  that  the
    Arsalai family of Abdul Haq would want to extract further  revenge  from
    the Appellant's family and they would target post puberty  male  members
    of the family such as the Appellant. There was  no  time  limit  to  the
    validity of the feud. No adequate reasons were  given  for  finding  the
    Taliban were not specifically targeting the Appellant.


13. The grounds argued that the Judge's assessment of the lack  of  risk  to
    the uncle failed to engage with the evidence that while the uncle's wife
    continued to live in Jalalabad she had to  move  around  and  the  uncle
    travelled to Afghanistan for 15 days or a  month  maximum.  The  finding
    that the Appellant would be at risk of ill-treatment in his home village
    was inconsistent with the Judge's earlier  findings.  Dr  Giustozzi  had
    given his opinion that the Taliban entertained good relations  with  the
    Arsalai family and  thus  the  Taliban  had  the  means  to  track  down
    individuals in Afghanistan. Relocation to Kabul was not reasonable as no
    account had been taken of the factors relied upon by the  Appellant.  He
    was a young man of nearly 20 with no  recent  experience  of  living  in
    Afghanistan.  Kabul  was  not  immune  from  Taliban  activities  as  Dr
    Giustozzi pointed out and adverse attitudes towards westernisation  were
    quite common in Kabul. Ms Futton of the Red Cross had stated that  Kabul
    was very dangerous.


14. There were very significant obstacles to the  Appellant's  reintegration
    into Afghanistan and he should have succeeded under paragraph 276 ADE of
    the Immigration Rules. The Judge had not explained how the  interference
    with the Appellant's private life was proportionate. No adequate account
    was taken of the Appellant's value to the community as a  model  student
    or that he had arrived in the United Kingdom as a child  and  spent  his
    adolescence lawfully in this country.  The  grounds  cited  the  Supreme
    Court decision of Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 that it  made  a  difference
    whether the person who had come to this country had  come  during  their
    childhood or as an adult. The Judge had failed to take  account  of  the
    depth of the Appellant's integration into UK society. No account of been
    taken of the impact of the decision on his foster parents and friends.


15. The application for permission to  appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Birrell on 17th  of  October  2017.  In
    granting permission to appeal she noted that it was  asserted  that  the
    Judge had erred in the assessment of the core of the  Appellant's  claim
    in relation to the Haq family and the risk from the Taliban. Further the
    grounds argued that the  determination  was  inadequately  reasoned  and
    failed to engage with the expert evidence of Dr Giustozzi.  The  Judge's
    assessment of internal relocation was inadequate and  failed  to  engage
    with the expert evidence. The assessment of Article  8  was  inadequate.
    The grounds disclosed arguable errors of law.


16. In response to the grant of permission  the  Respondent  wrote  to  the
    Upper Tribunal on 3rd of November 2017 that she opposed the Appellant's
    appeal.  The  Judge  had  directed  herself  appropriately.   She   had
    extensively digested the expert report of Dr Giustozzi at paragraphs 39
    to 45 of the determination. She had considered the Appellant's  account
    and rejected it for being vague and contradicting background  evidence.
    It was implausible that the Appellant's attackers  would  wait  for  11
    years to harm the Appellant  when  there  were  older  members  of  the
    Appellant's family. The  expert  report  was  based  on  accepting  the
    account given by the Appellant at face value. Given the Judge had found
    significant issues with the Appellant's account  it  was  open  to  the
    Judge to find the Appellant would not be at risk upon return.

The Hearing Before Me

17. At the hearing before me counsel relied  on  the  two  sets  of  grounds
    arguing that the determination was flawed in both its assessment of  the
    need for protection and the issue of proportionality  under  Article  8.
    There were no findings as to the core facts of the case such as  whether
    the man that the Appellant's father had worked for  Abdul  Haq,  existed
    and whether his wife and son were killed. The  findings  on  credibility
    were seriously flawed as they failed to take  into  account  the  expert
    evidence. The Judge's finding that the Haq family would not wait for  11
    years ignored the  expert  evidence  that  blood  feuds  would  only  be
    executed on post puberty males. It was not therefore that the  Appellant
    was not targeted between the ages of 2 and 13.


18. There was an issue under Article 15 C of the Qualification Directive  in
    relation to the safety of persons returned to Kabul. The situation there
    was fluid. The Judge had abundant  background  evidence  to  demonstrate
    that but had failed  to  consider  it.  A  proportionality  exercise  in
    relation to the Article claim 8 was absent. There was little regard paid
    to the life the Appellant had  with  his  foster  family.  There  was  a
    distinction between someone who came here as an adult and  someone  like
    the Appellant who had come here as a child. The Appellant was fluent  in
    English and would contribute to the economy.


19. In response, the Presenting Officer stated that there  was  considerable
    merit to  the  challenge  to  the  determination.  There  were  no  safe
    credibility findings which were at the heart of the  case.  We  did  not
    know if it was true if the Appellant's father had been  killed.  It  was
    not certain what evidence the Judge rejected. The argument  as  to  safe
    relocation to Kabul was flawed. AK was a  2012  country  guidance  case.
    There was material on file which went to the situation at the moment.  I
    asked the Presenting Officer to clarify whether the Respondent  was  now
    resiling from the submissions made to the Judge at  first  instance  and
    summarised by her in the determination (see [4] above).  The  Presenting
    Officer replied that at the hearing at first instance  the  Respondent's
    position was qualified by an even if. The factual matrix  needed  to  be
    established before risk of persecution could be  decided.  However,  the
    Respondent was not  conceding  the  appeal  or  prepared  to  grant  the
    Appellant leave to remain. It was a matter for the  Tribunal  to  decide
    whether the Judge's determination contained a material error of law.


20. In conclusion counsel for the Appellant argued that she agreed with  the
    Respondent that clear findings had not been made on  the  facts  of  the
    case. The Appellant was not just any young man being returned to  Kabul.
    I queried why it was considered dangerous for the Appellant to return to
    Afghanistan but not apparently for the Appellant's uncle (who had  given
    evidence to the Judge about his trips to  Afghanistan).  Counsel  argued
    that the vendetta  with  the  Arsalai  family  was  only  aimed  at  the
    Appellant's immediate family and therefore did not include the uncle.  I
    asked whether there was  any  evidence  in  the  objective  material  or
    otherwise to show that the vendetta would be limited in such a  way  but
    counsel said she did not have any such evidence.

Findings

21. This is essentially a reasons based challenge to  a  determination.  The
    first set of grounds of appeal argued that the Judge did not make  clear
    what parts of the Appellant's case  were  accepted  such  as  where  the
    Appellant came from in Afghanistan. This ground overlooked paragraph  57
    of the determination which referred to  the  Appellant's  home  area  of
    Isarek. The grounds also complained that the Judge had made no  findings
    on the events said to have occurred in 1999 when  the  Appellant  was  2
    years old namely the death of the Appellant's father and  the  wife  and
    son of Abdul Haq. The difficulty with this argument is that it  was  not
    clear where the evidence of this incident in 1999  had  come  from.  The
    Appellant had told the Respondent of this  incident  but  by  definition
    could not have been speaking from his own personal  knowledge  since  he
    was only 2 years old at the time. As might be expected the Appellant did
    not know when the incident now put at 1999 was said  to  have  occurred.
    The Appellant on his case was repeating what he was told  of  events  by
    his mother who had since disappeared. He was young at the  time  and  it
    would not be surprising if he recalled matters incorrectly given that he
    himself had not experienced them. He would not be in a position to  know
    whether what his mother was telling him was true.


22. The problem which the Judge had to deal with was that the  adult  member
    of the Appellant's family who was called  to  give  supporting  evidence
    gave evidence that was undermined and did not confirm the 1999  incident
    in circumstances where he could reasonably be expected to have  done  if
    the events had taken place, see [6] above.  The  Judge  pointed  out  at
    paragraph 33 that the uncle's evidence was inconsistent. The  uncle  had
    said he did not know how his sister had  managed  for  money  after  the
    Appellant's father had been killed even though he the witness  had  been
    in Afghanistan for 3 years after the 1999  incident  (until  leaving  in
    2002) and had lived in the same village. This was evidence which it  was
    reasonable to expect would be produced in a straightforward way  to  the
    Tribunal but it was not produced.


23. The death of the Appellant's father in  some  form  of  burglary  was  a
    catastrophic event if true which the uncle's sister had to deal with for
    at least the 3 years prior to the uncle  leaving  Afghanistan.  Yet  the
    uncle was quite unable to say how his sister  had  managed  during  that
    period seriously undermining, as the Judge found, the  uncle's  evidence
    that any incident had in fact occurred in 1999. Further the uncle  could
    reasonably have been expected to add something to the evidence that  the
    Appellant's father was employed by the Haq family  which  the  Appellant
    claimed was at the core of the asylum appeal. In  the  three  years  the
    uncle remained in Afghanistan in the same  village  as  the  Appellant's
    mother he had discovered nothing of relevance  to  this  issue.  As  the
    Judge pointed out despite being in a position to  know,  the  uncle  was
    quite unable to help the Tribunal with evidence about what was  said  to
    be the core of the claim.  The  grounds  appeared  to  accept  that  the
    uncle's evidence was lacking but did not suggest a plausible reason  why
    that should be so. In these circumstances, it was a matter for the Judge
    what weight she wished to give to the evidence that was put before her.


24. She was urged by the Presenting Officer at the hearing that the  uncle's
    evidence could not be relied upon as a statement  of  risk  because  the
    uncle was travelling backwards and forwards between the  United  Kingdom
    and Afghanistan. I note in this respect that the 2nd grounds  of  appeal
    acknowledged the uncle's travel to Afghanistan but stated that he  would
    travel out for one month maximum. Making several  trips  to  Afghanistan
    for a period of up to a month at a time is not in my view a minimal stay
    in that country but rather a  more  substantial  one.  If  the  Taliban,
    elements of the Afghan government or the Arsalai  family  had  some  ill
    will towards the Appellant's family it is difficult to see why the uncle
    would be able to make such extended trips in safety. The  argument  that
    the uncle was somehow exempt from the family feud makes no sense at all.
    No evidence was produced to the Judge at first instance to indicate that
    the feud would be so limited, and that was certainly not the evidence of
    the uncle who is quoted by the Judge at paragraph 33 saying he too would
    be at risk from Abdul Haq as was his sister (the Appellant's mother thus
    not a male member of the family) but he had no option but to  return  to
    Afghanistan to see his family.


25. It was clearly a core part of the Respondent's opposition to the  appeal
    that  the  lack  of  risk  to  the  Appellant's  uncle  undermined   the
    Appellant's  claim  to  be  at  risk.  The  Appellant  himself  had  not
    apparently suffered any harm he was reporting what he had been told.  It
    was for the Appellant to establish his case to the appropriate  standard
    of proof and this evidence fell short of doing that. The stark  contrast
    between what the Appellant claimed his other had told  him  and  what  a
    family member who could be expected to know what  happened  but  in  the
    event did not, inevitably  undermined  the  value  of  the  second  hand
    evidence the Appellant was giving.


26.  The Judge was concerned that if the Appellant's father had been  killed
    in 1999 the Haq family  would  not  have  waited  for  11  years  before
    approaching the Appellant's mother through a letter. That  assertion  by
    the  Judge  at  paragraph  56  was   criticised   by   the   Appellant's
    representatives as being in conflict with the  report  of  Dr  Giustozzi
    that only post puberty males would be targeted. From 1999 onwards whilst
    the Appellant was still a child he would not have been included  in  the
    feud. The difficulty for the Appellant is that that does not explain who
    was at risk from 1999  onwards.  Evidently  not  the  Appellant's  uncle
    because he has been able  to  return  to  Afghanistan  on  a  number  of
    occasions.


27. The Judge was aware of that part of Dr Giustozzi's  report  which  deals
    with the age at which vendettas are applied, see  paragraph  39  of  the
    determination. Indeed, the Judge analysed the report of Dr Giustozzi  at
    some  length  and  the  complaints  made  in  the  2nd  set  of  grounds
    particularly, that the Judge had not engaged with Dr Giustozzi's  report
    is completely without foundation. Nor can it  be  said  that  the  Judge
    arrived at a view on the Appellant's credibility and then  rejected  the
    expert report. As I have indicated she went through the report carefully
    and  in  some  detail  before  giving  her  credibility  findings.   She
    acknowledged parts of the report  and  relied  upon  them,  such  as  Dr
    Giustozzi's comments on the risk from  westernisation  and  his  remarks
    about forcible recruitment.


28. The Appellant's case on the risk from the Taliban was undermined by  the
    uncle's lack of knowledge. At paragraph 24 of the  determination  he  is
    quoted as saying that his family had received threats from  the  Taliban
    as he believed they knew of the Appellant's  father's  link  with  Abdul
    Haq. The grounds of onward appeal argue that the Taliban now  have  good
    relations with the family of Abdul Haq and are considering  an  alliance
    with them. Abdul Haq himself was said to have lived in  Jalalabad  where
    the uncle's family continued to reside without incident.


29. The Appellant continued to protest that he was a year younger  than  the
    age assessment had revealed him to be.  The  Appellant  had  arrived  in
    United Kingdom at the age of 15. The Red Cross had been asked  to  trace
    the Appellant's mother but the evidence of Ms  Futton  accepted  by  the
    Judge at paragraph 38 did not  indicate  that  they  had  been  able  to
    establish the Appellant's mother had disappeared but  rather  that  they
    been unable to make enquiries because of the general country  conditions
    in Afghanistan. It was not accurate for the grounds  of  appeal  to  say
    that there was evidence before the Judge to confirm that the Appellant's
    family had disappeared. What there was before  the  Judge  was  evidence
    that the Appellant had family in Afghanistan namely his  uncle's  family
    who lived in an area Jalalabad that was perhaps even more dangerous than
    Kabul particularly given the apparent presence in that city of Abdul Haq
    himself.


30. Nor do I accept  the  criticism  that  the  Judge  was  inconsistent  in
    finding a risk to the Appellant if he returned to his home area but  not
    a risk if he returned to Kabul. The findings were  based  on  two  quite
    separate assessments. The problem for the Appellant if  he  returned  to
    his home area was not that he would be caught up  in  a  feud  with  the
    family of Abdul Haq but that he might be the subject of  an  attempt  to
    forcibly recruit him into the Taliban as a male in the area not  because
    he was specifically targetted. The risk to the  Appellant  in  his  home
    area was not an acceptance by the Judge that the Appellant was  at  risk
    from the family of Abdul Haq. The point about the safety  of  Kabul  was
    that in  Kabul  the  Appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  from  forcible
    recruitment by the Taliban.


31. It was further argued that the Judge was wrong in  her  assessment  that
    there was no risk as such to the Appellant in Kabul by reason of Article
    15C general country conditions. The Judge was entitled to follow country
    guidance  on  this  issue.  There  continues  to  be  an  insurgency  in
    Afghanistan and clashes between the Afghan government and Allied  forces
    on the one hand and the Taliban on the other. In order for the Appellant
    to be at risk in Kabul he would need to  establish  a  personal  profile
    that would put him at risk. The Judge's finding was that  the  Appellant
    did not have such a personal profile because she did not accept that the
    Appellant was at risk from a feud with the family of  Abdul  Haq.  There
    was no reason why the Taliban would focus on the  Appellant,  the  Judge
    describing the risk as a generalised one, that is  faced  by  anyone  in
    Afghanistan.


32. If the country guidance were to change and it  was  decided  that  there
    was nowhere safe in Afghanistan to return individuals then the  position
    might be different but that was not the position in law at the  date  of
    the hearing at first instance nor is it the position now at the date  of
    the hearing before me. Although the Presenting Officer raised a  concern
    at the treatment  of the Article 15C claim by the Judge that concern did
    not extend as far as conceding that there was an  Article  15C  risk  in
    Kabul.Had the Respondent accepted that such a risk existed she would  no
    doubt  have  granted  the  Appellant  international   protection.    The
    Respondent's concern is not that the Judge was wrong to say  that  there
    was no Article 15C risk but to say the Judge should have said more about
    it in the determination. That of itself does  not  indicate  a  material
    error of law.


33. The Presenting Officer before me argued that  there  was  force  in  the
    Appellant's submissions  that  the  Judge  had  inadequately  given  her
    reasons for dismissing the appeal. There is an irony here. At  paragraph
    3 of the first set of  grounds  of  appeal  drawn  by  counsel  who  had
    appeared at first instance it was argued that the Judge had disposed  of
    the case by agreeing with the Home Office refusal letter.  If  therefore
    it is being said by  the  Respondent  that  the  Judge  gave  inadequate
    reasons and the submission of counsel who appeared at first instance  is
    correct that the Judge was merely repeating the  reasons  given  in  the
    refusal letter then the Respondent's  reasons  for  refusal  letter  was
    inadequate. The correct disposal of this case  would  then  be  for  the
    Respondent to withdraw her decision and grant this Appellant  the  leave
    to remain requested. However, when I queried this the Presenting Officer
    indicated that that was not the Respondent's position and they  did  not
    propose to give this Appellant leave. The Respondent's position in  this
    case is somewhat muddled.


34. In fact, I do not agree that the Judge has merely agreed with  the  Home
    Office refusal letter.  It  is  correct  that  the  Respondent  did  not
    consider it plausible that the Haq family would not have sought  revenge
    sooner given that Abdul Haq's brother  was  the  governor  of  Nangarhar
    province a point also relied upon by the Judge. However, the  Respondent
    at the time of writing the refusal letter could not have  known  of  the
    inconsistencies in the uncle's evidence which were later relied upon  by
    the Judge. This indicates that the Judge formed  her  own  view  on  the
    merits of the case.


35. One point which does appear in the refusal letter  which  connects  with
    the point about the delay by the Haq family in  pursuing  the  Appellant
    was that the Appellant had told the Respondent  in  interview  that  the
    Taliban had not pursued his family earlier because they were not  strong
    in his area at that time (see paragraph 31 of the refusal  letter)  when
    in fact the Taliban were  in  power  in  Afghanistan  until  2001.  This
    evidence was somewhat ambiguous. It was open to the Judge to decide what
    evidence was relevant and what was not. If, as here, she did not rely on
    something which appeared in the refusal letter as a reason for  refusing
    the claim, that further undermines the argument made in the  grounds  of
    appeal that the Judge simply followed what the Respondent had said.


36. The grounds also complained about the Judge's treatment  of  Article  8.
    She was said to have overlooked the Appellant's  relationship  with  his
    foster family and that he was a model student. In  fact,  she  mentioned
    both those points. The Judge dealt with the ability of the Appellant  to
    re-establish himself in Afghanistan. She noted at paragraph 71 that  the
    Appellant could speak Pashto and that he had family in Afghanistan.  The
    Appellant had sought medical treatment  as  the  first  set  of  grounds
    claimed but as the Judge pointed out the medical evidence  was  that  it
    was because the appellant was having problems adjusting to life  in  the
    west, problems which  would  go  away  on  return  to  Afghanistan.  The
    evidence put before the Judge did not support  the  claim  made  in  the
    first set of grounds that the Appellant  had  sought  medical  attention
    because of his experiences in Afghanistan. If the  Appellant  wishes  to
    put further evidence before the Respondent that is a matter for him  but
    the Judge could only decide the case on what was in front  of  her.  The
    Judge concluded that there were not very significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's integration into Afghanistan. That was a decision  that  was
    open to her on the evidence which included the existence  of  family  in
    Afghanistan  and  the  grounds  are  a  mere  disagreement   with   that
    conclusion. The Judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  developed  a
    private life in this country and noted his close ties  with  his  foster
    parents, that he had had to avail himself of medical facilities in  this
    country and had been a model student.  These  factors  were  taken  into
    account but the weight to be given to them was a matter for the Judge.


37. The 2nd set of grounds of onward appeal merely repeat the  remarks  made
    by the Judge on these aspects of the Article 8 claim and then argue that
    the Judge has given inadequate reasons for her findings.  The  point  is
    that that the Judge was weighing all of the evidence in the balance both
    for and against the Appellant and was setting that evidence  out  before
    arriving at her conclusions. Again, the grounds are a mere  disagreement
    with the result they do not indicate a material error of law. The  Judge
    noted the Appellant had  been  a  diligent  student  and  had  seemingly
    settled well into the United Kingdom but the decision to remove him  was
    not disproportionate. As the  Appellant  had  failed  to  establish  the
    required international protection there were no circumstances such  that
    his appeal should be allowed under Article 8. This is to be expected. If
    the Appellant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules  and/or  his
    claim for asylum there would  be  great  weight  to  be  placed  on  the
    Respondent's side of the scales.


38. The Appellant had come to the United Kingdom at the age  of  15  but  he
    was 20 by the time of the hearing and able to return to his country  and
    make a contribution to it using perhaps the skills he  has  acquired  in
    this country. Had he come to this country at  an  earlier  age  than  15
    there might have been more force in the Hesham Ali argument but  by  the
    time of the hearing he was an adult. The Hesham Ali argument which is of
    questionable relevance does not seem to  have  been  raised  before  the
    Judge who cannot reasonably be criticised for not dealing with it.


39. Although many criticisms were  made  of  this  determination  they  were
    unfounded ones. On closer examination and a fair not  selective  reading
    of the determination as a whole it can  be  seen  that  the  Judge  gave
    cogent reasons for  her  findings  that  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be
    involved in a blood feud was not credible, that he could return to Kabul
    and could rely on support from his  family  in  doing  so.  The  lengthy
    grounds of onward appeal are an attempt to  find  an  error  where  none
    exists. The Judge rejected any claim that the Appellant might be at risk
    upon return to Afghanistan by reason of his westernised attitude relying
    on the expert report of Dr Giustozzi who  said  that  would  only  be  a
    problem if the Appellant settled in rural or conservative areas  of  the
    country including some suburbs of Kabul.  The  2nd  set  of  grounds  of
    appeal argue that inadequate reasons were given  for  finding  that  the
    Appellant would be able to avoid conservative areas but no positive case
    has been advanced that  the  Appellant  would  need  to  go  to  such  a
    conservative area or particularly would want to. Nor is it  demonstrated
    why avoiding an area where there might be  a  Taliban  or  other  malign
    influence is of itself such  hardship  that  it  engages  the  need  for
    international protection.


40. Notwithstanding some of the  comments  made  to  me  by  the  Presenting
    Officer in submissions since the appeal itself was not conceded  by  the
    Respondent the position remains that I must analyse the determination to
    establish whether there is any material error of law which vitiates  the
    determination. For the reasons which I have given at some length above I
    do not find there is any such material error of law  and  I  reject  the
    submissions made to me that there are such errors. I  therefore  dismiss
    the Appellant's appeal.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.

Signed this 15th of December 2017

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.

Signed this 15th of December 2017

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



