
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33826/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 9 April 2015                      |On 22 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                            JEROME EJAIRU OGUJOR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Lloyd-Smith  promulgated  on  14  November  2014  which
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal a refusal of leave to remain as a Tier
    4 (General) Student Migrant on all grounds .

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 28 June 1984 and is a  national  of  Nigeria.
    The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  13  October  2012  with
    entry clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student until 17 January 2014 and
    the course of study he completed was at  Metro  College  of  Management
    Science.

 4. On 16 January 2014 the Appellant applied for further leave as a Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant to complete a further course of study at  the
    same college.

 5. On 13 August 2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application because he could not be awarded the points  claimed  as  he
    did not have a valid CAS.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lloyd-Smith  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision after considering the papers without  a  hearing.
    The Judge found :

      a) The chronology was as set out in the Refusal Letter.

      b) The Appellant did not have a CAS but relied on an  email  from  the
         Home  Office  Suspension  and  Revocation  Team  sent  to   another
         individual which 'advises that an application  be  made  without  a
         valid CAS.'

      c) The Judge found that she could not be sure that the content of  the
         email would be applicable to this Appellant.

      d) Without a CAS the application and  the  appeal  could  not  succeed
         under hte Rules.

      e) Article 8 did not assist the Appellant.

 7. Grounds of appeal  were  lodged  and  on  21  January  2015  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Holmes gave permission to appeal stating  that  'it  was
    arguable that the decision making process was vitiated by unfairness.'

 8. Mr Harrison on behalf of the Respondent conceded that  having  reviewed
    the file there was an error of law in the decision in  that  there  was
    procedural unfairness.  The  email  relied  on  by  the  Appellant  was
    addressed to the College and therefore applied to all of  the  students
    and advised them  that  they  could  submit  their  leave  applications
    without a valid CAS and the applications would be placed on hold  until
    a final licence outcome had been achieved. He  accepted  that  to  then
    refuse on that basis without notifying the Appellant of the outcome  of
    that process and giving the Appellant an opportunity  to  find  another
    CAS was unfair.



Finding on Material Error

 9. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made material errors of law.

10. This was an in time application dated 16 January 2014 by the  Appellant
    who was at the time a student at Metro College Manchester  for  further
    leave to study at the same College as a Tier 4 student on a course from
    3 February 2014 to 3 February 2015. The application  was  made  by  the
    Appellant without a valid CAS. He was aware that he had no CAS but  was
    acting on the basis of an email dated 3 January 2014 that is at page 12
    of the Respondent's bundle addressed to Metro College  Manchester  (not
    'another individual' as the Judge asserts) which said:

         "Regarding your current students extensions, while your license  is
         suspended our system  simply  does  not  allow  us  the  grant  any
         additional CAS under any circumstances.

         However, these students may still  submit  their  leave  to  remain
         applications without a  valid  CAS.I  suggest  that  you  submit  a
         covering  letter  along  with  these  applications  explaining  the
         current situation, the applications will then  be  placed  on  hold
         until a final licence outcome has been reached."

11. The covering letter from the College is found at page 13 of the  bundle
    and is part of his offer letter and refers to the email at page 12  and
    therefore  confirms  that  the  application  for  the  course  in   the
    Appellant's name could be submitted without the CAS and would  then  be
    put on hold. Thus while the Judge found that she could not be sure  the
    contents of the email applied to this Appellant it was clear  from  the
    covering letter which incorporated an offer in his name that it did.

12. I am satisfied that in paragraphs 6 and 7 therefore the Judge fell into
    error in stating that neither the email or covering letter were  before
    her or indeed applied to this Appellant : both were in the Respondent's
    bundle and it was clear they applied to the Appellant .

13. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to address and determine whether
    the Appellant had been advised by the Respondent that he  could  submit
    an application without a CAS constitutes a clear error of law as it led
    to her not considering whether the Appellant had been  treated  fairly.
    This error I consider to be material since had the  Tribunal  conducted
    this exercise the outcome could have been different. That in my view is
    the correct test to apply.

14. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that the
    Judge's determination cannot  stand  and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety.

15. Mr Harrison had no further submissions to make.

Remaking the decision.

16. This was an in time application  for  further  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student where the Appellant was aware he had no  CAS.  I  am  satisfied
    that he submitted his application having been advised  by  his  College
    that the license for the  College  had  been  suspended  but  that  the
    Respondent had advised that the applications would be accepted  without
    a CAS and kept on hold until the decision on the College was finalised.

17. I accept that the Appellant  was  not  advised  that  the  decision  in
    relation to the College had been finalised until  his  application  was
    refused.

18. I am satisfied  that  it  was  unfair  having  positively  invited  the
    Appellant to make an application without a  CAS  and  having  told  the
    Appellant that his  application  would  be  'on  hold'  until  a  final
    decision was made about the  College  it  was  procedurally  unfair  to
    refuse the application without giving him the opportunity  to  find  an
    alternative CAS having made such a decision.

19. Given the difficulty of obtaining a CAS without  a  passport  which  Mr
    Harrison confirmed was still with the Respondent I trust that  it  will
    be returned to the Appellant to allow  him  to  make  such  alternative
    arrangements within a 60 day period.

Conclusion

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

21. I set aside the decision

22. I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it to the  extent  that
    it remains outstanding before the Secretary of State.



Signed      Date 9.4.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
