

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33236/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 May 2014                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                     BM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The Appellant in person

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

   2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of  the
      First-tier Tribunal (Judge N J Osborne) which allowed the  appellant's
      appeal against the Secretary of State's decision taken on 22 July 2013
      refusing to grant "BM" further leave to remain outside the Immigration
      Rules under Article 8 of the ECHR.

   3. For convenience I will hereafter refer to the parties as they appeared
      before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

   4. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who  was  born  on  9  February
      1983.  On 15 May 2009, the appellant was granted  discretionary  leave
      to remain under Article 8 on the basis of his  family  life  with  his
      (then) partner "JLB" and his son "JLM".   His  relationship  with  JLB
      broke down and is no  longer  subsisting.  The  appellant  has  a  new
      relationship with "NS" and they have a daughter "A" who was born on 11
      December 2010 and so is aged 3.  The Judge found  (para  10(iv))  that
      the appellant's relationship with NS had lasted for  a  period  of  at
      least approaching 4 years.

   5. On 30 April 2012, the appellant made an application for  an  extension
      of his leave to remain now on the basis of his  relationship  with  NS
      and A in the light of the fact that his earlier relationship with  JLB
      no longer subsisted.

   6. In her decision dated 18 July 2013, the Secretary of State  considered
      that the appellant's previous grant of discretionary leave had been on
      the basis of grounds which no longer persisted and so  she  considered
      his application under Appendix FM.

   7. As regards, the appellant's relationship with  NS,  the  Secretary  of
      State noted that the appellant's previous relationship  with  JLB  had
      not broken down until February 2013 and so  the  appellant  could  not
      establish that NS was his  "partner"  as  they  had  not  been  living
      together in a relationship akin to marriage for at least 2 years prior
      to the application (see Gen 1.2).  Further, as regards  reliance  upon
      the appellant's relationship with his daughter  A,  the  Secretary  of
      State concluded that the appellant did not have "sole  responsibility"
      for A and therefore could not meet the requirements  of  E-LTRPT  2.3.
      As regards reliance upon  his  relationship  with  his  son  JLM,  the
      Secretary of State concluded again that the  appellant  did  not  have
      sole responsibility for JLM and did not have "access rights"  so  that
      he failed to meet the requirements of para E-LTRPT 2.4.  Consequently,
      the Secretary of state concluded that the appellant could not  succeed
      under Appendix FM.

   8. The Secretary of State also  considered  the  appellant's  application
      under the private life rule in para  276ADE  but  concluded  that  the
      appellant had not lived in the UK  for  20  years  and  since  he  had
      resided in Zimbabwe for the majority of his  life,  it  had  not  been
      established that he had no ties (including social, cultural or family)
      with Zimbabwe (para 276ADE(iii) and (vi)).



The Appeal

   9. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      promulgated on 13  February  2013,  Judge  N  J  Osborne  allowed  the
      appellant's appeal  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   Judge  Osborne
      accepted that the appellant had a "well established family life"  with
      his (now) partner, NS and their daughter A and also with JLM, his  son
      from his previous relationship.  Judge Osborne concluded that  it  was
      in those children's best interests  to  continue  their  relationships
      with the appellant in the UK.  Taking into account that the  appellant
      had always lawfully been in the  UK,  Judge  Osborne  found  that  the
      public interest was outweighed by the impact upon the family life that
      the appellant enjoyed with his partner  and  children  if  removed  to
      Zimbabwe as their relationship would effectively be "terminated".

  10. The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal on the basis that the Judge had erred in law in allowing  the
      appeal under Article 8 by  failing  to  consider  whether  there  were
      "exceptional" or "compelling" circumstances which justified the  grant
      of leave under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules given that  the
      appellant could not meet the requirements of the Rules.

  11. On 4 March 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hemingway) granted the
      Secretary of State permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  that
      ground.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

Submissions

  12. The appellant was not represented before me and  appeared  in  person.
      The Secretary of State was represented by Mr Richards.  He relied upon
      the grounds and submitted that the Judge had erred in law  in  failing
      to identify "compelling" circumstances to justify allowing the  appeal
      under Article 8 following Gulshan (Article 8 -  New  Rules  -  Correct
      Approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).  Mr  Richards  submitted  that  the
      Judge had found that the appellant had no entitlement under the  Rules
      and he had failed to take that into account, emphasising  instead  the
      positive factors  in  the  appellant's  favour  in  finding  that  the
      appellant's removal would be disproportionate.

  13. Mr Richards invited me, if I found an error  of  law,  to  remake  the
      decision by determining whether there  were  compelling  circumstances
      that, in carrying out the balancing exercise,  outweighed  the  public
      interest.  Mr  Richards  accepted  that  the  appellant  now  met  the
      requirements of Appendix FM.  That is because on 28 April 2014 at  the
      Family Court in Bristol the appellant was granted contact with his son
      JLM on a weekly basis each Sunday.  The Court document was provided by
      the appellant at the hearing.  The appellant met the requirements in E-
      LTRPT 2.4 (a)(ii) based upon his relationship with his son.   Applying
      E-LTRPT 1.1(d), the appellant met all the requirements of  LTRPT  2.2-
      2.4 and LTRPT 3.1 and paragraph EX.1 applied.   EX.1  applied  because
      the appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
      his son who is under the age of 18, in the UK and  a  British  citizen
      and, given that he was living with  his  mother  JLB  also  a  British
      citizen, it would not be reasonable to expect JLM to leave the UK.  Mr
      Richards invited me to take that into account as a relevant factor  in
      carrying out the balancing exercise.

  14. The Appellant repeated his personal circumstances and relied  upon  an
      IDI which stated that an individual's application would be  considered
      on the basis upon  which  previous  discretionary  leave  was  granted
      unless there had been  a  change  of  circumstances.   The  appellant,
      nevertheless,  appeared  to  accept  that  the  circumstances  of  his
      application had now changed as it was based upon his relationship with
      his current partner and two children rather than his relationship with
      his previous partner and their child (JLM) which had been the basis of
      his previous grant of discretionary leave.   The appellant  also  told
      me about his ex-partner demanding money from him in order to allow him
      to see his son JLM and that there had therefore been difficulties with
      contact.  As I have already indicated, he  produced  a  contact  order
      dated 28 April 2014  from  the  Family  Court,  Bristol  granting  him
      contact with his son JLM on a weekly basis each Sunday.

Error of Law

  15. It was accepted before Judge Osborne that the appellant could not meet
      the requirements of  Appendix  FM  or,  indeed,  para  276ADE.   Judge
      Osborne also rejected the submission made by  the  appellant's  (then)
      legal representatives that the appeal should be considered  under  the
      old rules as the appellant's application had been made before the  new
      "Article 8" rules had come into  effect  on  9  July  2012.    If,  of
      course, the new rules were not relevant then Judge Osborne  cannot  be
      criticised for failing to approach his Article  8  assessment  on  the
      basis set out in the recent case law summarised in Gulshan  where  the
      new rules do apply.

  16. This is a matter of some complexity and difficulty.  Mr  Richards  did
      not seek to address me on this issue apart from submitting (in my view
      correctly) that  the  IDI  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  (and  his
      representative before Judge Osborne) did  not  require  that  the  old
      rules be applied because the appellant's current claim was based  upon
      a  change  of  circumstances  since  the   previous   grant   of   his
      discretionary leave.  That was because the previous  grant  was  based
      upon his relationship (now terminated) with  JLB  whilst  his  present
      application was based on his relationship with his new partner NS  and
      their daughter A and, of course, his continuing relationship with JLM.



  17. There are, on the face of it, two conflicting decisions of  the  Court
      of Appeal dealing with the applicability of the new Art 8 rules  where
      an individual's application was made before 9 July  2012  (when  those
      rules came into force) but the decision was  made  on  or  after  that
      date.

  18. In Edgehill and Bhoyroo v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 402  (decided  2  April
      2014), the Court of Appeal (Laws, Jackson and Black  LJJ)  interpreted
      the  'implementation  provisions'  in  HC  194  as  meaning  that   an
      application made before 9 July 2012 could not be decided on  or  after
      that date under the new rule (there the  private  life  rule  in  para
      276ADE) but had to be determined on the basis of  the  previous  rules
      and  it  was  those  rules  which  were  relevant  to  any  Article  8
      assessment.  At [32], Jackson LJ stated:

           "The Immigration  Rules  need  to  be  understood  not  only  by
           specialist immigration counsel, but also by ordinary people  who
           read the rules and try to abide by them. I  do  not  think  that
           [counsel for the Secretary of  State's]  interpretation  of  the
           transitional provisions accords with  the  interpretation  which
           any ordinary reader would place upon them. To adopt the language
           of Lord Brown in Mahad, "the natural and ordinary meaning of the
           words, recognising that they are statements of the Secretary  of
           State's administrative policy," is that the Secretary  of  State
           will not place reliance on  the  new  rules  when  dealing  with
           applications made before 9th July 2012."

  19. In Haleemudeen v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  558  (decided  2  May  2014)
      (Sullivan, Beatson and Sharp LJJ),  the  Court  of  Appeal  reached  a
      diametrically opposed view.  The Court of  Appeal  applied  Odelola  v
      SSHD [2009] UKHL 25 that the relevant rules were those in force at the
      date of decision.  The Court held that a FtT Judge had erred in law in
      his approach to  Article  8  when  determining  an  appeal  where  the
      application for leave had been made prior  to  9  July  2012  but  was
      decided after that date, because he had done so without regard to  the
      'new Article 8' private and family life rules in Appendix FM and  para
      276ADE. At [40]-[41] Beatson LJ said this:

           "40. I, however, consider that the FTT  Judge  did  err  in  his
           approach to Article 8. This  is  because  he  did  not  consider
           Mr. Haleemudeen 's case for remaining in the United Kingdom on
           the basis of his private and family life against  the  Secretary
           of State's policy as contained in Appendix FM and Rule 276ADE of
           the Immigration Rules. These new provisions in  the  Immigration
           Rules are a central part of the legislative and  policy  context
           in which the  interests  of  immigration  control  are  balanced
           against the interests and rights of people who have come to this
           country and wish to settle  in  it.  Overall  the  Secretary  of
           State's policy as to when an  interference  with  an  Article  8
           right   will   be   regarded   as   disproportionate   is   more
           particularised in the new Rules than it had previously been. The
           new Rules require stronger bonds with the United Kingdom  before
           leave will be given under  them.  The  features  of  the  policy
           contained in the Rules include the requirements of  twenty  year
           residence, that the applicant's partner be a British citizen  in
           the United Kingdom, settled  here,  or  here  with  leave  as  a
           refugee or humanitarian protection, and that where the basis  of
           the application rests on the applicant's children that they have
           been residents for seven years.

           41. The FTT's decision on Mr Haleemudeen 's Article 8 appeal is
           contained in [34]-[41], which I summarised and set out  in  part
           at [21] - [23] above. Those  paragraphs  do  not  refer,  either
           expressly or implicitly, to paragraph 276ADE of the rules or  to
           Appendix FM. None of the new more particularised features of the
           policy are identified or even referred to in general terms.  The
           only reference to the provisions is in  the  FTT's  summary  (at
           [30]) of Mr. Richardson's submission that the reference  to  the
           new Rules in the refusal letter was of little relevance  because
           at the time of Mr. Haleemudeen 's application those Rules  had
           not been promulgated and thus did not apply to  his  case.  That
           submission could not succeed in view  of  the  decision  of  the
           House of Lords in Odelola's case,  to  which  I  refer  at  [25]
           above."

  20. The Court of Appeal hearing in Haleemudeen was on 15  April  2014  and
      the decision in Edgehill was handed down on 2  April  2014.   However,
      Edgehill does not appear to have been cited to the Court of Appeal  in
      Haleemudeen and no reference to it is made in  the  Court's  judgment.
      Equally, it does not appear that any argument was put to the Court  in
      Haleemudeen based upon the transitional provisions in HC 194 and  also
      found in paras A277-A280 of the Immigration Rules.  Paragraph A280(c),
      in particular, appears to require the application of the 'old'  rather
      than any 'new' rules in Part 8 of the Immigration Rules (dealing  with
      family life cases) where an application is made before 9 July 2012 but
      a decision is only made on or after that date.  The 'date of decision'
      approach in Odelola is subject to  any  transitional  provisions  (see
      Odelola per Lord Brown at  [34]).   (But  contrast  para  A277C  which
      allows the Secretary of State to chose to apply certain of  the  'new'
      rules provisions in Appendix FM and para 276ADE in just that situation
      but only where the individual cannot succeed under the 'old' rules but
      can under the 'new' rules.)

  21. The position is, therefore, that there are two inconsistent  decisions
      of the Court of Appeal both  of  which  are  binding  upon  the  Upper
      Tribunal.  It is not easy, if indeed it is possible, to  see  how  the
      decisions can be reconciled unless a  different  approach  applies  to
      para 276ADE than does to Appendix FM.   Edgehill  was  only  concerned
      with  the  former.  However,  whilst  the  Court  in  Haleemudeen  was
      primarily concerned with the  application  of  Appendix  FM,  it  also
      raised the application of para 276ADE (see [40]).  There is the  added
      difficulty that the relevance of paras A277-A280 to the issue  decided
      by each constitution of the Court of Appeal has not been  explored  in
      either decision: those provisions were particularly  relevant  to  the
      application of Appendix FM in Haleemudeen.

  22. The Court in Haleemudeen makes no reference to, as it does not  appear
      to have been cited to it, the binding authority of Edgehill.  The  per
      incuriam doctrine has no application where a lower court is faced with
      a decision of a higher court binding upon it (see Cassell & Co  Ltd  v
      Broome [1972] AC 1027; [1972] 1 All ER 801  -  decision  of  House  of
      Lords binding on Court of Appeal even if that decision was reached per
      incuriam).  That is equally applicable to decisions of  the  Court  of
      Appeal binding on the High Court (per Lords Hailsham  and  Diplock  in
      Cassell & Co Ltd v Broome at p.809h and p.874h respectively)  and,  of
      course, which are binding on the Upper Tribunal.    The  relevance  of
      the doctrine lies rather in whether the Court of Appeal  itself  could
      refuse to follow its own previous decision on the basis  that  it  was
      decided without reference either to another binding decision  of  that
      court or above it in the judicial hierarchy or  without  reference  to
      material statutory or other  legislative  provisions.   The  doctrine,
      therefore, has no application in this appeal so  as  to  allow  me  to
      choose between Court  of  Appeal  authorities  on  the  basis  of  any
      argument that that Haleemudeen may have been decided per incuriam.

  23. I am conscious that I have not heard argument on this issue.  My view,
      albeit expressed somewhat cautiously in the absence  of  argument,  is
      that I am constrained to follow the more recent decision of the  Court
      of Appeal on the issue of the application of the new rules.  I am  not
      free to choose between them as the Court of Appeal itself could do  in
      the future (see Patel and others v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 741 at  [59]).
       I should assume that the more recent decision states  the  applicable
      law.  Left to decide the issue for myself,  I  would  not  necessarily
      have reached the same conclusion because of the terms of para  A280(c)
      which appears to preserve the application of the old rules under  Part
      8 for pre-9 July 2012 applications.  However,  I  do  not  propose  to
      analyse the point  further  because,  for  the  reasons  I  will  give
      shortly, this point does not ultimately affect the outcome appellant's
      appeal which I have concluded should be allowed under Article 8.

  24. Consequently, I am content to accept, on the basis of Haleemudeen,  Mr
      Richards' submission that the  new  rules  did  apply.    It  was  not
      necessary  for  Judge  Osborne  to  use  the  terms  "exceptional"  or
      "compelling" to describe the appellant's circumstances  provided  that
      was the substance of his decision (see Haleemudeen at [47] per Beatson
      LJ). However, Judge  Osborne,  despite  his  positive  and  favourable
      findings,  did  not  in  fact   consider   whether   the   appellant's
      circumstances were "exceptional" or "compelling" such  as  to  justify
      the  grant  of  leave  outside  the  Rules  because  there  would   be
      unjustifiably harsh consequences (see MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013]  EWCA
      Civ 1192; R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)  and  Gulshan).  At
      least, I cannot be confident that was the substance of  his  decision.
      That amounted, therefore, to an error of law.

  25. For those reasons, the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  in  allowing
      the appeal under Article 8 and I set aside the decision  which  I  now
      turn to re-make.

Remaking the Decision

  26. In his determination, Judge  Osborne  very  carefully  considered  the
      evidence and made a number of findings.  It was not  suggested  by  Mr
      Richards that any of those findings were unsustainable on the evidence
      before the Judge.  I, therefore, take and adopt those findings  as  my
      own.  At para 10(iv) the Judge dealt with the relationship between the
      appellant and his (now) partner NS and their daughter A.

           "The Respondent accepts (as  is  set  out  in  the  Reasons  for
           Refusal Letter) that the Appellant is now in a relationship with
           NS and that the Appellant and  NS  have  a  daughter,  A.   That
           family relationship is continuing.  The Appellant, NS, and A all
           live together as a family at [].  Indeed, the Appellant  and  NS
           have  been  in  a  relationship  before  the  breakdown  of  the
           Appellant's relationship with JLB.  I therefore  find  that  the
           Appellant and NS have been in a relationship for a period of  at
           least approaching four years as A was born on 11  December  2010
           and patently would have been conceived nine months  before  that
           date."

  27. At para 10(v), the  Judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  a  "close
      relationship" with his daughter, A.   He set out the circumstances  of
      their life as follows:

           "...The Appellant and NS want nothing but the best for A.   They
           take her together to nursery on Mondays because that is  one  of
           the Appellant's rest days from work.  The Appellant also  spends
           time with A on his own when NS has time alone to relax or  catch
           up with her friends.  NS's parents have emigrated to Canada  and
           so there is no possibility of grandparental babysitting which is
           carried out entirely by the Appellant."

  28. At paras  10(vi)-(vii) the Judge dealt further with the nature of  the
      relationships as follows:

           "(vi) NS  has  written  a  letter  which  is  exhibited  to  the
                 Appellant's bundle.  She states how  she  relies  upon  the
                 Appellant to look after their home and  their  daughter  A.
                 She relies upon him financially.  He has a great  bond  and
                 relationship with A and is a brilliant father.  She  states
                 that if the Appellant were to be removed  from  the  United
                 Kingdom it would affect her greatly as she sees her  future
                 with him.  She cannot imagine what life would be like for A
                 to have her father taken away from her.

           (vii) NS states that she  would  not  be  able  to  relocate  to
                 Zimbabwe because she does not know the language or the  way
                 of life there.  Also, due  to  the  way  that  Zimbabwe  is
                 portrayed in television programmes, she is concerned  about
                 the safety there for herself and her daughter.  She  states
                 that she wishes her daughter to benefit  from  her  British
                 citizenship and wishes that she should reside  in  the  UK.
                 Finally she states that she has a sister and stepfamily  in
                 the United Kingdom upon whom she  relies  for  support  and
                 that those relationships would not be able to be maintained
                 and enjoyed if she was expected to accompany the  Appellant
                 to Zimbabwe."

  29. Then at paragraphs 10(viii)-(ix) the Judge continued:

           viii) I find that NS is a UK citizen.  I  find  that  A  born  11
                 December 2010  is  also  a  UK  citizen.   Following  well-
                 established case law (Sanade and Others (British children -
                 Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048  (IAC))  it  would  be
                 unreasonable to  expect  NA  and  A  to  leave  the  United
                 Kingdom.

             ix) I have no difficulty in accepting the Appellant's  evidence
                 that he is in  a  well-established  committed  relationship
                 with NS and that his daughter A is all the  world  to  him.
                 He further confirmed  that  NS  knows  about  his  previous
                 relationship with JLB and the fact that he has a son,  JLM.
                 In fact, he explained that NS has met  JLM  and  that  they
                 have  spent  some  time   together.    She   supports   his
                 application for contact with JLM.  I find  that  those  are
                 encouraging signs for the Appellant's  future  family  life
                 not only with NS but also with A and JLM."

  30.  At  paragraphs  10(x)-(xi)  the  Judge  dealt  with  the  appellant's
      relationship with his son JLB as follows:

              x) The Appellant has established through documentary  evidence
                 that   he   is   presently   paying   periodical   payments
                 (maintenance) for JLM through the Child Support Agency.  He
                 stated that JLB is prone to stopping his contact  with  JLM
                 when she considers that he should be paying more by way  of
                 maintenance than he has been asked to pay through the Child
                 Support Agency.  The Appellant states that he does what  he
                 can.  He works, maintains a family in Newport, and  fulfils
                 his financial obligations through the Child Support  Agency
                 to JLM.   He  considers  that  JLM  would  benefit  from  a
                 continuing relationship with him as they have always had  a
                 strong bond and enjoy each other's company.  The  Appellant
                 submitted a bundle of photographs depicting  the  Appellant
                 and JLM enjoying each other's company in various  locations
                 and on various occasions.  The  photographs  were  patently
                 taken over a  period  of  time  as  JLM  appears  in  those
                 photographs in various  stages  of  his  development.   The
                 photographs do not appear  to  be  staged  or  planned  but
                 appear to be relatively typical  family  photographs  taken
                 whilst father and son were enjoying each  other's  company.
                 Having seen those photographs and having heard the evidence
                 of the Appellant, I am satisfied to that standard which has
                 to be applied in these appeals that he has had and  may  be
                 capable of having in the reasonably  foreseeable  future  a
                 relatively full and happy relationship with his son JLM.

             xi) Moreover, the Appellant explained that although he has been
                 allowed contact with  JLM,  that  contact  has  been  often
                 disrupted and to some extent prevented  over  a  period  of
                 time by JLB.  The Appellant submitted in evidence a receipt
                 which he has been given by Bristol County Court  confirming
                 that the Appellant has  commenced  contact  proceedings  as
                 recently as 10 February 2014  in  order  to  formalise  his
                 contact arrangements with JLM in JLM's best interests."

  31. At the hearing, as I have already indicated, the evidence was that the
      appellant has obtained a contact order on 28  April  2014  for  weekly
      contact on a Sunday with JLM.  I accept that evidence.

  32. At paras 18-19 of his determination Judge Osborne  concluded  that  it
      was in the best interests of both A and JLM to have continued  contact
      with the appellant in the UK rather than at a  distance  by  means  of
      modern communications such as email and Skype.  He  relied  upon  what
      was said in Azimi-Moayed and Others [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC).  I  agree
      with that finding.  The best interests of both A and JLM are a primary
      consideration (see ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011]  UKSC  4).   A  child's
      best  interests  whilst,  a  primary  consideration,  may  however  be
      outweighed by competing factors (see ZN at [26] per Baroness Hale) but
      no other factor can be treated as  inherently  more  significant  (see
      Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 at [10] per Lord Hodge).

  33.  The  Judge  made  a  number  of  positive  findings  concerning   the
      relationships between the appellant, his  current  partner  and  their
      daughter and his relationship with his son.   Judge  Osborne  accepted
      that the appellant's commencement of contract proceedings were genuine
      (see para 10(xiii)) and I see no reason to depart from  that  finding.
      Those contact proceedings have now been successful.

  34. Judge Osborne also found that it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect
      either of the appellant's children or his current partner NS to  leave
      the UK as they are British citizens.  All have, so far as I am  aware,
      always lived in the UK.  I agree that it would not  be  reasonable  to
      expect the appellant's current partner and his daughter A to leave the
      UK to live with him in Zimbabwe.  His son, of course, lives  with  his
      mother who is entitled to remain  in  the  UK  and  there  can  be  no
      question  of  him  living  in  Zimbabwe  with  the   appellant.    The
      consequence, therefore, of the Secretary of State's refusal  of  leave
      to the appellant is that, as Judge Osborne put it in para  19  of  his
      determination, that the relationships between the  appellant  and  JLM
      and A would effectively be terminated by his removal. That  would,  in
      my judgment, be equally true of  the  relationship  with  his  current
      partner NS.  Although it maybe somewhat easier  to   maintain  contact
      with an adult by such methods as email and Skype, that  contact  would
      be wholly inadequate to maintain a  spousal  relationship  when  there
      would be no prospect of returning to the UK.

  35. I apply the five stage test set out by Lord  Bingham  of  Cornhill  in
      Razgar [2004] UKHL 24 at [17].  I accept that  there  is  family  life
      between the appellant and his current partner NS and his two  children
      JLM and A.  The appellant's removal would seriously interfere with the
      continuation of that family life and,  consequently,  I  am  satisfied
      that Article 8.1 is engaged.

  36. Turning to Article 8.2, I accept that the decision  is  in  accordance
      with the law and that it is for a legitimate aim, namely the  economic
      well-being  of  the  country.   The  crucial  issue  is  whether   the
      interference with the family life of  the  appellant  and  his  family
      members is proportionate.  In Razgar, Lord Bingham at [20]  identified
      that that issue:

           "always involve[s] the striking of a fair  balance  between  the
           rights of the individual and  the  interests  of  the  community
           which is inherent in the whole of the Convention.  The  severity
           and consequences of the interference will  call  for  a  careful
           assessment at this stage."

  37. In addition,  in  a  case  where  an  individual  cannot  satisfy  the
      requirements of the new Article 8  Immigration  Rules,  the  case  law
      requires there to be "exceptional" or "compelling" circumstances  such
      that there are unjustifiably harsh consequences to the individual  and
      his other family members.

  38. Even assuming that the appellant cannot meet the requirements of those
      Immigration Rules, I am satisfied that the strength and nature of  the
      relationships  taken  with  the  irreparable  consequences  to   those
      relationships if the appellant  is  removed  do  outweigh  the  public
      interest.

  39. However, in this case Mr Richards accepts that the appellant does  now
      meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules in Section  R-LTRPT  of
      Appendix FM.  That is because he has  now  obtained  through  a  court
      order "access rights" within E-LTRPT 2.4(a)(ii).

  40. The relevant provisions in Section  R-LTRPT  of  Appendix  FM  are  as
      follows:


         "Section R-LTRPT: Requirements for limited leave to remain as a
         parent
         R-LTRPT.1.1. The requirements to be met for limited or indefinite
         leave to remain as a parent or partner are-
         (a) the applicant and the child must be in the UK;
         (b) the applicant must have made a valid application for limited or
         indefinite leave to remain as a parent or partner; and
         ....
         (d) (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal under S-LTR:
         Suitability leave to remain; and
         (ii) the applicant meets the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRPT.2.2-
         2.4. and E-LTRPT.3.1.; and
         (iii) paragraph EX.1. applies.


         ....


         Relationship requirements
         E-LTRPT.2.2. The child of the applicant must be-
         (a) under the age of 18 years at the date of application, ...;
         (b) living in the UK; and
         (c) a British Citizen or settled in the UK; ....


         E-LTRPT.2.3. Either-
         (a) the applicant must have sole parental responsibility for the
         child or the child normally lives with the applicant and not their
         other parent (who is a British Citizen or settled in the UK); or
         (b) the parent or carer with whom the child normally lives must be-


         (i) a British Citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;
         (ii) not the partner of the applicant (which here includes a person
         who has been in a relationship with the applicant for less than two
         years prior to the date of application); and
         (iii) the applicant must not be eligible to apply for leave to
         remain as a partner under this Appendix.


         E-LTRPT.2.4. (a) The applicant must provide evidence that they have
         either-
         (i) sole parental responsibility for the child, or that the child
         normally lives with them; or
         (ii) access rights to the child; and
         (b) The applicant must provide evidence that they are taking, and
         intend to continue to take, an active role in the child's
         upbringing.


         Immigration status requirement
         E-LTRPT.3.1. The applicant must not be in the UK-
         (a) as a visitor;
         (b) with valid leave granted for a period of 6 months or less,
         unless that leave was granted pending the outcome of family court
         or divorce proceedings;
         (c) on temporary admission or temporary release (unless paragraph
         EX.1. applies).




         Section EX: Exception
         EX.1 This paragraph applies if
         (a) (i) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental
         relationship with a child who-
         (aa) is under the age of 18 years, ...;
         (bb) is in the UK;
         (cc) is a British Citizen ... ;and
         (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         UK; ...."

  41. By virtue of paragraph R-LTRPT1.1(d), the appellant must meet all  the
      requirements of  paragraphs  E-LTRPT2.2-2.4  and  E-LTRP3.1  and  also
      demonstrate that paragraph EX.1 applies.

  42. There is no doubt that the appellant does meet the requirements of  E-
      LTRPT 2.2 as his son is under the age of 18, living in the UK and is a
      British citizen.  There is no requirement to make an application where
      Art 8 is raised in an appeal (see GEN 1.9(iv))

  43. He also meets the requirements of E-LTRPT2.3  because  his  son  lives
      with his mother who is a British citizen and is not the partner of the
      appellant.

  44. Further, the appellant meets the requirements in E-LTRPT2.4 because he
      has established that he has "access  rights"  to  his  son  and  I  am
      satisfied that he is "taking, and intend[s] to continue  to  take,  an
      active role in the child's upbringing."   That  was,  in  effect,  the
      finding made by Judge Osborne and I agree with it.

  45. Further, the appellant meets the requirements in  E-LTRPT3.1  in  that
      the discretionary leave granted to him in  2009  does  not  disqualify
      him.

  46. Finally, in relation to Section EX.1,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the
      appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  his
      son who is under the age of 18, in  the  UK  and  a  British  citizen.
      Further, for the reasons  I  have  already  given,  it  would  not  be
      reasonable to expect his son to leave the UK.

  47. For those reasons which Mr Richards accepted, the appellant  does  now
      meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  That is a significant
      factor in assessing the proportionality of the appellant's removal  at
      the date of the hearing before me.  The Rules recognise his right now,
      but not previously, to remain in the UK based  upon  his  relationship
      with his son JLM.

  48. Carrying out the balancing exercise required under proportionality,  I
      am satisfied that the right to respect for the appellant's family life
      and that of his family members outweighs the public interest.  That is
      a conclusion I would have reached even if it was not accepted that the
      appellant now met the requirements of the Immigration Rules.   If  the
      appellant were removed from the UK there would  be  dire  consequences
      for his genuine relationship with his children and current partner.

  49. For these reasons, I remake the decision  allowing  the  appeal  under
      Article 8.

Decision

  50. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  appellant's
      appeal under Article 8 involved the making of an error of law.  I  set
      that decision aside.

  51. I remake the decision allowing the appeal under Article 8.






                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:










TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Like Judge Osborne I have allowed the appeal under Article 8 and I have
considered whether to make a fee award and I have decided to make a whole
fee award of �140 in favour of the Appellant.

                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
