
[pic]
ST
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33467/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th November 2014                        |On 8th December 2014          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HARRIES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             MR AHMED MOHIUDDIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr K Manzure Mawla


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Details of the Parties and Proceedings


  1. The appellant in the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of State  for  the
     Home department.  The  respondent,  Mr  A  Mohiuddin,  is  referred  to
     hereafter as the claimant. He was born  on  5th  June  1985  and  is  a
     citizen of India.  On 18th June 2010 he was granted  limited  leave  to
     remain in the United Kingdom until 18th June 2012 as a student. On  6th
     June 2012 Morgan Hill, Solicitors, applied on his behalf for  leave  to
     remain in the United Kingdom outside the Immigration Rules.


  2. The Secretary of State refused the application on 17th  July  2013  and
     made a decision to remove the claimant from the United Kingdom  by  way
     of  directions  under  section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum   and
     Nationality Act 2006.  After a hearing at Hatton  Cross  before  First-
     tier Tribunal Judge S J Clarke (the Judge) on 6th June 2014 the  appeal
     was allowed to the limited extent that the Judge purported to quash the
     decision of the Secretary of State such that the claimant's application
     remains outstanding and he was no longer liable to removal.  The  Judge
     found that the decision of Secretary of State  was  not  in  accordance
     with the law because it suffered from a defect in procedure.


  3. Permission was granted to the Secretary of State to appeal to the Upper
     Tribunal against the decision of the Judge by First-tier Tribunal Judge
     Parkes on 14th July 2014. The position of the  Secretary  of  State  in
     challenging the decision was that the Judge erred in law by finding the
     decision to be unlawful and the proper approach would have been for the
     Judge to consider the appeal under Article 8. After a hearing before me
     on 3rd September 2014 I was satisfied that there was a  material  error
     in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and it was set aside  to  be
     remade. No findings were made on the facts or merits of the case in the
     First-tier Tribunal.  I was of the view that the claimant  is  entitled
     to have his Article 8 case considered and the  matter  was  accordingly
     adjourned for a resumed hearing before me for that purpose.


The Law


  4. Article 8 of the ECHR provides that:
         1. Everyone has the right to respect for  his  private  and  family
         life, his home and his       correspondence.
         2. There shall be no interference by a public  authority  with  the
         exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
         and is necessary in  a  democratic  society  in  the  interests  of
         national security, public safety or the economic well-being of  the
         country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for   the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others.
  5. The burden of proof in relation to Article 8 of the ECHR lies with  the
     claimant to prove on the  balance  of  probabilities  that  private  or
     family life is established and will be interfered with as a  result  of
     the respondent's decision.   Once he has  established  that  he  enjoys
     this protected right which is  threatened  with  violation  the  burden
     shifts to the Secretary of State  to  show  that  the  interference  is
     lawful and in pursuit of a legitimate aim.  It must be shown  that  the
     violation is justified and that it does not impair the right  any  more
     than  is  necessary;  in  other  words,  whether  the  interference  is
     proportionate.


  6. On 28th  July  2014  section  19  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014  made
     amendments to the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  by
     introducing a new Part 5A which contains sections 117A, 117B, 117D  and
     117D. These statutory provisions apply to all appeals heard on or after
     28 July 2014, irrespective  of  when  the  application  or  immigration
     decision was made. Part 5A applies where the Tribunal considers article
     8(2) ECHR directly.  Section 117A is as follows:


         117A Application of this Part


          1) This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
             determine whether a
             decision made under the Immigration Acts-
                  (a) breaches a person's right to respect for  private  and
         family life under
                  Article 8, and
                  (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6  of  the
         Human Rights Act
                   1998.
         (2)     In considering the public interest question, the  court  or
         tribunal must (in
                  particular) have regard-
             (a) in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and
             (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,
             to the considerations
              listed in section 117C.
         (3)     In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the
         question of
                   whether an interference with a person's right to  respect
         for private and family
                  life is justified under Article 8(2).




             Section 117B is as follows:

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases


         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.
         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-
             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b) are better able to integrate into society.
         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-
             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b) are better able to integrate into society.
         (4)  Little weight should be given to-
             (a) a private life, or
             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,  that  is
             established by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.
         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.
         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-
             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and
             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.



Consideration of the Evidence and Issues


  7. The background to this matter is that  the  appellant  arrived  in  the
     United Kingdom on  24th  August  2008  with  a  student  visa  and  was
     subsequently granted further leave to remain on 18th  June  2010  as  a
     Post Study Work Migrant until 18th June 2012. He applied to  remain  in
     the United Kingdom thereafter, on  6th  June  2012,  on  the  basis  of
     discretionary leave because he  had  an  established  presence  in  the
     United Kingdom, or in the alternative to be allowed the opportunity  to
     further his education and unfulfilled  aspirations;  the  Secretary  of
     State was urged to grant  further  leave  to  enable  the  claimant  to
     complete his studies.

  8. The claimant's application was based on his length of residence in  the
     United Kingdom, since August 2008, and his community connections in the
     United Kingdom. The application was  not  made  under  the  Immigration
     Rules - it was made outside the Rules in the first place on  the  basis
     of Article 8 of the ECHR because the claimant could not show more  than
     4 years presence in the United Kingdom at the date of application.


  9. The claimant could not have benefitted from any of the Rules  preserved
     by the Transitional Provisions to HC 194, although the application  was
     determined under the new rules, as set out in Appendix FM and paragraph
     276ADE of the Immigration Rules. The Secretary  of  State  refused  the
     application for the reasons set out in a letter dated 17th  July  2013.
     It is accepted that the claimant cannot not show 20  years'  continuous
     presence in the United Kingdom under the new rules  and  nor  could  he
     meet the 14-year requirement under the old rules.

 10. No new evidence was relied upon for  the  hearing  before  me  but  the
     claimant adopted in oral evidence  (given  in  English)  his  statement
     dated 29th May 2014 and was cross-examined on its content. His evidence
     set out in his statement is that in April 2009 he was awarded  a  Post-
     Graduate Diploma in Information Technology from the University of  East
     London  and  in  February  2010  he  obtained  an  MSc  in  Information
     Technology. His father died whilst he was studying causing the claimant
     to make two return trips to India for the funeral in July 2010 and June
     2011.


 11. The claimant states that in the course of these visits his family tried
     to force him to marry a lady from a wealthy  and  politically  powerful
     family in India but he refused to co-operate with these plans. A family
     feud ensued  causing  an  irretrievable  breakdown  of  the  claimant's
     relationship with his family members.  The claimant states  that  these
     circumstances have severed all his ties with India.


 12. The claimant states that his chosen profession  is  highly  competitive
     and he wishes to complete his educational and other goals in the United
     Kingdom to be able to compete with the market in India  if  he  returns
     there. He therefore pleads for compassion with his application to  give
     him the freedom of engaging with further studies; he  wishes  to  do  a
     PhD. He states that he has become fully integrated into British society
     and has built strong  connections  with  the  United  Kingdom;  he  has
     undertaken employed work.  He states that he has relatives and a family
     network in the United Kingdom as well as academic  friends,  colleagues
     and connections with lecturers.


 13. The appellant claims that as a citizen of India he is in tune with  the
     British values of equality, freedom, justice, fairness and democracy. A
     return  to  India  will  completely  disrupt  his  education  and  life
     prospects. He commends himself as a healthy, hardworking, warm, humble,
     young man with a good immigration history who will make  a  significant
     contribution to  society  and  will  contribute  taxes  in  the  United
     Kingdom. He is a fluent English-speaker and has never claimed benefits;
     there is, he states, no public interest in removing him from the United
     Kingdom. He is of clean character, without criminal convictions, either
     here or in India.


 14. In cross-examination it became  evident  that  the  references  in  the
     claimant's statement to "family" in the United Kingdom is in  the  very
     broadest terms; he has  no  blood  relatives  in  the  United  Kingdom.
     However, he claims to have had  no  contact  at  all  with  his  family
     members in India for 2 years because of the feud  over  their  marriage
     plans for him. His wish  is  to  further  his  studies  in  the  United
     Kingdom, but he has not applied remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
     student because, although he has funds, without family support he lacks
     the necessary funds.


 15. In cross examination the claimant was  asked  for  an  explanation  for
     failing to bring to the attention of the Secretary of State his fear of
     return to India for reasons to do with a forced or arranged marriage or
     feared persecution.  There was no clear answer from the claimant  about
     this, but in final submissions Mr Manzure Mawla said that the  claimant
     does not base his application on persecution.


 16. I take full  account  of  the  letters  submitted  in  support  of  the
     claimant's appeal from Mr Shafiq Rehman, the General Secretary  of  the
     Mosque attended by the claimant, His friends Mr  James  Sexton  and  Ms
     Monika Bajusz and his employers, namely Tesco and Adil  Catering.   The
     claimant  is  variously  commended  in  these  letters  as  an  honest,
     punctual, responsible, organised, proficient,  efficient,  hardworking,
     polite, talkative and jolly, person.


 17. I accept that the claimant has inevitably established a private life in
     the United Kingdom since his arrival here in 2008 through his  studies,
     friendships, work, social and religious networks. He does not rely upon
     family life and I find that the evidence does not show family  life  to
     be established. The 5-step approach set out in Razgar  then  poses  the
     following questions:


              (1) Will the proposed removal be an interference by a  public
    authority with
         the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for  his  private
         or (as the case
         may be) family life?
         (2) If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
         gravity as
         potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?
         (3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
         (4) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society
         in the interests
         of national security, public safety or the economic well-being of
         the
         country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
         protection of
         health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms
         of
         others?
         (5) If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
         public end sought
         to be achieved?


 18. If I accept for the  purposes  of  giving  full  consideration  to  the
     claimant's case under Article 8 of the ECHR  that  the  answer  to  the
     first four questions is in the affirmative - the legitimate  aim  being
     the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
     controls - the  fifth  and  critical  question  becomes  the  issue  of
     proportionality. I necessarily attach significant weight to the  public
     interest, the importance of which is now enshrined  in  statute.  Under
     section 117B of Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
     2002 the maintenance of effective immigration controls is stated to  be
     in the public interest.


 19. I accept that that the claimant is of good character, without  criminal
     convictions or an adverse immigration history. I  accept  that  he  has
     completed studies in the United Kingdom and he has been  honest  enough
     to say in evidence that he does not apply to remain as a student as  he
     is  not  sufficiently  funded   to   meet   the   necessary   financial
     requirements. The public interest in the  economic  well-being  of  the
     United Kingdom must also be weighed in the balance. At the core of  his
     motivation to further his studies is the  claimant's  intention  to  be
     well placed in a competitive employment market in India.


 20. The impact of the claimant's removal from the United Kingdom  to  India
     is necessarily diminished in the  light  of  his  stated  intention  to
     return to India to work.  His evidence at paragraph 11 of  his  written
     statement is:


         "A lot of  students,  including  myself,  wish  to  return  to  our
         respective countries at some stage.  However, we  need  to  achieve
         our educational and other goals while in the  United  Kingdom  just
         merely to avoid being incapable of competing with the colleagues we
         left behind in India."

 21. There is no suggestion that the  claimant's  removal  from  the  United
     Kingdom will interrupt any studies; he has  completed  the  courses  on
     which he embarked. Nor does the evidence show that any  further  course
     he wishes to pursue would not  be  available  to  him  in  India.   The
     findings in the case of Patel and others [2013] UKSC 72  were  endorsed
     in the  case  of  Nasim  "one",  decided  in  2013,   namely  that  the
     opportunity for a promising student to  complete  his  course  in  this
     country, however desirable in general terms, is not in itself  a  right
     protected under Article 8. As stated, this claimant is not at  risk  of
     failing to complete a course, only of failing to start another  in  the
     United Kingdom.


 22. In Nasim "two", Nasim and others (Article 8) Pakistan  [2014]  UKUT  25
     (IAC) it was held at paragraph 14 that:


             Whilst the concept of a "family life"  is  generally  speaking
             readily identifiable, the concept of a "private life" for  the
             purposes of Article 8 is inherently less clear.  At one end of
             the "continuum" stands  the  concept  of  moral  and  physical
             integrity  or  "physical  and  psychological  integrity"   (as
             categorised by the ECtHR in eg Pretty v United Kingdom  (2002)
             35 EHRR 1) as to which, in extreme instances, even the state's
             interest in removing foreign criminals might not constitute  a
             proportionate  response.   However,  as  one  moves  down  the
             continuum, one encounters aspects of private life which,  even
             if engaging Article 8(1) (if not alone,  then  in  combination
             with other factors) are so far  removed  from  the  "core"  of
             Article 8 as to be readily defeasible by state interests, such
             as the importance  of  maintaining  a  credible  and  coherent
             system of immigration control.


 23. I find that the claimant in this case cannot rely on aspects  of  moral
     and physical integrity; his situation is not distinguishable in my view
     from that set out in "Nasim two" as follows:


                  15. At this point on the continuum the essential  elements
             of the private life relied upon will normally be transposable,
             in  the  sense  of  being  capable  of  replication  in  their
             essential respects, following a person's return to their  home
             country. Thus, in headnote 3 of MM (Tier 1 PSW; Art 8; private
             life) Zimbabwe [2009] UKAIT 0037 we find that:-


                          "3. When determining the issue of  proportionality
                      ... it will  always  be  important  to  evaluate  the
                      extent  of   the   individual's   social   ties   and
                      relationships in the UK. However, a student here on a
                      temporary basis has no  expectation  of  a  right  to
                      remain  in  order   to   further   these   ties   and
                      relationships if the  criteria  of  the  points-based
                      system  are  not  met.  Also,  the  character  of  an
                      individual's "private life" relied upon is ordinarily
                      by its very nature of a  type  which  can  be  formed
                      elsewhere,  albeit  through  different  social  ties,
                      after the individual is removed from the UK."


                  16. As was stated in the earlier  case  of  MG  (assessing
             interference with private life) Serbia and  Montenegro  [2005]
             UKAIT 00113:-


                  "A person's job and precise programme of  studies  may  be
                  different in the country to which he is to be returned and
                  his network of  friendships  and  other  acquaintances  is
                  likely to be different too,  but  his  private  life  will
                  continue in respect of all its essential elements."


                  17. The difference between these types of  "private  life"
             case and a case founded on family life is instructive. As  was
             noted in MM, the relationships involved in a family  life  are
             more likely to be unique, so  as  to  be  incapable  of  being
             replicated once  an  individual  leaves  the  United  Kingdom,
             leaving behind, for example, his or her spouse or minor child.


 24. The depth and content of the private life established by  the  claimant
     in the United Kingdom is not in my view such that it could not  readily
     be continued and replicated  elsewhere.  The  usual  methods  of  long-
     distance communication can be used to maintain contact with friends and
     colleagues and there is nothing to show why visits could not be made as
     well. The claimant relies on broken family relationships in India,  not
     by way of putting a case for persecution or  to  show  that  he  cannot
     return to India, but to show that he has no ties remaining  there.   In
     my view the claimant inevitably  retains  strong  ties  with  his  home
     country having spent only the last 7 of his  29  years  in  the  United
     Kingdom.  He speaks the language of his  home  country  and  inevitably
     retains his culture and heritage there. He spent  his  formative  years
     there and the evidence is that contact with  his  blood  family  ceased
     only two years ago.


 25. In considering the public interest question I must have regard  to  the
     matters set out in section 117B of Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
     Act 2002 as follows.  It is in the public interest, and  in  particular
     in the interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
     persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able  to
     speak English and are financially independent because they are less  of
     a burden on taxpayers and are better able to integrate into society.

 26. It was submitted by Mr Manzure  Mawla  for  the  claimant  that  he  is
     English speaking and I accept that he is. I weigh this in  the  balance
     in the claimant's favour, however, he is unable to present himself as a
     financially independent person and this also  weighs  in  the  balance.
     Taking account of all the relevant factors and returning to  the  issue
     of public interest I find that those interests are  not  outweighed  by
     the claimant's Article 8 right to respect for his private life. I  find
     after weighing all matters in the balance that the interference  caused
     to the claimant's private life by the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
     State is proportionate to the legitimate public  end.   The  appeal  is
     accordingly dismissed under Article 8 of the ECHR and the appeal of the
     Secretary of State succeeds in the Upper Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 27. The claimant's appeal is dismissed under Article 8 of the ECHR.


 28. The appeal of the Secretary of State succeeds in the Upper Tribunal.


Anonymity


No direction is made.

Signed

J Harries
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date: 5th December 2014
Fee Award

In the light of  the  dismissal  of  the  claimant's  appeal  in  the  Upper
Tribunal the fee award made in the First-tier Tribunal falls away.

Signed

J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date: 5th December 2014
