
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33887/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th July 2014                               |On 16th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                             Mr john abuga guto
                          (no anomymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sadiq, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mrs K Heaps, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Kenya born  on  3rd  October  1974.   The
    Appellant was granted leave to enter  the  UK  as  a  student  on  12th
    January 2004.  His leave  to  remain  as  a  student  was  subsequently
    renewed on three occasions expiring on 27th October 2012.

 2. On 25th May 2012 the Appellant applied for leave to remain on the basis
    of his private life in the UK.

 3. The Appellant's application was refused by the Secretary  of  State  by
    Notice of Refusal dated 8th August 2013.

 4. The Appellant appealed and the appeal  came  before  Immigration  Judge
    Crawford sitting at Manchester on 7th March 2014.  In  a  determination
    prepared  on  10th  March  2014  and  promulgated  on  18th  March  the
    Appellant's appeal  was  dismissed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

 5. On 2nd April 2014 the Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds made the following contentions:-

      i) that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had made a mistake  of  fact  on
         the evidence;

     ii) that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  reached  his  conclusions  in
         paragraph 19 of the  determination  regarding  the  nature  of  the
         Appellant's research without the matter  having  been  put  to  the
         Appellant directly at the hearing and thus breached  principles  of
         natural justice;

    iii) that the judge had  failed  to  consider  the  implications  as  to
         whether the Appellant  should  be  able  to  conduct  his  research
         outside the United Kingdom;

     iv) had failed to properly direct himself as to the law  and  carefully
         consider all the facts in the Appellant's case in his assessment of
         private life under Article 8.

 6. On 2nd May  2014  Designated  Judge  Woodcraft  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  In granting permission Judge Woodcraft considered that it  was
    arguable that the proportionality exercise was unduly influenced by the
    application of arguably the wrong Immigration  Rules.   He  noted  that
    although this point was not raised in the ground of  onward  appeal  as
    this issue went to this country's obligations under  the  Human  Rights
    Convention it was appropriate to  consider  whether  it  was  "Robinson
    obvious"  such  that  permission  to  appeal  could  be  granted.    He
    considered that all grounds could be argued.

 7. No reply pursuant to Rule 24 has been served by the Secretary of State.
     The matter comes before me to determine whether there  is  a  material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and if so
    as to whether I can or cannot remake the decision today.  The Appellant
    appears by his instructed solicitor Mr Sadiq.  The Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mrs Heaps.

Submissions/Discussions

 8. Mr Sadiq starts by querying whether an analysis of the  new  Rules  has
    led to the judge over-influencing his  proportionality  assessment  and
    that looking at the determination the new Rules played  a  strong  part
    based on proportionality but that the grounds given in support  of  the
    application are also strong and arguable.  He submits that the crux  of
    this matter is Judge Crawford's finding that  the  PhD  course  can  be
    conducted from Kenya as set out at paragraph 70 of  the  determination.
    He points out that the Appellant's leave as a student was due to expire
    on 27th May 2012 but that the Appellant was unable to extend his  leave
    as a student because of the change of the  Rules  that  took  place  in
    April 2012 prohibiting grants  of  leave  as  a  postgraduate  non  PhD
    student if as a consequence of that grant of leave the applicant  would
    spend more than five years in total in the UK as a student.

 9. Mr Sadiq takes me in some detail through his very  lengthy  grounds  of
    appeal which run to some 57 paragraphs and ask me to find that there is
    a material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

10. Mrs Heaps in her response starts  by  referring  to  the  authority  of
    Edgehill [2014] EWCA  Civ  402  which  decided  that  the  transitional
    provisions introduced into the Immigration Act  when  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE were introduced meant that an application made  before
    8th July 2012 would be decided in accordance with the Rules in force at
    that date.  However she submits that the judge has looked at this issue
    and that at paragraph 12 of the determination it is conceded  that  the
    Appellant cannot meet the Immigration Rules.  Thereafter the judge  has
    gone on to consider the Appellant's rights pursuant to  Article  8  and
    has analysed the factors set out in Razgar.  She submits that there  is
    no material error of law.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.



Findings on Error of Law

13. In this case the judge  has  firstly  considered  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant can succeed under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules.
    Mr Singh on his behalf has conceded that he cannot do so  and  this  is
    well-documented at paragraph 12  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    determination.  A finding under the Immigration  Rules  certainly  does
    not show any material error of law.  However I am satisfied that  there
    is a material error of law in the assessment carried out by the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge so far as it  relates  to  the  Appellant's  appeal
    pursuant  to  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   Whilst  I
    acknowledge that the judge has recited the Appellant's personal history
    he has made two errors.  One is  an  error  of  fact  namely  that  the
    Appellant is able to complete his PhD  research  in  his  home  country
    using funding partially from  Kenya  and  secondly  he  has  failed  to
    consider the relevant case law relating to claims pursuant to Article 8
    outside the Immigration Rules.  On that basis I set aside the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal and proceed to go on to remake the decision.

The Law on Appeal outside the Immigration Rules under Article 8

14. The Tribunal in Gulshan made clear and  has  repeated  subsequently  in
    Shahzad  (Article  8:  legitimate  aim)  [2014]  UKUT  00085  (IAC)  at
    paragraph (31):

         "Where an  area  of  the  rules  does  not  have  such  an  express
         mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) ([29]-[31]  in  particular)
         and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT
         640 (IAC) should be followed: i.e. after applying the  requirements
         of the rules, only if  there  may  be  arguably  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them."

15. The Court of Appeal in MM (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985 at paragraph 128 went on to state:

         "Nagre does not add anything to the debate save for  the  statement
         that if a particular person is outside the  Rule  then  he  has  to
         demonstrate, as a preliminary to a consideration outside  the  Rule
         that he has an arguable case that there may  be  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside the  Rules.   I  cannot  see  much
         utility  in  imposing  this  further  intermediary  test.   If  the
         applicant cannot satisfy the Rule, then there either is or there is
         not a further Article 8 claim.  That will have to be determined  by
         the relevant decision maker."

Findings on the Remaking of the Appeal

16. The  authorities  consequently  focus  firstly  on  whether  there  are
    arguably  good  grounds  for  granting  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules and then for considering whether there are compelling
    circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised   under   them.    Further
    subsequent to the statutory changes introduced by the  Immigration  Act
    2014 it is appropriate to give due consideration to  the  statute  even
    though the hearing for both in this case the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    before myself took place prior to the statute coming into force but  in
    this instance my determination is promulgated after that event.  I have
    given due consideration to the statute.

17. This is a very exceptional case.  The Appellant  has  been  allowed  to
    address the Tribunal as to his  present  circumstances.   He  has  been
    offered a place at the University of Manchester to  complete  his  PhD.
    He has previously completed a postgraduate  diploma.   He  is  the  co-
    writer of a paper entitled Estimated Burden  of  Fungal  Infections  in
    Kenya which has been submitted for  publication  in  the  East  African
    Medical Journal and is currently at the review stage with a schedule of
    being published in November.   He  is  also  a  member  of  a  proposed
    research team which has  recently  had  a  protocol  approved  entitled
    "Cross-sectional study to determine the  point  prevalence  of  chronic
    pulmonary aspegillosis in tuberculosis patients in Kenya."

18. The Appellant is  unquestionably  a  law-abiding  citizen  who  has  no
    intention of circumventing the law or  the  Immigration  Rules.   I  am
    further satisfied  that  his  attendance  to  complete  his  PhD  would
    unquestionably be for the benefit of the public good not just in  Kenya
    and Africa but in the United  Kingdom.   It  is  regrettable  that  the
    provisions of the Immigration Rules would effectively bar the Appellant
    from completing this research and that this scenario  has  only  arisen
    due to the accepted fact that the Appellant has had very serious health
    problems and that his attempt to continue with his studies as a  result
    of his medical condition has been repeatedly hindered.  He is the first
    to admit that he has been granted numerous periods of  interruption  to
    his studies by the university who have  been  most  generous  in  their
    assistance and continue to be so.  In  March  2012  he  was  given  the
    medical all clear following surgery which took place some twelve months
    previously and has returned to his studies full-time and is  now  in  a
    position to complete his studies.

19. The Appellant has explained exactly what his studies will  entail.   He
    points out that the word research should not be confused with  analysis
    and that the process in Kenya  is  one  simply  of  obtaining  relevant
    samples which will constitute the data for his research.   His  medical
    PhD  thesis  comprises  essentially  two   components,   firstly   data
    collection in Kenya and secondly data  analysis  and  research  in  the
    laboratories at  the  University  of  Manchester.   The  required  data
    collection has commenced and is being  conducted  by  identified  local
    medical experts in Kenya and is  then  transferred  to  the  Manchester
    University laboratories in  ongoing  batches  for  detailed  scientific
    analysis which he intends to conduct.  It is this  detailed  scientific
    analysis rather than the data and sample collection in Kenya  on  which
    his PhD is based.  I am  satisfied  that  such  analysis  can  only  be
    conducted in Manchester as the specialised machinery required  for  the
    analysis of blood samples, sputum and DNA breakdown namely PCR machines
    and hamecrine machines are not available in Kenya.

20. Consequently I am satisfied that the finding of the judge in  paragraph
    19 that the research would mainly be carried out  in  Kenya  is  wrong.
    That constituted the material error of  law  but  the  fact  thereafter
    remains  that  for  the  Appellant  to  complete  all  aspects  of  his
    investigation,  research,  analysis  and  drafting   of   reports   and
    thereafter to complete  his  PhD  that  work  can  be  carried  out  in
    Manchester without  his  actually  having  to  travel  to  Kenya.   The
    corollary namely of carrying out his PhD from Kenya without  coming  to
    Manchester is I am satisfied entirely impossible.

21. In such circumstances I am of the view that a proper  consideration  of
    the Appellant's interference with his Article 8  rights  following  the
    basic principle set out in Razgar are such that the  interference  with
    the Appellant's private life by expecting him to return  to  Kenya  for
    the purpose of completing his course would breach his Article 8  right,
    be an unnecessary interference and would not be  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate public end sought to be achieved.  Further I am of the  view
    that it would not be practical for all the reasons set  out  above  for
    the Appellant to continue his private life in the manner  in  which  he
    seeks by returning to Kenya.

22. I emphasise that this is a very exceptional case which turns very  much
    on its own facts and on that basis I am satisfied that the  Appellant's
    appeal pursuant to Article 8 should be allowed.  It goes  I  anticipate
    without saying and certainly will be noted both by the Appellant and by
    the Secretary of State (albeit that it is the  Secretary  of  State  to
    dictate the length of such allowance), that the length of time by which
    the Appellant's visa should be extended should in my view be solely for
    the length of time that his PhD is anticipated to take as laid down  by
    the University of Manchester.

Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  having  contained  a  material
    error of law is set aside and is  remade  insofar  as  the  Appellant's
    appeal pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights
    is allowed.

24. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


