
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/33031/2013
     IA/33033/2013
     IA/33041/2013
     ia/33046/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22nd October 2014            |On 24th November 2014            |
|                                |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                            josefina arcala cesa
                             joselito araba cesa
                                florence cesa
                             alessandra joy cesa
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Poynor of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of the Philippines, born as to Mrs Josefina
    Arcala Cesa on 24th June 1969, Mr Joselito Araba  Cesa  on  17th  March
    1963, Miss Florence Cesa on 12th October 1996 and Miss  Alessandra  Joy
    Cesa on 11th November 2010.

 2. On 25th June 2013 Josefina Arcala Cesa applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  The other appellants are her dependants.
     It was accepted by the appellants' solicitors that they did  not  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules but that on  the  basis  that
    they had lived in the  United  Kingdom  since  November  2007  and  had
    enjoyed private and family lives here, that  the  respondent's  refusal
    and their removal to the Philippines would breach the United  Kingdom's
    obligations under Article 8.

 3. In refusing the application, the respondent gave consideration  to  the
    appellants' private  lives  which  from  19th  July  2012  fell  to  be
    considered under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  The Secretary of State
    was not satisfied the appellants could meet the  requirements  of  Rule
    276ADE.  Josefina Arcala Cesa entered the United Kingdom as  a  student
    in 2007  and  remained  here  on  a  series  of  visas  with  temporary
    categories which did not lead to settlement.  The respondent considered
    whether the application raised any exceptional circumstances consistent
    with the right to respect for private  and  family  life  contained  in
    Article 8 which might warrant consideration by the Secretary  of  State
    of the grant of leave to remain here outside the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules but decided that it did not.  The applications of the
    dependants were refused in line with Josefina Arcala Cesa.

 4. The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Majid.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 26th August 2014, he dismissed the appeal.



 5. The grounds claim the judge arguably failed to consider the Immigration
    Rules, carried out a flawed assessment of private  life  under  Section
    117B and carried out a flawed assessment of the best interests  of  the
    children.

 6. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford whilst
    acknowledging that it was unarguable the appellants did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules, found it was unclear from the  determination
    whether the judge considered there were circumstances that  might  have
    rendered the decision unduly harsh or unreasonable so as to lead him to
    consider the  proportionality  of  the  decisions  outside  the  Rules.
    Further, it was arguable that the judge  might  have  made  a  material
    error of law in his consideration of the best interests of the children
    given that the Secretary of State gave  no  detailed  consideration  to
    those best interests.  It was arguable that  it  was  unclear  why  the
    judge found that the appellants would be a burden on the  public  purse
    in the short term if allowed to remain, given that they had always been
    self-supporting here.  Further, that it was arguable the judge accepted
    improperly in putting questions to the second  appellant.   Judge  Ford
    said that the grounds relating to S.19 of the Immigration Act 2014 were
    not arguable as the judge was obliged to apply the  revised  provisions
    of S.117 and the appellants' representative should not have been  taken
    by surprise in that regard.

 7. The respondent submitted a Rule 24 response.  It  was  clear  that  the
    appellants did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The
    oldest child came to the UK aged 14, had been  present  for  less  than
    four years at the time  of  the  hearing  and  was  always  here  under
    precarious circumstances as the dependant of a short term migrant  such
    that there was no expectation of further leave.

 8. The judge correctly referenced the provisions of Section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act as provided as S.19 of the 2014 Act.

 9. For the appellants  to  succeed  outside  the  Rules,  very  compelling
    circumstances would need to be demonstrated.  See MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 1192.  The only issue of any  slight  note  was  the  academic
    ability of the appellant's eldest daughter, however, the issue  of  the
    education of minor dependants was address in  EV  (Philippines)  [2014]
    EWCA  Civ  874  at  [60].   The  appellants'  circumstances  were  very
    different.  None of the family was British.  None of the family had the
    right to remain here.  If Josefina Arcala Cesa was removed, none of the
    other family members had the right to  remain.   If  the  parents  were
    removed, then it was entirely reasonable to expect the children  to  go
    with them because it was obviously in their best  interests  to  remain
    with their parents.  The  desirability  of  being  educated  at  public
    expense in the United Kingdom could not outweigh  the  benefit  to  the
    children of remaining with their parents in their own country.  Just as
    the United Kingdom cannot provide medical treatment for the  world,  it
    cannot educate the world.

Submission on Error of Law

10. Ms Poynor relied upon the grounds.  Mr  Bramble  submitted  that  there
    were errors in the determination, however, they were not material.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11. I find that the judge took into account irrelevant  issues,  failed  to
    consider relevant issues,  carried  out  a  flawed  assessment  of  the
    appellants' circumstances including the best interests of the  children
    and overall, failed to  give  adequate  reasons.   Merely  because  the
    appellants could not succeed under the Immigration Rules was no  reason
    not to go on to carry out an appropriate assessment under Article 8.

12. The appellants have shown errors of law in the determination such  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside, and  heard
    again de novo.

13. Directions are attached to this short determination.

14. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 30 October 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart


