
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/33148/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 30 September 2019                   |    On 2 October 2019                |
|                                       |                                     |

                                    Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                          mr Bhavesh Thakor Panchal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Akhtar of Addison & Khan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision issued on 12  February  2015  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Richards-Clarke which refused the  Article  8
    ECHR appeal brought by the appellant.

 2. The appellant is a national of South Africa, born on 14 October 1974.

 3. The appellant's background before coming to the  UK  is  not  disputed.
    Having been born in South Africa in 1974 to a  family  from  India,  he
    returned to India with his parents in 1976.   He  therefore  spent  the
    first two years of his life in South Africa and  then  lived  in  India
    until 1999.  The family sent the appellant  to  stay  with  a  paternal
    uncle and his  family  in  South  Africa  in  1999  as  he  was  having
    difficulty finding work in India as he was not a legal resident  there.
    His uncle's son, the appellant's cousin, had a business  in  which  the
    appellant was able to work.  In 2001 the appellant came to the UK on  a
    visit visa. He therefore spent approximately two more  years  in  South
    Africa, the full total of his residence there amounting to four  years.
    He is now 44 years' old.

 4. Having come to the UK as visitor, the appellant obtained various grants
    of leave to remain until 31 January 2010.  It was at that point that an
    appeal against refusal of leave became appeal  rights  exhausted.   The
    appellant remained in the UK and met his partner, Ms Alkaben  Bhaskbhai
    Panchal.  She had leave as a student until 31 May 2014 but then  became
    an overstayer.  The couple remained in the UK, and their child, [A] was
    born in 2013.

 5. On 19 December 2013 the appellant made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds.   The  respondent  refused  that
    application on 5 August 2014.  The respondent found that the provisions
    of Appendix FM concerning a partner or being a  parent  were  not  met.
    This is not disputed by the appellant.  The respondent went on to  find
    that the appellant could not meet the provisions  of  paragraph  276ADE
    as, following paragraph 276ADE(vi) he could not show  that  there  were
    "very significant obstacles" to his integration "into  the  country  to
    which he would have to go if required to leave the UK".  Here,  it  was
    never disputed that the country to which the appellant would have to go
    would be South Africa, the only country for which he  has  citizenship.



 6. Before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant maintained that there were
    very significant obstacles to his reintegration in  South  Africa.   He
    relied on the fact that he had only spent the first two  years  of  his
    life there and a period of approximately two  years  in  his  twenties.
    This very limited residence contrasted markedly with his  time  in  the
    UK.  In his witness statement dated 22 December 2014 he maintained that
    he had lost contact with any friends he made in South Africa having not
    been there for over fourteen years.  He also maintained in paragraph 13
    of his witness statement that since coming to the UK there had  been  a
    family feud and that "I so cannot rely on the support of  those  uncles
    anymore if I were to go to South Africa".  The appellant also relied on
    a witness statement from his father which stated in paragraph  7  that,
    concerning the relatives in South Africa, "since 2003 due to  a  family
    dispute we are no longer on terms with those relatives".

 7. The First-tier Tribunal in paragraph 13 of the  decision  recorded  the
    appellant's evidence on these matters as follows:

         "13. In cross-examination the Appellant confirmed that he did  work
             in South Africa as a  salesman.   This  was  in  his  cousin's
             business.  This cousin was the son of  his  father's  brother.
             The Appellant stated that his uncle had now  passed  away  and
             the only family that he had in South Africa was  this  cousin.
             When asked what he  meant  by  family  members  the  Appellant
             stated that his cousin is  married  and  has  three  children.
             When the Appellant was asked about land  in  South  Africa  he
             stated that he did not have any land or property nor  was  any
             due to pass to him".

 8. In paragraph 24 of the decision the First-tier  Tribunal  recorded  the
    submissions made on behalf of the appellant including:

         "In 2001 the Appellant spent a tiny fraction of his life  in  South
         Africa and from this follows difficulties: the  Appellant  had  not
         been back to South Africa (sic) thirteen  years,  there  were  some
         family problems, the Appellant had had no contact with  anyone  for
         eight or nine years, he had few family members in  South  Africa  -
         his cousin, his cousin's wife and their  children  and  he  had  no
         house property or assets in South Africa".

 9. In paragraph 29 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal  considered the
    question of whether the appellant would face very significant obstacles
    to reintegration in South Africa.  The Judge stated:

         "29. The second issue is to be considered is whether the  Appellant
             meets the requirements for leave to remain on the basis of  an
             established private life as set out in paragraph 276ADE of the
             Immigration Rules.  The age of the Appellant and his wife  and
             their respective lengths of residence  in  the  UK  mean  that
             neither are able to satisfy  the  requirements  of  paragraphs
             276ADE(iii), (iv) or (v).  This leaves the  issue  as  whether
             there would be very significant obstacles to  the  Appellant's
             integration in the country to which he would  have  to  go  if
             required to leave the UK.  On the evidence that  I  have  that
             country would be South Africa.  I am not satisfied that  there
             would be such a significant obstacle.  This is because:

             (a)  The Appellant was  born  in  South  Africa,  is  a  South
                  African citizen and there is no evidence before me that he
                  would be refused entry to South Africa.

             (b)  The evidence before me is that  the  Appellant  lived  in
                  India  between  the  ages  of  2  and  25.   However,  the
                  Appellant then returned to live in South Africa.  At  this
                  time the Appellant was able to live and work in a  country
                  which it is unlikely that he could remember and  where  he
                  had not lived  as  an  adult.   I  consider  that  if  the
                  Appellant was able to integrate into South Africa then  he
                  would  be  likely  to  be  able  to  do  so   again   now.
                  Particularly  as  he  is  now  assisted  by  his  previous
                  experience and knowledge of South Africa.   Further  while
                  it may be that the Appellant has  lost  contact  with  the
                  family members that assisted him when  he  went  to  South
                  Africa in 1999 he does have family members in South Africa
                  and this situation is not the same as in 1999 as he  would
                  be returning to a country which that (sic) has been  known
                  to him.

             (c)  I do not consider  the  different  nationalities  of  the
                  Appellant and  his  wife  amount  to  a  very  significant
                  obstacle.  There was no evidence before me today that  the
                  Appellant's wife and son  would  be  unable  to  join  the
                  Appellant in South Africa once they had  applied  for  and
                  obtained the necessary permissions to do so.

             (d)  I do not agree that being able to  integrate  in  the  UK
                  would mean that there would be  significant  obstacles  to
                  the Appellant's integration in South Africa.   I  consider
                  that the resourcefulnesses that the Appellant has shown in
                  the UK would suggest that he would be likely to be able to
                  integrate in South Africa".

10. The appellant challenged the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Richards-Clarke but was refused permission by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in a decision dated 17 April 2015  and  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  a
    decision dated 14 July 2015.

11. The appellant then applied  to  the  Administrative  Court  by  way  of
    judicial review on 21 August 2015.  Permission was refused by the  High
    Court on 3 November 2015.  The appellant  renewed  the  matter  in  the
    Court of Appeal  and  on  7  October  2016  Lord  Justice  Vos  granted
    permission on the "very significant obstacles" issue.  On  14  February
    2018 Master Gidden made an order, where no request  for  a  substantive
    hearing to the Court of  Appeal  had  been  made,  quashing  the  Upper
    Tribunal decision of 27 July 2015 which refused  permission  to  appeal
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

12. The appeal then returned to the Upper Tribunal and in a decision  dated
    13 August 2019 the Vice-President granted permission to appeal  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Richards-Clarke.  The  appeal  was
    then listed for 30 September 2019 in order for the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    decide whether the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  disclosed  a
    material error on a point of law as argued in the grounds of  challenge
    dated 5 May 2015. There was no application to amend those grounds.

13.   The  appellant's  grounds  maintained,  firstly,  that  the   judge's
    consideration of whether  there  were  very  significant  obstacles  in
    paragraph 29 of the decision omitted a material  consideration,  namely
    the family feud which meant that the appellant no  longer  had  contact
    with and could not look  for  support  from  family  members  in  South
    Africa. There had been unchallenged and consistent evidence on this  in
    the appellant's witness statement and in his father's  statement.   The
    grounds maintained in paragraph 5(ii) that the judge had:

         "... failed to engage with the fact that it is one thing to  return
         to a country in one's mid-twenties and work for a relative, as  the
         Appellant did in 1999, but quite another to  do  so  after  another
         fourteen years when in one's 40s and with a wife  and  young  child
         and with no friends or family".

14. The grounds also argue that the judge erred in finding  that  the  best
    interests of the child lay  in  returning  to  South  Africa  with  his
    parents as the evidence showed that the family would be destitute.

15. The second ground of appeal maintained  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to make  a  proper  assessment  of  the  best  interest  of  the
    appellant's son and whether it was in his best interests to go to South
    Africa where the family were likely to be destitute.

16. The third ground of appeal maintained that the First-tier Tribunal, for
    the reasons set out in the previous two grounds, made a material  error
    of law in the proportionality assessment.

17. When making my decision as to whether the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
    the very significant obstacles assessment, I referred to  the  case  of
    SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813.  This case provides guidance on  the
    correct approach to an assessment of whether there are very significant
    obstacles to reintegration.  The learning of the Court of Appeal is set
    out in paragraph 14 of the judgment:

         "14.      In  my  view,  the  concept  of  a   foreign   criminal's
             'integration' into the country to which it is proposed that he
             be deported, as set out in section  117C(4)(c)  and  paragraph
             399A, is a broad one.  It is not confined to the mere  ability
             to find a job or to sustain life while  living  in  the  other
             country.   It  is  not  appropriate  to  treat  the  statutory
             language as subject to some  gloss  and  it  will  usually  be
             sufficient for a court or tribunal simply to direct itself  in
             the terms that Parliament has chosen  to  use.   The  idea  of
             'integration' calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made
             as to whether the individual will be enough of an  insider  in
             terms of understanding how life in the society in  that  other
             country is carried on and a capacity to participate in it,  so
             as to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted  there,  to
             be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that  society  and
             to build up within  a  reasonable  time  a  variety  of  human
             relationships to give substance to the individual's private or
             family life".

18. Does the consideration of very significant obstacles in paragraph 29 of
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision comply with the guidance provided by
    the Court of Appeal in Kamara?  It is my conclusion that it does.   The
    Judge set out in paragraph 8 of the decision that he took into  account
    the witness statements of the appellant and his father. He records  the
    submissions for the appellant in paragraph 24  of  the  decision  which
    included reference to there being problems with  the  family  in  South
    Africa.  In paragraph  29  the  judge  assesses  the  difficulties  the
    appellant would face on return on the basis that he "has  lost  contact
    with the family members who assisted him "in  the  past.  The  decision
    shows that the judge was aware of the evidence on the changed situation
    regarding relatives in South Africa and took this into account  in  the
    assessment of whether there would be very significant obstacles.

19. It is worth noting the further guidance provided by the Court of Appeal
    in paragraph 18 of Kamara on the  correct  approach  when  there  is  a
    submission that a relevant matter was not properly taken into account:

         "18.     There is no special rule regarding the reasons to be given
             by  a  tribunal   deciding   an   immigration   appeal.    The
             conventional approach applies.  The Upper Tribunal's  decision
             is to be read looking at the substance of  its  reasoning  and
             not with a fine-tooth comb or like a statute in an  effort  to
             identify  errors.   In  giving  its  reasons,  a  tribunal  is
             entitled to focus on the principal issues in  dispute  between
             the  parties,  whilst  also  making  it  clear  that  it   has
             considered other matters set out  in  the  legislative  regime
             being applied".

20. Where the judge  was  aware  of  the  evidence  about  the  appellant's
    relatives in South Africa and referred  to  it  in  his  assessment  in
    paragraph 29, it is not arguable that the decision discloses  an  error
    on a point of law. Reading paragraph 29 of the decision fairly,  it  is
    clear that the judge placed significant weight  on  the  appellant,  by
    that time, having experience of South Africa as an adult and not  going
    to the country for the first time and no experience.  The appellant had
    voluntarily returned to the country as an adult having  lived  most  of
    his life in India and had worked there over a period of two  years.  It
    is therefore my conclusion that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    on the question of very significant obstacles to reintegration does not
    disclose an error on a point of law.

21. The second ground of challenge has no force as the First-tier  Tribunal
    found that the appellant could be expected to return  to  South  Africa
    and find work  given  his  experience  of  the  country  as  an  adult,
    notwithstanding the lack of  contact  with  his  relatives  there;  see
    paragraph 29 and 30. The First-tier Tribunal did not  accept  that  the
    appellant would be destitute or  that  he  and  his  family  could  not
    establish themselves. The assessment in  paragraph  33  that  the  best
    interests of the child lay in remaining with the appellant and his wife
    even if that meant going to South Africa or India, is not in error.

22. The third ground  of  challenge  has  no  force  where  the  First-tier
    Tribunal conducted an assessment of the  circumstances  of  the  family
    outside the Immigration Rules in paragraphs 31 to 34  of  the  decision
    and, given the previous findings, reached a  rational  conclusion  that
    there were no exceptional circumstances  preventing  return  to  either
    South Africa or, alternatively, India, the appellant having  supportive
    family there and his wife being Indian.

23. For all of these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  does
    not disclose an error on a point of law and therefore stands.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Signed:  [pic]                                          Date:  30  September
    2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
