
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33012/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8th September 2014                         |On 6th October 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                              mr Yamine Dahmani


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Wells, Legal Representative, M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria born on 12th August 1975  and  he
    claims to have entered the UK on  4th  January  1998  and  applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of fourteen  years'  residence.
    He made an application on 6th  July  2012  which  was  rejected  as  an
    invalid application because his  solicitors  had  failed  to  sign  the
    cheque for the  fee  which  accompanied  the  application.   A  further
    application was made on 26th  September  2012  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules on compassionate grounds.

 2. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Eban  on  13th  June
    2014 and she promulgated a determination dismissing the appeal on  25th
    June 2014.  An application for permission to appeal was  filed  by  the
    appellant's representatives on effectively three  grounds.   The  first
    ground was that the judge had  failed  to  give  consideration  to  the
    immigration history of the case and failed to give weight  to  fairness
    to the appellant.  It was submitted that Edgehill v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 402 should  apply  because  the
    application should have been decided under the Rules existing as at the
    date of 6th July 2012.

 3. Further to JH (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2009] ECWA Civ 78 where it was held by that an application was in  the
    wrong form it was in fact a valid application even if it was ultimately
    doomed to fail.   It  was  submitted  that  this  principle  should  be
    applied.  The Secretary of State retained the application for a  period
    of almost two and a  half  months  before  returning  it  back  to  the
    solicitors.

 4. This had serious consequences and the judge had failed to  consider  FP
    (Iran) [2007] EWCA Civ 13 such that human error caused the  application
    to be invalid and BT  (former  solicitor's  alleged  misconduct)  Nepal
    [2004] UKIAT 0311.

 5. Further the appellant sought to rely on MM (unfairness; E  &  R)  Sudan
    [2014] UKUT 105 (IAC).  This confirmed that if there  was  no  material
    error of law in the judge's determination permission could  be  granted
    where it would cause the appellant a great deal of unfairness.

 6. The appellant had been in the UK for fourteen years and on the face  of
    it would succeed under paragraph 276 of the Immigration Rules.

 7. Further the  judge  without  having  dealt  with  the  requirements  of
    paragraph  276ADE  simply  went  on  to  consider  whether  there  were
    exceptional circumstances such that the judge should have made specific
    findings in  relation  to  paragraph  276ADE  under  the  Rules  before
    considering whether the appellant could meet  the  Rules.  It  was  not
    conceded that the appellant could not meet  Paragraph  276  ADE.    The
    judge failed to consider the Court of Appeal decision of MF (Nigeria) v
    SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 superseded Izuazu (Article  8  -  new  rules)
    [2013] UKUT 425 (IAC).

 8. The third ground was that the  judge  had  erred  in  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside the Rules.  She failed to  consider  whether  or  not
    there were arguably good grounds for granting leave to  remain  outside
    the  Rules  but  considered  only  whether   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances by reference to unjustifiably  harsh  consequences.   The
    fact relevant here was the appellant's  length  of  residence  together
    with the private life established over fourteen years.

 9. The judge's consideration of the issue did not follow logical process.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchinson on the basis that it was arguable that the  judge  erred  in
    law by not considering paragraph 276ADE(vi) of  the  Immigration  Rules
    could apply in terms of the appellant's private life that he  was  over
    the age of 18 and lived in the UK for sixteen years before going on  to
    consider whether there was an  arguably  good  case  to  be  considered
    outside the Immigration Rules in terms of Article 8.

11. At the hearing Mr Wells submitted his  grounds  on  the  basis  of  the
    written grounds previously submitted.  He submitted that the respondent
    had a residual discretion to have acted to accept the application.  The
    solicitors openly admitted a genuine error but this was not  considered
    at all.  The judge failed to consider the arguably good grounds on that
    basis.  The Secretary of State had failed to act fairly.

12. Mr Bramble stated that the judge had set out her approach in paragraphs
    9 to 12 of her determination.  The fact was the cheque was  not  signed
    and that was a mandatory requirement.  There had not  been  appropriate
    payment made.  Any residual discretion lay with the Secretary of  State
    and it was not for the Tribunal to question  how  the  Respondent  went
    about that.  The judge addressed the fairness point.

13. In respect of paragraph 276ADE the  judge  set  out  the  findings  and
    considered any merits outside the Immigration Rules.  The merits of the
    grounds are merely a disagreement by the appellant.

14. Mr Wells submitted that the judge had not fully addressed Article 8 and
    paragraph 276ADE and she had failed to take into  account  the  overall
    argument in relation to the application when considering the Article  8
    argument.

Conclusions

15. The judge set out the arguments with respect to  the  fairness  of  the
    consideration of the  application  and  as  to  whether  it  should  be
    considered as a variation or a  new  application  after  the  9th  July
    Immigration Rules  were  introduced  and  found  that  the  fault  lies
    squarely with the solicitors as they did  not  sign  the  cheque  which
    accompanied the appellant's application even though the  appellant  had
    paid and put them in funds to pay the appropriate fee.   As  the  judge
    stated at paragraph 10 she did not find how  the  respondent  could  be
    unfair and that further at 11 it  did  not  mean  that  there  was  any
    unfairness on the respondent's part.

16. Particularly at paragraph 12 the judge found

         "I do not see that the respondent has  any  responsibility  towards
         the appellant to ensure  that  he  is  not  adversely  affected  by
         negligent advice from solicitors  or  changes  in  the  Immigration
         Rules.   In  the  circumstances  I  do  not   consider   that   the
         respondent's consideration of the appellant's application under the
         new Immigration Rules which were in place when a valid  application
         was made, rather than under the old Immigration Rules, can be  said
         not to be in accordance with the law."

17. On consideration of  Basnet  (validity  of  application  -  respondent)
    [2012] UKUT 00113 (IAC) I note that the solicitors accepted that it was
    their error and that they had failed to sign the cheque and this led to
    the rejection of the first application.  As highlighted at paragraph 17
    of Basnet the Immigration and Nationality (Fees) Regulations 2011 (2011
    No. 1055) provides at Regulation 37

         "Consequence of failing to pay the specified fee

         Where an application to which  these  Regulation  refer  is  to  be
         accompanied by a specified fee the application is not validly  made
         unless it has been accompanied by that fee."

18. As found by the Tribunal the question whether the first application was
    valid depends not upon whether payment was successfully  processed  but
    whether the application was accompanied by a fee.

19. Further the Tribunal noted that as held in BE  (application fee: effect
    of  non-payment)  Mauritius  [2008]  UKAIT  00089  an  application   is
    accompanied by a fee if it is "accompanied by  such  authorisation  (of
    the applicant or other person purporting to pay)  as  will  enable  the
    respondent to receive the  entire  fee  in  question,  without  further
    recourse having to be made by the respondent to the payer".

20. Paragraph 16 of BE confirmed 'To my mind that is  clear  and  that  the
    solicitors have accepted that authorisation of the fee was not  present
    when the application was submitted.  Further BE 'There will in practice
    be a wide range of reasons why an application  is  unaccompanied  by  a
    fee,  ranging  from  deliberate  deceit   or   omission   to   innocent
    inadvertence. Any system which expressly seeks to  distinguish  between
    various kinds of failure risks being administratively unworkable'.

21. The regulation was not found to be ultra vires and the  regulation  for
    accompanying payment was found to be essential.  In this  instance  the
    appellant was not deprived of an appeal and the application of a change
    in the immigration rules is a  legal  requirement  Haleemudeen  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 558.  Although I was provided with MM(unfairness E &  R
    Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC) I am not persuaded that  this  applies  -
    there was no suggestion that the judge  herself  failed  to  take  into
    account material or that  there  was  a  defect  or  impropriety  of  a
    procedural nature in the actual proceedings of the first tier tribunal.
     BT was also cited in the grounds of appeal but this was not  the  case
    of  misconduct  or  an  allegation  of  deliberate  misconduct  by  the
    solicitors.  They accepted the mistake was made through clerical error.
     The argument was put that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  a  residual
    discretion to decide the application prior to the change of the  rules.
    That respondent did not do so was not a decision, in the light  of  the
    regulations and the mandatory requirements and the lack of fault on the
    part of the Secretary of State, one for the judge to go behind.

22. I therefore find no error in this aspect of the judge's  determination.
    The requirement for a payment of fee is an essential part of the normal
    course of events. It was not the case that there was discretion on  the
    part of the judge to decide whether to direct the Secretary of State to
    admit the application as valid when it was not and in the face of  very
    clear rules. There are many applications made  which  are  invalid  and
    need to be returned.

23. Mr Wells submitted that further to paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration
    Rules he accepted only that the appellant had not been in  the  UK  for
    twenty years.

24. The judge at paragraph 18 stated that the Immigration  Rules  were  the
    starting point and  she  made  various  findings  not  least  that  the
    appellant by the time he came to the UK had not lived half his life  in
    the UK and that he would be returning to a country where he was brought
    up and that he still had family in Algeria although he was not close to
    them.  The judge also made a finding that the  appellant  retained  his
    social and cultural ties to  Algeria  as  all  of  his  witnesses  were
    Algerian and there was a letter from the Arab Advice Bureau  indicating
    that he was a member of their community.   In essence she  found,  even
    though the appellant did not accept the point, that he could not comply
    with Paragraph 276 ADE and made the relevant findings.

25. Although the judge did not specifically record her findings in relation
    to paragraph 276ADE in relation  to  loss  of  linguistic,  social  and
    cultural ties it is quite clear from her  finding  that  the  appellant
    could not succeed under paragraph 276ADE.  On an overall reading of the
    determination together with her conclusions at  paragraph  20  although
    the judge may have been more specific in her conclusions  it  is  clear
    that she did not consider that  he  could  not  comply  with  paragraph
    276ADE.

26. I also note that the grounds of appeal largely rest on a  criticism  of
    the lack of  consideration by  the  judge  of  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

27.  Having  made  her  findings  the  judge  stated  that  "there  are  no
    exceptional circumstances on the evidence before me.  I find there  are
    no arguably good grounds for  granting  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules."

28. The judge did not take into account at this point  is  the  unfortunate
    situation that the appellant's solicitors had failed to sign the cheque
    which would have allowed him to have his application  considered  under
    the old Rules and which in effect precluded  him  from  being  able  to
    succeed under that previous Rule.  There was no doubt  that  the  judge
    found that he had been in the UK for sixteen years albeit illegally and
    that he had worked  under  a  false  name.   However,  the  judge  made
    findings  on  the  application,  and,  as  indicated  above   a   valid
    application was not made prior to the change of the  immigration  rules
    and thereafter the appellant could not succeed. As indicated above this
    is not an exceptional circumstance and the rules  are  clear  and  thus
    there was no reason why the judge should find  this  an  arguably  good
    ground for considering the matter outside the Immigration Rules.

29. Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC) confirms

    'Where an area of the rules does not have such  an  express  mechanism,
    the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) ([29]-[31] in particular) and Gulshan  (Article
    8 - new Rules - correct approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC)  should  be
    followed: i.e. after applying the requirements of the  rules,  only  if
    there may be arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside
    them is it necessary for Article  8  purposes  to  go  on  to  consider
    whether there are compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised
    under them'

30. Gulshan remains good law and the judge applied  Gulshan  after  finding
    relevant facts but even if an application of the Razgar principles were
    required the judge found the  relevant  facts  and  accepted  that  the
    appellant had established a private life  and  it  is  clear  that  the
    threshold in that respect is low.  She considered  whether  there  were
    compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently   recognised   under   the
    Immigration Rules.  The appellant, I note had not been deprived  of  an
    appeal, and the fact that the immigration  rules  had  changed  in  the
    intervening time is unfortunate for the appellant but a reality.

31. The judge identified that he had entered the UK illegally and that  his
    private life had been formed whilst  his  status  was  precarious.   He
    worked under a false name.  She identified that he would  return  to  a
    country where he was brought up and there was no evidence  of  ties  or
    dependency which went over an  above  what  one  might  expect  between
    adults siblings.  She did not find that he had  family  life  with  his
    brother who was not even shown to have a residence  card.    She  found
    that the appellant had family in  Algeria  and  he  retained  links  to
    Algeria. All of his witnesses were of Algerian origin and there  was  a
    letter from the Arab Advice Bureau indicating he was a  member  of  the
    community.  He could keep in contact through visits and.  She found the
    appellant was independent resourceful  and  had  good  health  and  had
    managed to work all the time he had been in the UK.  The judge did  not
    cite the failure to  comply  with  the  previous  long  residence  rule
    because that did not apply.

32. Judge Eban, added nonetheless, the appellant's network of  friends  may
    be different if he  returns  to  Algeria  but  his  private  life  will
    continue in respect of all its essential elements and this is what  the
    judge found.

33. In essence the judge found that no valid application was made prior  to
    the change of rules, the new Immigration rules applied  to  him,  there
    were no arguably good  grounds  to  consider  the  matter  outside  the
    Immigration rules and concluded in paragraph 20 that the judge  had  no
    claim to remain under the Immigration rules or under article 8.

34. MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 1192 confirmed  that  the  test  of  exceptionality  had  not  been
    resurrected  and  further   the   court   remarked   obiter   that   if
    "insurmountable"  obstacles  were  literally  obstacles  which  it   is
    impossible to surmount their scope was very limited indeed and that for
    the reasons stated in Izuazu (Article 8:  new  rules)  [2013]  UKUT  45
    (IAC) such a stringent approach would be contrary to Article  8.   Thus
    the use of the term "exceptional circumstances" in the new  Rules  does
    not restore the  pre-Huang  exceptionality  test  rather  the  term  is
    employed in the sense to be found in the Strasbourg case law where ties
    are forged in the knowledge that immigration status is precarious.

35. The judge as indicated above looked at all  the  circumstances  and  in
    view of his status the appellant's private life was not found by  Judge
    Eban to be seriously prejudiced and as such I find there was  no  error
    of law such that it would  have  made  a  material  difference  to  the
    outcome.  The determination of Judge Eban shall stand.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
