
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/33980/2015
     IA/33984/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Determination & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10 January 2018                  |On 31 January 2018                    |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                    MRS NIRMANI UDESHIKA HEWA KODIKARAGE
                                                             First Appellant
                        MR RAVI PRABATH GODIGAMUWAGE
                                                            Second Appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karim, Counsel for PGA Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first appellant is the wife of  the  second  appellant.   They  are
    citizens of Sri Lanka born on 14 September 1986 and 30  September  1981
    respectively.  They appealed against the  decision  of  the  respondent
    dated 27 October 2015 refusing to grant them  residence  cards  as  the
    extended family members of EEA nationals.  Their applications were made
    in accordance with Regulation 8 of the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006 but the respondent's view was that there were insufficient grounds
    to issue residence cards.

 2. Their appeals were heard by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Wellesley-
    Cole on 21 December 2016 and dismissed for want of  jurisdiction  in  a
    decision promulgated on 16 March 2017.  This dismissal was based on the
    case of Sala [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC).


 3. The Sala decision has been found to be wrong and permission  to  appeal
    was granted by Judge of the First-Tier  Tribunal  Alis  on  20  October
    2017.  This states that Sala was overturned by the Court of Appeal  and
    there is therefore an arguable error of law in the Judge's decision.


 4. A Rule 24 response has been lodged which states that the respondent  is
    currently considering the recent Court of Appeal  decision  in  Khan  v
    SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 and so is not  presently  in  a  position  to
    formally respond to the merits of the grounds of appeal.

The Hearing

 5. Mr Karim submitted that this claim should be remitted to the First-Tier
    Tribunal as it requires to be dealt with under  Article  10(2)  (e)  of
    ECHR.

 6. He submitted that the appellants  have  permanent  residence  cards  in
    Italy and I was referred to the decision of  Judge  of  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal  Lucas  relating  to  the  first  appellant,  (Appeal   Number
    IA/21074/2014).  The hearing  took  place  on  4  March  2015  and  the
    decision was promulgated on 25 March 2015.   At  paragraph  3  of  this
    decision Judge Lucas states that a number  of  important  issues  arose
    during the course of the preliminary discussions relating to the status
    of the appeal.  It had emerged at the hearing that  the  appellant  and
    her partner (the  two  appellants  in  this  claim)  had  been  granted
    permanent residence in Italy.  Both produced their  passports  together
    with ID documents showing this.  In addition the  first  appellant  had
    pointed out that she had been present in the United Kingdom for  almost
    seven years and had a son who was six years of age at the date of  that
    hearing.


 7. At paragraph 4 Judge Lucas refers to the respondent's response in which
    the Presenting Officer pointed out that he  had  been  unaware  of  the
    factual  background  underlying  this  appeal,  particularly  that  the
    appellant had permanent residence within an EEA country and because  of
    this he doubted whether she required a residence card to enter  the  UK
    in these circumstances. The representative for the  appellant  did  not
    find this to be the case and maintained that the appellant  required  a
    residence card to remain within the UK.


 8. Judge Lucas goes on to state that the respondent has not considered the
    status of the appellant with regard to her permanent  residency  within
    Italy, an EEA State.


 9. Counsel at the hearing before me submitted that these claims should  be
    allowed outright.


10. The Presenting Officer submitted that she had a lack of papers in  this
    case.  I adjourned the case for 15 minutes so that  she  could  confirm
    the Article 10 point which is not mentioned in the refusal letter.


11. The  Presenting  Officer  was  unable  to  get  instructions  from  her
    superiors about the Article 10 point.  Counsel submitted that  for  the
    appellants' status in the United Kingdom to  be  recognised,  residence
    cards issued in  the  UK  are  required  and  if  the  appellants  have
    residence cards in another EU State they should be issued automatically
    in the United Kingdom.

Decision

12. There was no error of law in Judge Wellesley-Cole's decision,  as  Sala
    was good law at the date of the First-tier hearing but as Sala has  now
    been overturned these appeals require to be reheard.


13. I direct that these appeals are remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal for
    rehearing but not  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wellesley-Cole,
    taking into account all issues including the Article 10 issue raised by
    Counsel at this hearing.


14.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision promulgated on 25 March  2015  must
    be set aside.


15. Anonymity has not been directed.









Signed                                  Date 30 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
