
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33403/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 July 2016                                |On 12 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                              Babatunde Adetuyi
                         (anonymity Order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V Chikwe, Solicitor of St Valchikwe, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  22  November  1966.   In
    March 2006 he unlawfully entered the United  Kingdom.  Subsequently  he
    was granted discretionary leave for three years from 26 May 2011 on the
    basis of his family life.  In time,  on  9  May  2014  he  applied  for
    further leave on the same basis.

The Secretary of State's Decision

 2. On 6 August 2014 the Respondent refused his application.  She noted the
    Appellant had failed to provide sufficient documentary evidence to show
    he still enjoyed family life with his partner and so failed to meet the
    requirements of paragraph E-LTRP.1.2. of Appendix FM of the Immigration
    Rules and further she considered his  presence  not  conducive  to  the
    public  good  because  of  his  conduct.  His   criminal   convictions,
    character, associations or other reasons made it undesirable for him to
    be allowed to remain.  Since the Appellant had failed to  meet  any  of
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules necessary to engage  Appendix
    FM he was unable to rely on the benefit of Section EX.1 of Appendix FM.
     She went on to consider his  private  life  by  way  of  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules and was satisfied  he  did
    not meet any of the relevant time criteria and that there were no  very
    significant obstacles to his return to Nigeria.  She noted  there  were
    no exceptional circumstances making it appropriate to consider that his
    return to Nigeria would engage the United Kingdom's  obligations  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention outside the Immigration Rules.

 3. Most importantly for the appeal in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  she  further
    stated that if he considered he was in fear of persecution on return to
    Nigeria or was in fear of serious harm on return such as  would  engage
    the United Kingdom's  obligations  under  Article  3  of  the  European
    Convention, then he needed to make a separate and personal application.
    The Appellant did not make and has not made any such application.

 4. On 21 August 2014 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal  under  Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds and the Statement  of  Additional  Grounds  are
    expressed  in  generic  terms  and  make  reference  to  the   European
    Convention and the Refugee  Convention.   They  indicate  that  further
    grounds may follow but none have.

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 5. By a decision promulgated on 29 September 2015 Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Owens dismissed the appeal.  Her decision records at paragraph
    14 that Mr Chikwe who  represented  the  Appellant  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as well as in the Upper Tribunal confirmed the Appellant would
    not be pursuing his claim on asylum grounds.  She also made  a  finding
    that the Appellant's relationship with his partner had come to  an  end
    in May 2012.

 6. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  grounds  which  related
    solely to the Judge's treatment of his claims in respect of private and
    family life.  On 28 April 2016 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Ford
    refused permission to appeal.  The application was renewed to the Upper
    Tribunal in the same terms but with additional grounds at  paragraph  7
    referring to the Judge's treatment of the  Appellant's  claim  that  if
    returned to Nigeria he would face real risk of  serious  harm  engaging
    the United Kingdom's obligations under Articles 2 and 3 of the European
    Convention.   On  26  May  2016  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Reeds  granted
    permission on the basis that arguably the Judge had erred in law in his
    lack of assessment of the Appellant's claim in light of the evidence at
    the hearing, the contents of his statement and the original grounds  of
    appeal.  These  all  appeared  to  be  inconsistent  with  the  Judge's
    recording of the concession made for the Appellant  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing that the protection claim under Articles 2  and  3  of
    the European Convention was not being pursued.  She added that  at  the
    error of law hearing the parties would be required to address the issue
    of what concession, if any, was made.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. Mr Chikwe for the Appellant who  had  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal referred to the original  grounds  of  appeal  raising  claims
    under the Refugee Convention 1951 and the European Convention 1950.  He
    submitted that the final  sentence  of  paragraph  35  of  the  Judge's
    decision was inaccurate.  I acknowledged that  the  Judge's  Record  of
    Proceedings contained references to submissions made about the risk  to
    the Appellant on  return  to  Nigeria  of  serious  harm,  but  not  of
    persecution.  After some discussion about the difference between claims
    made under each of the Refugee  and  European  Conventions,  Mr  Chikwe
    submitted that the Judge had confined herself  to  a  consideration  of
    only the Appellant's claim based on respect for his private and  family
    life as evidenced by paragraphs 2 and 13 of her decision.  However,  in
    the Appellant's statement and his oral testimony there was considerable
    reference to what had happened to him in Nigeria in 2001 and 2006.  He,
    Mr Chikwe, had made submissions to the Judge on the Appellant's  claims
    under Articles  2  and  3  of  the  European  Convention.   Indeed,  at
    paragraph 26 of her decision the Judge had referred  to  the  extensive
    evidence given at the hearing about the events which the Appellant said
    had prompted him to leave Nigeria.

 8. He continued that the Appellant had returned to Nigeria in 2005 with  a
    view to starting a new life  there  with  his  wife  but  he  had  been
    arrested and subsequently had fled back to  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Judge had erred in not making any findings about the  risk  of  serious
    ill-treatment if the Appellant was returned to Nigeria, notwithstanding
    that his claim under Articles 2 and 3 of the  European  Convention  had
    been properly argued before her.  This was a material error of law  and
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision could not stand.

Submissions for the Respondent

 9. Ms Ahmad relied on the file note made by the Presenting Officer the day
    after the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  The asylum claim had
    not been pursued and this was clear from the note which was attached to
    the Respondent's response of 15 June 2016 under Rule 24 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

10. It was  of  considerable  note  that  neither  the  Appellant  nor  his
    solicitor had provided  a  statement  detailing  what  they  considered
    happened at the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  and  his  solicitor  had
    failed  to  provide  any  Record  of  Proceedings,  contemporaneous  or
    otherwise.

11. At paragraph 26 of her decision, the Judge had adequately  disposed  of
    the  Appellant's  claims  under  Articles  2  and  3  of  the  European
    Convention.  At paragraph 35  she  referred  to  the  difficulties  the
    Appellant had experienced in 2006 when he had returned to Nigeria,  but
    noted that this was some nine years previous to the date of the hearing
    and that he had not claimed asylum.  So it could not be said the  Judge
    had failed to consider the claim under Articles 2 and 3.  The  decision
    should stand.

Response for the Appellant

12. Mr Chikwe referred to  paragraph  14  of  the  Judge's  decision  which
    identified the Appellant was not making an asylum claim  and  submitted
    there was no similar finding that the Appellant would not be relying on
    Articles 2 and 3 of the European Convention. Further, the Judge had not
    made any adverse credibility finding about the Appellant's claim  under
    Articles 2 and 3 of the European Convention.

Consideration and Decision

13. I have carefully considered the file and the mostly legible  Record  of
    Proceedings made by the Judge.  I am satisfied that with respect to any
    putative asylum claim, Mr Chikwe informed the Judge the Appellant would
    not be pursuing before her his asylum claim such as  it  might  be.   I
    also take into account the remarks of the Respondent in the Reasons for
    Refusal Letter that if the Appellant proposed to make a claim under the
    Refugee Convention then he needed to make a separate claim  in  person,
    as the Respondent had informed him.

14. There remains the  claim  under  Articles  2  and  3  of  the  European
    Convention.  Having regard to paragraphs 21 and 22 of the  judgment  in
    Patel and Others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 I am satisfied the Appellant did
    raise a claim under Articles 2 and 3 of the European  Convention.  This
    is supported not only by what was said in the notice of appeal and  the
    additional grounds in response to the warning under Section 120 of  the
    2002 Act contained in the Notice of Decision and that the  claim  under
    Articles 2 and 3 was before the First-tier Tribunal.  There  was  ample
    evidence to support it and albeit that, looking at the  Judge's  Record
    of Proceedings, it could be said the submissions on Articles  2  and  3
    were secondary to those made under Article 8. The Judge  did  not  make
    any findings of credibility  in  relation  to  the  matters  which  the
    Appellant claimed gave rise to his claim under Articles 2 and 3 and did
    not make a decision on this part of the appeal which was before her.

15. I would add that I do not find the Respondent was entitled to  rely  on
    what was said in the Notice of Decision that the  Appellant  needed  to
    make a separate claim under Article 3 of the European Convention.   The
    Judge's  error  is  compounded  by  an  apparent  failure  clearly   to
    distinguish between claims under the Refugee Convention and  under  the
    European Convention.

16. The consequence is that the decision cannot stand in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's claim under Articles 2 and 3  of  the  European  Convention
    because it failed adequately to address them.  There is no  reason  why
    the decision so far as it relates to the Appellant's claim based on his
    private and family life in the  United  Kingdom  and  all  findings  in
    relation to it should not stand.

17. It will be necessary for extensive findings of credibility and fact  to
    be made in relation to the Appellant's claims about  what  happened  to
    him in Nigeria in 2001 and 2006 and why he remains at risk  on  return,
    such that the obligations of the United Kingdom under Articles 2 and  3
    of the European Convention are engaged.

18.  Having  regard  to  Section  12(2)  of  the  Tribunal's,  Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement of  10
    February 2010 (as amended) it is  appropriate  for  the  appeal  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing before  a  Judge  other
    than Judge Owens.

Anonymity

19. There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  considered
    the appeal I find none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law  such
    that the elements of the Appellant's claim under Articles 2  and  3  of
    the European Convention remain  effectively  to  be  decided.  To  that
    extent the appeal of the Appellant in the Upper Tribunal is allowed.


    Anonymity direction not made.



Signed/Official   Crest                                                 Date
08. vii. 2016




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

