
 [pic]



The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33525/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26th May 2017                         |On 6th July 2017                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   Mr A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr.V.Makol of Maalik and Co, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:  Mr.Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

   1. The appellant has been given permission to appeal the decision of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Cope who dismissed the appellant's appeal on
      human rights grounds.


   2. The appellant is a national of India who sought to remain on the basis
      of his marriage to a British national and their child who had been
      born in April 2015.

   3.  The respondent had refused his application on suitability grounds
      under the immigration rules. He had originally entered the United
      Kingdom in January 2011 on a student visa. The respondent alleged that
      he had subsequently obtained a certificate as to his English language
      skills through personation. He needed this document in order to obtain
      a confirmation of acceptance for studies.

   4.  The respondent also did not accept that the relationship with his
      partner was genuine and subsisting.

   5. Under the parent route of the immigration rules it was pointed out
      that the appellant and said he lived with his wife and their child.
      Consequently he did not have sole responsibility of the child.

   6. Regarding private life and paragraph 276 ADE he had only been here a
      short time and the respondent was not satisfied they were very
      significant obstacles to his integration into India.

   7. No exceptional circumstances were identified.

The First tier Tribunal.

   8. The parties were represented in the First-tier Tribunal. The judge
      heard from the appellant and his wife. The judge recorded that by the
      time of hearing they had a second child born in April 2016.


   9. The judge dealt firstly with the question of personation. The
      respondent relied upon the generic statements typically used in such
      decisions. The judge referred to the Upper Tribunal decisions on this
      at paragraph 74. The judge commented on the lack of evidence specific
      to the appellant and concluded personation had not been established.

  10. Turning to family life the judge accepted the existence of family
      life. It was recorded that the presenting officer was unable to
      concede the point did not suggest to the contrary (paragraph 105). The
      judge then proceeded to conduct a freestanding article 8 assessment,
      stating at paragraph 107 that following the amendments in 2014 this
      was the only ground of appeal open to the appellant. However, having
      gone through the Razgar sequential approach to article 8 the judge
      then turned to the immigration rules.

  11. Paragraph 276 ADE (1)(vi) was considered, with the conclusion that
      this did not assist the appellant. The judge then turned to appendix
      FM and EX1 and the question of insurmountable obstacles to family life
      continuing. The judge concluded it had not been demonstrated such
      obstacles existed.


  12. At paragraph 153 the judge noted that his wife only spoke English. She
      was employment in the United Kingdom and had family here. However, the
      judge felt these obstacles could be overcome and that English is
      widely spoken in India.

  13. The judge then turned to the children, pointing out that as British
      citizens they are entitled to be here. Furthermore, the appellant did
      not have sole responsibility for them. The judge then went on to have
      regard to section 117 B factors.

The Upper Tribunal

  14. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis the judge had failed to
      consider in the first instance if the immigration rules were met. It
      was also arguable the judge erred in focusing on insurmountable
      obstacles rather than the reasonableness of requiring the two British
      children to leave the United Kingdom or being separated from their
      father. Reference was also made to a previous appeal which had been
      allowed.


  15. At hearing the presenting officer accepted that it was difficult to
      say the appellant did not meet the requirements of the immigration
      rules. The suitability requirements were met. The judge's finding that
      personation had not been established was not challenged by the
      respondent. Similarly, the judge's finding that family life existed
      was not challenged. The respondent had accepted the financial and
      English requirements were met.

  16. The judge was faced with a complicated immigration history and with an
      appeal which presented with numerous issues. The judge had commented
      on the failure of the appellant's solicitors to provide a full
      chronology. Matters were further complicated by an earlier appeal
      which was allowed and affected the appellant's status.

  17. The judge's decision indicates that considerable effort has been
      expended in its preparation. However the decision itself is most
      confusing because it lacks a clear progressive structure and
      intermingles the immigration rules with freestanding article 8
      features. At one point it appears to incorrectly suggest there is only
      a limited right of appeal.

  18. However, the judges findings had helped clarify matters in the Upper
      Tribunal. There was, if not agreement, than a lack of opposition on
      behalf of the respondent to key issues. The judge had made material
      unchallenged findings. The first of these was that personation had not
      been established. Mr.Diwnycz accepted the financial requirements were
      met. The judge found the existence of family life. The appellant's
      wife is a British national and through her, the children are British.
      As such they who have the right to be here is relevant.

  19. I find the judge materially erred in dismissing the appeal in light of
      the found facts. This should have led to the conclusion that the
      appeal could be allowed under the partner route of the immigration
      rules. Consequently I would remake the decision on this basis.


Decision.

The decision of First-tier Judge Cope dismissing the appeal materially errs
in law. I remake the decision, allowing the appeal under the immigration
rules.

Deputy Judge Farrelly

6th July 2017

