
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33151/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 5th May 2015                              |On 26th May 2015              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                          miss angela Asante-Ampofo
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Salam - Solicitor of Salam & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison - Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Angela Asante-Ampofo, a citizen of Ghana born 16th
    February 1982.  She appeals against  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Landes issued on 5th January 2015 dismissing her  appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent made on 31st July 2014 to refuse
    to grant further leave to remain in the UK on human rights grounds.

 2. On 20th February 2015 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  P  J  M  Hollingworth
    granted permission to appeal.  He said:

         "An arguable error of law has arisen in relation to the  applicable
         Rules at the relevant time. A further arguable error of law  arises
         in the context of the availability of evidence in relation  to  the
         application of Article 8 given the history of the  case  which  the
         Judge has set out under the heading of 'The Proceedings'."

 3. Essentially what  is  submitted  in  the  grounds  is  that  the  Judge
    misdirected herself in law with regard to the date of the  coming  into
    force of the amendment set out in HC 532, paragraph 276ADE(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  It is submitted that because  the  application  was
    made on 2nd June 2014 the  test  that  should  have  been  applied  was
    whether  it  can  be  established  that  the  Appellant  "has  no  ties
    (including social, cultural or family) with the country  to  which  she
    would have to go if required to leave the UK".  The new provision which
    came into effect from  28th  July  2014  requires  that  the  Appellant
    established that there are significant obstacles to integration in  the
    country to which she would have to go if required to leave the UK.

 4. The second submission relates to Article 8.  It is submitted  that  the
    Judge erred in carrying out no proportionality exercise as required and
    jumped to her  conclusion  without  giving  adequate  reasons  for  the
    removal being proportionate.  She carried out no balancing act.

 5. The amendment to paragraph 276ADE(vi) came into force on 28th July 2014
    and was said to apply to all applications which are decided on or after
    28th July 2014.  That applies in this  case.   The  Judge  applied  the
    correct provision.  There is therefore no merit in the first submission
    of the Appellant and there is no  error  of  law  in  relation  to  the
    applicability of paragraph 276ADE(vi).  Mr Salam conceded that.

 6. In relation to Article 8 the submission of Mr  Harrison  was  that  the
    appeal was decided on the papers and as such the Judge did not need  to
    do any more than she did.  In fact it is clear that the Judge was aware
    of the Appellant's  circumstances.   There  were  some  health  issues.
    These were set out and taken into account.  The Appellant had had ample
    time to submit further evidence if she so wished.  The Judge noted that
    there was no indication of family life in the UK and so considered only
    a private life.   She  noted  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant's health continued to cause her problems.  She noted that the
    Appellant had bought a ticket to return to Ghana which  indicates  that
    she was prepared to return there.  She took into account  Section  117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   I  can  see  no
    material error of law  in  the  assessment  of  interference  with  the
    Appellant's private life made by Judge Landes.

Decision

I find that there is no material error of law in the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal and that decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 18th May 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
