
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/33378/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 31 August 2017                     |      On 21 September 2017            |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                                TAHMINA AKTAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E L Cantor of Counsel on the Bar Direct Access
Scheme
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    The  appellant,  a  Bangladeshi  national,  appeals  the  decision  of
    Immigration  Judge  Beg  (the  Immigration  Judge)  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FTT). In his decision promulgated  on  16  October  2015  the
    Immigration Judge decided to dismiss the appellant's appeal against the
    respondent's decision to refuse further leave to remain in the UK.

Background

2.   The appellant came to the UK as a  student  on  23  January  2011  with
    valid entry clearance until 31 October 2012.  She was  given  leave  to
    extend her stay, which expired on 19 April 2015.  However,  due  to  an
    investigation by the respondent, the educational institution  at  which
    the appellant  was  studying  ceased  to  be  an  approved  educational
    institution. This led to a curtailment of her leave. On 30 March  2015,
    however, the appellant applied for further leave to remain on the basis
    that she qualified under Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human
    Rights (ECHR), but the respondent refused the application on 24 October
    2015. The appellant's representatives have claimed (in the grounds  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal) that the appellant did  not
    receive the notice of curtailment when she  made  her  application  for
    further leave to remain on human rights  grounds,  which  lead  to  the
    present appeal. I will consider the relevance of that  issue  later  in
    this decision.

3.   The appellant appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    leave to remain on human rights' grounds to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The Immigration Judge heard her appeal at Taylor House on  22  November
    2015.

Basis for the appellant's human rights' application

4.   The appellant in her application pointed  out  that  she  had  begun  a
    relationship with a Mr Martin Peter Real, a British citizen born  on  1
    September 1958. Mr Real had children by a previous relationship and had
    a child with the appellant, called S. Mr Real and the appellant, as S's
    mother, were providing a stable family environment for the child in  an
    enduring relationship. Having formed a  family  life  in  the  UK,  the
    respondent's  decision  to  refuse  further  leave  to   remain   would
    constitute an unlawful interference with her protected human rights and
    specifically her rights under article 8 ECHR to  continue  her  private
    and family life in the UK.

 5.  The  Immigration  Judge  heard  evidence  given  in  English  from  the
    appellant.  She was unrepresented at the hearing but was cross-examined
    by the  respondent's  representative,  Mr  P  Whitehead,  a  Presenting
    Officer.  Mr Real also gave evidence.  He  said  that  they  had  begun
    cohabiting in May 2013 and  that  the  appellant  had  become  pregnant
    within five  months.   Their  child  was  born  in  August  2014.   The
    appellant accepted during her evidence before the FTT that her leave to
    remain in the UK was curtailed with effect from May 2014.

The Proceedings before the Upper Tribunal

6.   The appellant appealed the decision of the FTT to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    This was considered by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lambert  on  5  July
    2017. Judge Lambert decided that the criticism in the grounds of appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal against the Immigration Judge's finding that  the
    appellant had fraudulently obtained a visit visa,  was  by  unarguable.
    The Immigration Judge's finding was sustainable on the material  placed
    before him.  But Judge Lambert found that there were arguable merits in
    the complaint that the appellant had been unaware of her curtailment of
    leave when she had made her application in March  2015.  Judge  Lambert
    found that this gave rise to an  arguable  error  of  law.   A  further
    ground for the application relating to the period  of  cohabitation  is
    based on a typing error. Judge Lambert found an arguable error  of  law
    in relation to the one matter identified.
7.   At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, initially, some  concern  was
    expressed as to the precise chronology of events including the day when
    the appellant received the curtailment of leave. It was suggested by Ms
    Cantor that the burden  lay  on  the  respondent  show  this  had  been
    properly served on the appellant. This would  enable  the  Tribunal  to
    ascertain exactly when the leave had been curtailed and on what  basis.
    Helpfully, Mr Walker carried out some enquiries in a short  adjournment
    and he was able to indicate to the  Tribunal  following  his  enquiries
    that in fact the curtailment of leave had been sent  by  an  e-mail  14
    March 2014, but he accepted that he was unable to assist me as  to  who
    the e-mail was sent by and to, or as to  the  precise  content  of  the
    curtailment of leave.  However,  he  was  able  to  remind  me  of  the
    acknowledgment in by the appellant during her oral  evidence  that  her
    leave had indeed been curtailed.  The present application was not  made
    until 30 March 2015 following the curtailment of that leave.

Discussion of the Issues

8.   Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    provides that certain public interest considerations are applicable to
    all cases involving Article 8 of the ECHR and sub- paragraph (5) of
    Section 117B provides that "little weight should be given to a private
    life established by a person at a time when the person's immigration
    status is precarious".  Ms Cantor, who appeared for the appellant under
    the Bar Direct Scheme, candidly accepted that her client's immigration
    status was precarious at the time she made her application.  However,
    she argued strongly that it ought nevertheless to be for the respondent
    to produce the relevant curtailment of leave to justify the decision to
    interfere with the appellant's protected human rights. The burden
    rested on the respondent in that respect to establish that curtailment
    was justified. The curtailment of leave was a highly material matter,
    without which the First-tier Tribunal had not been justified in
    reaching the conclusions that it had reached.  She said there were
    several compelling factors in this case not least of which is the fact
    that the appellant has a young child, S, by Mr Real. If the appellant
    were forced to return to Bangladesh, the most likely scenario would be
    that S would have to return with her.  It may have a long-term effect
    on the child's relationship with his father who would, presumably,
    remain in the UK. The alternative scenario would be that the child
    would remain in the UK with Mr Real. It was suggested that this
    scenario was an unrealistic one in the light of all the circumstances.
    S was born on 20 August 2014 and starts school in September 2017.  The
    parties had cohabited since May 2013 and, whilst the appellant's
    immigration status in the UK was precarious, I was urged to accept that
    the Immigration Judge ought to have allowed the appeal and recommended
    to the respondent or directed the respondent to grant further leave to
    remain. It was suggested that the "Wednesbury principles" were
    applicable to this situation and that it was unjust and inappropriate
    to allow the decision to stand. The appellant may face significant
    difficulty in re-entering the UK, even if it was on a different basis
    than that previously advanced, because with her history of deception.
    Ms Cantor's client would find it difficult to obtain the necessary
    entry clearance.  I pointed out that no attempt had been made to renew
    the permission to appeal application, by enlarging the grant, following
    the refusal of permission to appeal against the finding of fraud.  It
    was open to her instructing solicitors, or indeed her client, to make
    that application. I noted in this context that her client was married
    to a solicitor.

9.   In argument, it was accepted on behalf of the respondent that it  would
    have been better for the Upper Tribunal to have the actual decision  by
    which the leave had been taken away  (i.e.  the  curtailment  of  leave
    document). Mr Walker apologised to the Tribunal  for  not  having  that
    document, but he pointed out that it had been produced before  the  FTT
    and was referred to by  the  Immigration  Judge  in  decision  at,  for
    example, paragraph 33. Furthermore, the appellant had accepted the fact
    that leave to remain  in  the  UK  had  been  curtailed  in  May  2014.
    Furthermore, Mr Walker stood by the respondent's Rule 24  response.  He
    said that the appellant's private  life  in  the  UK  had  been  formed
    precariously. It had not been established  that  there  was  any  other
    basis for the appellant to remain in the UK. He  relied  on  the  Upper
    Tribunal in the case of AM  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260.   He  said  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was sustainable and  he  sought  to
    uphold the decision which had been reached having  heard  evidence  and
    given the matter proper consideration.

Conclusions

10.  I have considered whether the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  can
    stand given the fact that the curtailment of  leave  decision  has  not
    actually been produced before the Upper Tribunal. The Immigration Judge
    demonstrated that he fully considered the plethora of recent  case  law
    in relation to Article 8, including EA (Nigeria) [2011] UKUT  00315,  a
    decision of the Upper Tribunal, ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, a decision
    of the Supreme Court and AM Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260.   The  Immigration
    Judge set out fully the test for Article 8  including  quoting  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act.  He took into account that the appellant had been
    in the UK, for the most part lawfully, but that she accepted  that  she
    no longer had a right to remain in the UK.  Even if there were an error
    of law in relation to failing to take into account  the  terms  of  the
    curtailment of leave that would not be material to  the  decision.  The
    appellant has been in the UK for a  relatively  short  period  of  time
    (since 2011) and has chosen to embark on a family life knowing that she
    would ultimately have to return to Bangladesh. In those  circumstances,
    I find that there is no sound basis for interfering with  the  decision
    of the Immigration Judge. In so far as there was an error of law, I  am
    satisfied it was not a  material  error  of  law  since  the  appellant
    admitted that her leave had been curtailed. Additionally, the case  law
    under Article 8 suggests that although the respondent  has  a  duty  to
    safeguard and promote the welfare and interests of children in the  UK,
    children who are born in this  country  are  not  be  used  by  illegal
    immigrants as a "trump card" to avoid removal.  The  duty  towards  the
    child under section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
    2009 to safeguard and promote their welfare is not absolute. It must be
    balanced against the  need  to  consider  the  wider  public  interest,
    including the interest  in  ensuring  proper  balanced  and  controlled
    immigration into the UK. That was likely to be a weighty  factor  here,
    particularly having regard  to  the  Immigration  Judge's  findings  in
    relation to the appellant's fraudulent obtaining of  a  visit  visa.  I
    have no  doubt  that  these  principles  were  borne  in  mind  by  the
    Immigration Judge when he reached his decision.

Notice of Decision

The appeal against the decision of the FTT is dismissed.

The decision to refuse the appeal on asylum, human rights grounds stands.

 No anonymity direction was  made  by  the  FTT  and  I  make  no  anonymity
direction.


Signed                                  Dated 20 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Dated 20 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

