
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA338292015
                                                                 IA338312015
                                                                 IA338332015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Heard on 10th July 2017               |On 17th July 2017                    |
|Prepared on 11th July 2017            |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                         ANELICE [F] - 1st Appellant
                             JVM - 2nd Appellant
                               JMM - 3rd Appellant
         (Anonymity order not made in relation to the 1st Appellant)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A. Alam of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



The Appellants

   1. The Appellants are all citizens of Brazil. The first Appellant  who  I
      shall refer to as the Appellant was born on 26th of November 1978  and
      is the mother of the 2nd and 3rd Appellants who were born on [ ]  2005
      and [ ] 2008 respectively. They appeal against a decision of Judge  of
      the First-tier Tribunal Walker sitting at Newport on  22nd  of  August
      2016 in which she dismissed their appeals  against  decisions  of  the
      Respondent dated 21st of October 2015. Those decisions were to  refuse
      the Appellants' applications for leave to remain based on their family
      and private life.


   2. The Appellant was granted an EEA residence card with the 2nd Appellant
      as her dependent on 18 June 2008 valid until 18th  of  June  2013.  On
      23rd of October 2008 the 3rd Appellant was born in the United Kingdom.
      On 21st of May 2013 shortly before  the  residence  card  was  due  to
      expire the Appellant applied for a further residence card with  her  2
      children as her dependents but this was refused by the  Respondent  on
      12 October 2013. A further application made on 29th  of  October  2013
      was again refused by the Respondent this time on 17th of January 2014.
      Finally, she made an application  for  leave  to  remain  with  the  2
      children on 28 August 2014 which was refused on 28  October  2014.  It
      appears that this last refusal may have been made without  giving  the
      Appellant a right of appeal and judicial review  proceedings  followed
      thereafter. The Respondent compromised the judicial review application
      by agreeing to reconsider the Appellant's case which resulted  in  the
      decisions of 21st of October 2015  which  have  given  rise  to  these
      proceedings.


   3. At the time of the application for leave the 2nd Appellant  had  lived
      in the United Kingdom for a period of 7 years. By the date of  hearing
      the 3rd Appellant had also lived in this country  for  at  least  that
      length of time. The Respondent refused the applications under both the
      Immigration Rules and outside the Rules finding that it was reasonable
      to expect the children Appellants to leave the United Kingdom as  they
      would be returning with their mother the Appellant as a family unit to
      Brazil. There would be no significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
      reintegration back to Brazil as she was 38 years old at  the  time  of
      the reconsideration and had spent the first 30 years of  her  life  in
      Brazil. Although the 2nd Appellant had spent 7  years  in  the  United
      Kingdom and was settled  in  education,  education  was  available  in
      Brazil and there were no compelling circumstances to indicate that the
      2nd Appellant would be unable to continue  his  education  and  family
      life there. Brazil  had  a  functioning  education  system  which  the
      children would be able to enter.

The Appellants' Case

   4. The Appellant told the Judge at first instance that her children spoke
      English  more  than  any  other  language  but  mixed  with  a  little
      Portuguese at home. If they  returned  to  Brazil  it  would  be  very
      difficult for  the  children  because  they  did  not  read  or  write
      Portuguese and would have to leave their friends behind. The Appellant
      had no property in Brazil. The children's father was from  Brazil  but
      he lived in England now. He and the Appellant were no longer together.
      In 2007 she had applied for a residence card in relation  to  her  2nd
      husband, who was Italian. That relationship broke down  in  2010.  She
      did not know where her 2nd husband now lived. Despite the rejection of
      her EEA applications, she had remained in the United  Kingdom  on  the
      basis of advice that there were applications in progress. It would  be
      difficult for her to go to Brazil to get a job because of her age, her
      father had died and she had no friends there. Her sister  who  is  now
      aged 50 remained in Brazil. The Appellant had asked her family to look
      out for a job in Brazil for her but  they  had  been  unable  to  find
      anything. She had friends who she saw regularly who spoke Portuguese.

The Decision at First Instance

   5. The Judge found the Appellant to be a very unsatisfactory witness  and
      for the reasons given at paragraph 34 of the determination found there
      was doubt about the genuine nature  of  the  Appellant's  relationship
      with her 2nd husband. When the Appellant applied for a residence  card
      in 2013 she was no longer in a relationship with her 2nd husband,  the
      EEA national and the basis upon which she applied for  that  residence
      card was not known. The Appellant had accepted that  it  was  possible
      that the children would pick up the Portuguese language  upon  return.
      The Judge  did  not  consider  that  the  children  would  suffer  any
      significant  difficulty  in  being  able  to  converse  in  or   learn
      Portuguese in Brazil.


   6. At paragraph 36 the Judge noted the period of time that the  Appellant
      had lived in the United Kingdom, all of the 3rd Appellant's  life  and
      since 2007 in the case of the 2nd Appellant but the children were  not
      at a stage where they had started to study for essential  examinations
      such as GCSEs. The family would be able to rely upon  each  other  for
      mutual support when they returned to Brazil.  The  Appellant's  sister
      worked at a hospital and had done so for some years  and  there  would
      seem to be no reason  why  the  Appellant  could  not  obtain  similar
      employment in Brazil. At paragraph 38 the Judge found that it would be
      reasonable to expect both the 2nd and the 3rd Appellants  to  live  in
      Brazil with their mother and therefore they could not  take  advantage
      of the reasonableness provisions contained in paragraph  EX.1  of  the
      Immigration Rules Appendix FM.


   7. The Appellant's private and  family  life  was  in  reality  based  in
      Brazil. Her relationship with a qualifying EEA  national  partner  had
      lasted no more than 3 years on her own evidence and had ended by 2010.
      The friends she had made in this country were of Portuguese extraction
      and she would be to maintain contact with them by  modern  methods  of
      communication. Although there would be interference in the Appellants'
      private lives that would be at a minimum level. The children would  be
      able to take up their education in  Brazil  as  was  accepted  in  the
      Appellant's own evidence. At paragraph 41 the Judge  stated:  "in  the
      circumstances I have found above the relocation of the  Appellants  to
      Brazil would not be contrary to  the  interests  and  welfare  of  the
      children. The removal of the  Appellants  from  United  Kingdom  would
      therefore  be  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of   effective
      immigration  control".  She  dismissed  the  appeals  under  both  the
      Immigration Rules and on Human Rights grounds.

The Onward Appeal

   8. The Appellants appealed against this decision arguing that  the  Judge
      had imposed an incorrect  burden  upon  the  Appellants  for  them  to
      satisfy when establishing their Article 8 claims outside the Rules. In
      fact, that ground was based on  a  mis-reading  of  the  determination
      which indicated that  the  Judge  was  imposing  that  burden  on  the
      Respondent not the Appellants and the objection  in  the  grounds  was
      withdrawn before me. I do not therefore  propose  to  deal  with  that
      objection any further.


   9. The grounds continued that for Article 8 purposes the circumstances at
      the date of hearing were to be considered but  the  decision  did  not
      reflect this. Two years had passed since the application  for  further
      leave during which time the children had built up further ties in this
      country. The Judge had given too much weight to the credibility of the
      Appellant and failed to recognise that the 2nd and the 3rd  Appellants
      should not be penalised for her actions.  The  Judge  failed  to  give
      significant weight to the fact that the children had  been  in  United
      Kingdom continuously for 9 years. The Judge also placed  undue  weight
      on the fact that the children had socialised with people of Portuguese
      descent in United Kingdom. That would not be the same as  moving  from
      one country to another with a different culture and lifestyle.


  10. It would be unreasonable to expect the children to relocate to Brazil.
      They did not know how to read or write Portuguese. They could  not  be
      expected to learn the national language within a short amount of  time
      and  that  would  severely  inhibit  their  educational   and   social
      development. They only spoke some Portuguese. The  3rd  Appellant  had
      lived all his life in United Kingdom and the 2nd  Appellant  for  more
      than 9 years. There was no  consideration  of  the  strong  ties  both
      emotional and physical and their links that they had built  up  living
      for such periods in United Kingdom. The 2nd Appellant had difficulties
      in settling in school and had only just adapted and settled in.


  11. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Kimnell on 4th of  April  2017.  He  refused
      permission to appeal stating that the Judge was aware of the facts  to
      be determined and had said so in  the  determination.  The  matter  of
      weight to  be  attached  to  the  evidence  was  for  the  Judge.  The
      permission grounds were simply assertions  which  did  not  raise  any
      arguable error of law. The Appellants renewed  their  application  for
      permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on largely the same grounds
      as before. The renewed application came before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      McWilliam on 11th of May 2017. In a brief decision she stated: "it  is
      arguable that the Judge did assess the best interests of the children.
      and factor this into the proportionality assessment."


  12. The  Respondent  replied  to  this  grant  of  permission  noting  the
      typographical error and stating that the grant should have  read  that
      it was arguable that the Judge did not assess the  best  interests  of
      the children but in any event the Respondent opposed the appeals.  The
      reasonableness of the children relocating to  Brazil  had  been  fully
      taken into account by the Judge.

The Hearing Before Me

  13. For the Appellants, counsel submitted that by the time of the  hearing
      both  children  were  qualifying  children  under  the  Rules.  In  MA
      (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 it was said at paragraph 49 that:  "the
      fact that the child has been in the United Kingdom for 7  years  would
      need to be given significant weight in  the  proportionality  exercise
      for  two  related  reasons:  first,  because  of  its   relevance   to
      determining the nature and strength of the child's best interest;  and
      second, because it establishes as a starting point that  leave  should
      be granted unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary."


  14. Although it was not accepted that the Appellant had been incredible in
      her evidence, even if she had been, the children should not be  blamed
      for her conduct. The Judge had not gone into details  (as  she  should
      have) of the significance of the ties which the children had  to  this
      country given the length of time they had been here, almost  9  years.
      At paragraph 36 of her determination the  Judge  stated  that  as  the
      children had socialised with people  of  Portuguese  extraction  their
      removal to Brazil was likely to be less traumatic than would otherwise
      have been the case  had  they  socialised  exclusively  with  English-
      speaking people. The Judge  recognised  therefore  that  there  was  a
      possibility that the children could be  traumatised.  The  factors  in
      favour of the children staying had not been engaged with by the Judge.




  15. In reply the Presenting Officer argued that a careful reading  of  the
      determination showed that the best interests of the children had  been
      factored  in  to  the  Judge's  decision.  At  paragraph  12  of   the
      determination, the Judge had set out in full section 55 of the Borders
      Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. The Judge had  section  55  very
      much as a starting point in her mind. At paragraph 41 the Judge  found
      that relocation would not be contrary to the children's best interests
      and it was not clear from reading  the  determination  how  the  Judge
      could have done more to determine the best interests of the  children.
      In the case of Treebhawon [2017] UKUT 13 a decision made following  MA
      Pakistan the Tribunal had said that the best interests of the children
      would primarily be served by the maintenance of the  family  unit.  In
      the instant case before me that would also occur because the  children
      would be removed with the Appellant.


  16. In Treebhawon it was in the children's best interests  if  the  family
      were to remain in the United Kingdom because on balance they would  be
      better off economically. That had to be  taken  into  account  in  the
      balancing exercise as  a  primary  consideration  but  the  effect  of
      contemporary  immigration  law  was  that  what  was  described  as  a
      "superficially seductive case" did not cross the  threshold  necessary
      to demonstrate  a  disproportionate  interference  with  private  life
      rights under Article 8. The most sympathetic view of the cases of  the
      Treebhawon Appellants did not warrant any different conclusion in law.
      Referring back to the instant case before me  the  presenting  Officer
      submitted that the appeal was no more than  a  disagreement  with  the
      decision of the Judge and should be dismissed as no error of  law  had
      been shown. In response counsel  for  the  Appellants  reiterated  the
      argument that the Judge had failed to take into account evidence about
      the inability of the children to read or write in Portuguese and  that
      they would have to start from scratch upon return to Brazil.

Findings

  17. The test I have to apply in this case is whether there is  a  material
      error of law in the determination such that it falls to be set  aside.
      This was essentially an Article 8 appeal inside the Immigration  Rules
      under the reasonableness provisions of Section EX.1 and  outside  them
      (under section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act). On the one hand was the  best
      interests of the children which was a  primary  consideration  of  the
      Tribunal and whether it was reasonable to  expect  them  to  relocate.
      Balanced against that was the legitimate aim  of  immigration  control
      because the Appellant had no leave to be here. Formerly  it  had  been
      thought that this meant that the best interests of the children had to
      be described first before considering the proportionality exercise. MA
      Pakistan makes clear that such a formulaic approach to the setting out
      of the determination is not necessary, what is  required  nevertheless
      is an establishment of what the best interests  of  the  children  are
      which are being weighed in the balance (with all other  arguments  the
      Appellants can properly deploy in their private and family law claims)
      against those factors on the Respondent's side of the scales.


  18. In this case the Appellant made an application for  a  residence  card
      when she was not entitled to make such an application and thus she had
      been here for some period of time without any form of leave. Following
      the case of MA  Pakistan,  when  establishing  the  reasonableness  or
      otherwise of requiring the children to leave the United Kingdom public
      interest  considerations  such  as   the   Appellant's   flouting   of
      immigration control could be taken into account.  The  Judge  did  not
      simply rely on the Appellant's poor immigration record to dismiss  the
      appeal. She considered what the impact would be  on  the  children  if
      they were to leave as a family unit given the fact that both  children
      been living in this country for some considerable time.


  19. The determination records how long the children  had  been  here.  The
      Appellant's argument is that the Judge did not place  more  weight  on
      the length of time  the  children  were  here.  The  problem  for  the
      Appellant was that the evidence of the children's attachment  to  this
      country consisted of such matters as the  fact  that  they  socialised
      with Portuguese speaking friends. The Judge was entitled  to  conclude
      from  that  that  the  difficulties  to  be  overcome  in  relocation,
      mastering Portuguese and adapting to the  Brazilian  education  system
      would thereby be reduced. That was a matter for the Judge and I  agree
      with the submission of the Respondent that the Appellants arguments to
      the contrary are a mere disagreement.


  20. Leaving aside the typographical error permission was  granted  on  the
      basis that it was arguable that the Judge might not  have  taken  into
      account the best interests of the children. The Judge was  aware  that
      the best interests of the children had to be taken into account  hence
      the fact that she cited section 55 of the 2009 Act. She also  accepted
      that the children's  relocation  to  Brazil  would  interfere  in  the
      private lives which they  had  built  up  here.  It  was  the  Judge's
      assessment of paragraph 40  that  that  interference  would  be  at  a
      minimum level.  The  reason  why  she  came  to  that  conclusion  was
      contained in the next sentence of that paragraph. They would  be  able
      to take up their education in Brazil a point that was even accepted by
      the Appellant herself. The Judge was aware of what stage the  children
      had reached in their education and that had the  children  been  older
      that might have been a more significant factor (see  paragraph  36  of
      the determination). The Judge was no doubt influenced by the fact that
      for some of the time the children had been in this  country  they  had
      been under the age of 4 years in itself a factor of some  significance
      according to the jurisprudence.


  21. The Judge was also concerned as  to  whether  the  Appellant  and  her
      children could survive economically upon return to  Brazil  since  the
      Appellant's case was that she could not. The Judge dealt with that  at
      paragraph 37 indicating  that  the  Appellant  could  obtain  work  in
      Brazil. That was a matter for the Judge on the basis of  the  evidence
      before her. At paragraph 39 the Judge again  indicated  that  she  was
      aware of the impact of the reasonableness provisions in  section  117B
      of the 2002 Act (which the Judge had set out in full at page 6 of  her
      determination).  She  was   aware   therefore   that   it   would   be
      disproportionate to interfere with the children's private lives (which
      they had built up in this country whilst undergoing education)  if  it
      was not reasonable to expect the children to leave the United Kingdom.




  22. The Judge found that it was reasonable for the reasons which she  gave
      and I agree that the grounds of onward appeal in this case  amount  in
      fact to no more than a disagreement with the  result.  The  Judge  was
      aware of the legal test of reasonableness under Section EX.1 under the
      rules and section 117B (6) outside the rules. She was aware  that  she
      had to consider the best  interests  of  the  children  as  a  primary
      consideration and did so. In those circumstances  the  proportionality
      exercise was a matter for her and she  gave  cogent  reasons  why  she
      concluded the case the way she did. There were no  separate  arguments
      made to me in relation to the  Appellant's  private  life  claim,  the
      appeal focussing on the position of the children. I  do  not  consider
      there was any material error of law in  the  Judge's  decision  and  I
      dismiss the Appellant's appeals in this case.


  23. I make no anonymity order in relation to the 1st Appellant as there is
      no public policy reason  for  so  doing.  I  continue  the  orders  in
      relation to the 2nd and 3rd Appellants made at  paragraph  42  of  the
      Determination.    Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court   directs
      otherwise, the 2nd and 3rd Appellants are granted anonymity. No report
      of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them or any
      member of their family. This direction applies both to the  Appellants
      and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
      lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss all three Appellants'
    appeals

Appellants' appeals dismissed.



Signed this 11th day of July 2017

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 11th day of July 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



