
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33493/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 November 2017                           |On 21 December 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                Muhammad [G]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Brankovic of Counsel instructed by Bhavsar
Patel Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant was born on 1st June 1985 and is a citizen  of  Pakistan.
    On 24th February 2015 he submitted an application for leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom on the basis of his family and private life.   On
    13th October 2015 the respondent, in a decision, refused to  give  such
    leave.  The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Goya on 9th December 2016.
     In a determination promulgated on 26th January 2017  that  appeal  was
    dismissed.

2.   The appellant  sought to appeal against that  decision  and  permission
    to do so to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 20th  September  2017  in
    these terms:-

         "It is arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in
         failing  to  address  whether  the  appellant's  stepchild   is   a
         qualifying child (it is asserted he is a British citizen) and if so
         whether Section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002 applies.


         It is arguable that the approach to Article 8 is confused and fails
         to take into account Section 117B(6)."


3.   In those circumstances the matter comes before me to determine  whether
    or not the decision was in error.

4.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom  on  14th  October  2010  with
    entry clearance as a Tier 4 Student valid on 8th September  2010  until
    19th January 2012.  On 8th January 2013 he was refused further leave to
    remain as a student and has been an overstayer in  the  United  Kingdom
    since that time.

5.   In the decision of 13th October 2015 it  is  said  that  the  appellant
    exercised deception in undertaking a TOEIC test that had been taken  on
    18th October 2011 in support of an application of 19th January 2012.

6.   In considering  his  application  for  private  and  family  life  that
    deception is very much born in mind,  as  is  his  overstaying  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The Respondent considered that he  did  not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules nor that there were any exceptional circumstances  in
    his case to render removal disproportionate.  It was noted that at  the
    time he was the biological father of a British child aged 1  month  and
    had a parental relationship  with  another  British  child  namely  his
    stepdaughter who was then age 7.  It was considered  that  the  conduct
    outweighed his right to private and family life.

7.   At the hearing before Judge Goya the allegation of obtaining the  TOEIC
    certificate by deception was  analysed  in  considerable  detail.   The
    appellant contended that he had indeed taken the  test  and  was  found
    credible by the Judge as to that contention.   Thus  it  was  that  the
    accusation of deception fell away.

8.   In terms of the appellant's private and family life that was  noted  by
    the Judge in the detailed determination.  The appellant's  wife  was  a
    British citizen born on 18th January 1982  and  they  entered  into  an
    Islamic marriage on 13th January 2014.

9.   The appellant's wife has a daughter from a previous relationship  named
    [Al].  That child has not known her natural father.  The  two  children
    are born by the relationship namely [H] born [ ] 2015 and [As] born [ ]
    2016.

10.  Being an overstayer posed a significant difficulty  for  the  appellant
    in  showing  that  he  met  the  suitability  requirements  under   the
    Immigration Rules.  The Judge concluded that  EX.1.  did  not  fall  to
    benefit the appellant and that in any event even on applying  paragraph
    276ADE there were no very significant  obstacles  to  integration  into
    Pakistan.  The Judge considered the public interest  at  paragraphs  80
    and 81 of the determination and found overall it is  proportionate  for
    the appellant to return, the  best  interests  of  the  children  being
    viewed through the lens of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

11.  Although the Judge cited Section 117B(1), (2) and (6) little  reference
    was made to the fact of the children being  British  citizens  and  are
    qualified children for the purposes of 117B(6).   It provides:-

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -


         (a)   the  person  is  in  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and


         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom."

12.  At the hearing I was provided with a further bundle from the  appellant
    setting  out  the  general  background  to  family  and  private  life,
    confirming that all the  children  are  British  citizens  and  showing
    copies of their passports.

13.  At the outset of  the  hearing  Mr  Bates  most  fairly  conceded  that
    Section 117B(6) presented significant difficulties to the respondent in
    upholding the decision of the Upper Tribunal Judge.

14.  There were no clear findings as to the  fact  that  the  children  were
    qualified children and as such the reasonableness of their return  fell
    to be considered.

15.  In that connection my attention was drawn to the  decision  of  SF  and
    others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) (Albania)  [2017]  UKUT  00120  (IAC).
    This was a decision of the Upper Tribunal, the factual matrix not being
    unduly different from that which presents itself in this  appeal.   The
    appellant was an overstayer but married with British children.

16.  The Tribunal's attention  was  drawn  to  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instruction - Family Migration - Appendix FM, Section 1.0(B):   and  to
    11.2.23.of the policy guidance of August 2015.

         "Family Life as a Partner or Parent, Private Life: 10-year Routes."






         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child. This reflects the European Court of  Judge judgment  in
         Zambrano.

         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.

         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, providing that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where  the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
         otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer  in
         the UK or in the EU."

17.  In terms of the conduct that would be considered to  fall  within  that
    guidance such would be criminality falling below the threshold set  out
    in paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules or a  very  poor  immigration
    history with persons repeatedly and deliberately breach the Immigration
    Rules.   Mr  Bates  most  fairly  concedes  that  simply   overstaying,
    particularly where efforts have been made to regularise stay, would not
    be such conduct as to fall within the guidelines.

18.  The Tribunal in SF concluded:-

         "But where there is clear guidance which covers  a  case  where  an
         assessment  has  to  be  made,  and  where  the  guidance   clearly
         demonstrates what the outcome of the  assessment  would  have  been
         made by the Secretary of State, it would, we think, be  the  normal
         practice for the Tribunal to take such guidance into account and to
         apply it in assessing the same consideration in a  case  that  came
         before it."

    Mr Bates most fairly conceded that apart from the fact of  overstaying,
    there is nothing to be held to the detriment of the appellant and  that
    that policy was in existence at the time of the decision the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge ought to have borne it well in mind.

19.  Although two of the children are very  young  and  clearly  their  best
    interest lies with being with their parents wherever that might be  one
    child has developed a significant private life in  the  United  Kingdom
    and was aged 8.  Consideration as to her best interest should have been
    made.

20.  It seems to me that the Judge has failed conspicuously to  engage  with
    the obvious matters raised in Section 117B or with the respondent's own
    policy in that connection.  That is  clearly  an  obvious  and  serious
    error of law and as such I set aside the decision to be remade focusing
    upon that issue.

21.  Mr Bates fairly  indicates  that  there  is  little  of  detriment  now
    remaining against the appellant other than his overstaying,  the  Judge
    having resolved the deception in his favour.   Mr Bates  is  unable  to
    point to any other significant factor which would weigh in the  balance
    in assessing proportionality.  Mr Bates does not contend that I  should
    investigate  in  any  detail  the  best  interests  of  the   children,
    particularly of the stepdaughter, bearing in  mind  the  terms  of  the
    policy make it clear  that  in  terms  of  British  children  it  would
    generally be unreasonable in the absence of any other factor  for  them
    to leave the United Kingdom.  In those circumstances Mr Bates indicates
    that the respondent is not seeking to go behind the policy and  contend
    that in this particular case it would be reasonable for the children to
    return.  The fact that the appellant is in a parental relationship with
    the children is not an issue.  In the circumstances, the statute is  of
    particular significance in this case and he does not resist the appeal.



22.  In all the circumstances although the appellant as an  overstayer  does
    not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules, it is right to note
    that Section 117(B)(6) has direct  application  to  his  situation  and
    circumstances so as to reduce the public interest in his removal.

23.  In all the circumstances therefore  the  appeal  in  respect  of  human
    rights and Article 8 ECHR in particular is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

