
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/33197/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19th January 2018                      |On 12th February 2018             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                         miss princess ihouma okpara
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Bustani (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse  her  human  rights
    claim was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell ("the judge")
    in a decision promulgated on 27th March 2017.  The appeal  was  brought
    in the light of refusal  of  an  application  for  leave  made  by  the
    appellant, in which she relied on her private life ties to  the  United
    Kingdom.   The  judge  heard  submissions  on  the  private  life  rule
    contained  in  paragraph  276ADE(1).   He  made  a  broad   Article   8
    assessment, took in to  account  section  117B  of  the  2002  Act  and
    considered whether refusal of the human  rights  claim  amounted  to  a
    disproportionate response. The judge's overall conclusion was that  the
    appeal fell to be dismissed.

2.   In the application for permission to appeal, it was contended that  the
    judge erred in making no express assessment of the case in the light of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the rules.  The appellant was under the  age
    of 18, as at the date of application and was able to show that she  had
    lived continuously in the United Kingdom for at least seven years.  The
    issue for determination by the Tribunal was whether  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect her to leave the United Kingdom.   The  judge,  on
    the other hand, made an assessment outside  the  rules  altogether  and
    appeared to have in mind the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),
    which contains a different test and requires consideration  of  whether
    there are very significant obstacles to a person's integration into the
    country of removal.

3.   It was also contended that the Article 8 assessment outside  the  rules
    was flawed, in the light of the particular emphasis on the  appellant's
    immigration status.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted, in due course, by an  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge.  In a Rule 24 response made  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  the
    appeal was opposed.  The author of the response drew attention  to  the
    fact that the appellant was an adult by the date of the appeal.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   Ms Bustani said that the appellant, born on 8th March 1997, arrived  in
    the United Kingdom at the age  of  10,  on  28th  November  2007.   The
    application she  made  for  leave  to  remain,  with  her  mother,  was
    submitted on 17th February 2015, by which time she had spent over seven
    years in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  child.   The  relevant  rule  was
    contained in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  When the appeal was  heard,  the
    appellant had been present in the United Kingdom  for  just  under  ten
    years.  The judge was required to assess the reasonableness of removal,
    under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  In the decision, the judge referred  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1) in general terms.  The body of the decision  showed
    that he had  in  mind  whether  there  were  significant  obstacles  to
    integration, finding at paragraph 50 that there were  none.   This  was
    the wrong test.  So far as the second ground was concerned, Ms  Bustani
    said that the judge had given little weight to the appellant's presence
    here during her formative years.  At paragraph 63, he referred  to  the
    UKSC judgment in Agyarko and the question whether  removal  would  have
    unjustifiably harsh consequences.

6.   Mr  Tufan  said  that  the  judge  had  indeed  referred  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1) in general terms.  It appeared that sub-paragraphs  (iv)  and
    (vi) were drawn to his attention  and he mentioned  both  at  paragraph
    15.  He could not be criticised for concentrating on sub-paragraph (vi)
    as this formed part of the appellant's case.  There was, on  the  other
    hand, a lack of detail regarding sub-paragraph (iv), which contained  a
    different test than appeared in sub-paragraph (vi).  The omission might
    not have been relevant if it were not argued at the hearing.  So far as
    the assessment outside the rules was  concerned,  the  judge's  reasons
    were clear although his mention of Agyarko was not accompanied  by  any
    detailed consideration of sub-paragraph (iv).

7.   I indicated that there was no need for Ms Bustani to reply.
Conclusion on Error of Law

8.   The decision has been prepared by a very experienced judge and  is,  as
    one would  expect,  carefully  reasoned  and  thorough  in  almost  all
    respects.  However, the circumstances in which the appellant  made  her
    application for leave clearly show that she could, at first sight, fall
    within paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the rules, as she was  a  child  when
    the application was made.  At paragraph 15 of the decision,  the  judge
    noted that the appellant's counsel  had  mentioned  sub-paragraph  (iv)
    and, in addition, sub-paragraph  (vi).   At  paragraph  45,  the  judge
    referred again to an application under sub-paragraph (vi) and  recorded
    that the appellant's counsel "accepted that the appellant had not  been
    18 years of age at the date of her application."  This is  unsurprising
    as she was a minor when she applied for leave.

9.   The judge's reasons appear at paragraphs 55 to 66 of the decision.   As
    accepted by the parties, paragraph 276ADE(1)  is  described  as  merely
    that, in those paragraphs.  There  is  no  refinement  and  no  express
    engagement  with  sub-paragraph  (iv).   Whatever  the  merits  of  the
    assessment outside the rules,  and  taking  into  account  the  careful
    inclusion of section 117B of the 2002 Act, the clear  issue  raised  by
    sub-paragraph (iv) is not engaged with.  There  is  no  answer  to  the
    question concerning the reasonableness of return.  Instead,  the  judge
    found that there would not be unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the
    appellant if  she  were  removed  to  Nigeria,  which  amounts  to  the
    application of a higher threshold.

10.  If the appellant were able to show that she  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the rules, this would be of very substantial
    weight in the balance to be struck between the competing interests  and
    might even be determinative.


11.  I find that the decision contains a material error of law in the  light
    of the absence of express engagement with  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of
    the rules.  The decision is set aside and  will  be  remade  at  Taylor
    House, by a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell.


Signed                                  Date 08 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


ANONYMITY

The judge made no anonymity order and no application has  been  made  before
me.  I make no order on this occasion.

Signed                                  Date 08 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge RC Campbell
