
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33936/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th August 2015                  |On 2nd September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                               mrs iva spahiu
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr N Chisti, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born on [...].  She first arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 24th September 2010 with leave to enter  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student valid until 14th February 2012.  That visa was
    subsequently extended under her  capacity  as  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study)
    Migrant until 18th April  2014.   On  10th  April  2014  the  Appellant
    applied for leave to remain as a spouse  of  a  settled  person.   That
    application was refused by the Secretary of State by Notice of  Refusal
    dated 18th August 2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Majid sitting at Taylor House on 28th January 2015.  In a
    determination promulgated on 2nd February 2015 the  Appellant's  appeal
    was allowed.

 3. On 6th February 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds made three contentions:

      i) that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to  give  reasons  or
         any adequate reasons for findings on material matters;

     ii) had failed to take into account and/or  resolve  conflicts  of  the
         fact or opinion on material matters; and

    iii) had given weight to immaterial matters.

 4. On 23rd March 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Pirotta granted permission
    to  appeal.   Judge  Pirotta  indicated  that  the  decision  disclosed
    arguable material errors of  law  and  that  there  was  merit  in  the
    application on the basis that the application properly raised  concerns
    that the First-tier Tribunal judge had relied on the relevant, specious
    and personal opinions, on a meandering personal diversion and  had  not
    properly taken the facts or issues into account and was in error in not
    providing a reasoned decision with  cogent  findings  on  the  evidence
    available.

 5. By detailed letter dated 2nd  April  2015  the  Appellant's  instructed
    solicitor responded to the Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24.

 6. It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me.  Initially on  the
    basis to determine whether or not there is a material error of  law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  For the purpose of continuity
    within the appeal process I refer herein to Mrs Spahiu as the Appellant
    and to the Secretary of State as the Respondent albeit that this is  an
    appeal by the  Secretary  of  State.   The  Appellant  appears  by  her
    instructed solicitor Dr  Chisti.   Dr  Chisti  is  familiar  with  this
    matter.  He appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and is  the  author
    of the Rule 24 response.  In addition the Appellant personally  attends
    as does her husband.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Whitwell.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. Mr Whitwell relies on the Grounds of Appeal.  His strongest argument is
    that the judge  has  actually  failed  to  give  any  reasons  for  the
    conclusions  that  he  has  reached  and  that  paragraph  22  of   the
    determination actually fails to  set  out  any  reasons.   Secondly  he
    submits that the judge fails to take into account the issues  that  are
    in dispute in the appeal, that the judge has failed to  record  any  of
    the arguments put forward by either advocate  or  mention  any  of  the
    points mentioned in  the  reason  for  refusal  letter.   He  therefore
    contends that the judge has not addressed the relevant  issues  in  the
    appeal which he considers constitute a material error of law.   Thirdly
    he  asserts  that  the   Immigration   Judge   refers   to   irrelevant
    considerations particularly to be found at paragraphs 16, 18 and 20  of
    the decision and that in concerning  himself  with  irrelevant  matters
    rather than issues that go to the heart of the appeal he has materially
    erred in law.

 8. In response Mr Chisti acknowledges that the decision is not  ideal  but
    submits that the only issue that was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was the genuineness of the marriage and that he had found that it
    was genuine and he had set out why.  He points out that any query  with
    regard to the ability to reach a minimum level of maintenance  was  not
    an issue extant before the  Tribunal.   So  far  as  other  issues  are
    concerned particularly the immaterial issues and if they constitute  an
    error in their inclusion in the determination they are not material and
    that the judge has given a dispositive view  at  paragraph  10  of  his
    decision which is justified in the finding that he eventually made.

 9. In response Mr Whitwell acknowledges that the written  grounds  do  not
    challenge the validity of the marriage but  that  the  judge's  overall
    reasoning is challenged.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Finding on Error Law

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is in many respects as Mr
    Chisti has put it so succinctly "not ideal".  It is difficult to follow
    the judge's reasoning.  Having said that it has to be looked at against
    the basis upon which this matter was appealed.  The reason  of  refusal
    letter contends strongly, particularly at  pages  1  and  2,  that  the
    Appellant's relationship is not genuine and therefore the Secretary  of
    State is not satisfied that the Appellant can meet  E-LTRP.1.7  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  It is against that finding that  the  Secretary  of
    State chose to submit criticisms on the determination.

13. It is Mr Whitwell's acknowledgement that the written grounds now do not
    seek to challenge  the  validity  of  the  marriage  only  the  judge's
    reasoning.   I  acknowledge  that  a  careful  acknowledgement  of  the
    decision shows material errors of law.  It is necessary for a judge  to
    give his reasons as to why the appeal was allowed.  That is not in  the
    determination.  However all that is missing is a short sentence setting
    that out.  What the judge has done is at paragraph 10 of  his  decision
    to state that having heard the oral evidence and considered the witness
    statement of the Appellant contradictions pointed out by the  Secretary
    of State do not take away the substance of the marriage.  He  has  then
    gone on at paragraph 15 to go through item by item  those  areas  where
    the Secretary of State had concern in that it was  contended  that  the
    Appellant and her husband had given conflicting  answers  to  questions
    where clearly they would be expected to give similar  answers  and  has
    set out at the end of each item their responses  to  those  criticisms.
    What he has failed to do is to link those answers to a general finding.
     That constitutes a material error of law.

14. So far as the second Ground of Appeal is concerned it is  difficult  to
    know exactly what the Secretary of  State  is  implying.   The  grounds
    stipulate, and Mr Whitwell seeks to amplify  it,  that  the  judge  has
    failed to take into account any of the issues that are  in  dispute  in
    this appeal.  That clearly cannot be the case.  What he has  failed  to
    do is to provide the basis for linking paragraph 10 to paragraph 15  of
    his  decision.   That  clearly  was  the  principal  issue   that   was
    outstanding before the Tribunal.  Reference is made by Mr  Whitwell  to
    the meeting by the Appellant of the relevant maintenance  requirements.
    Dr Chisti indicates this was not an issue before the Tribunal  and  was
    not challenged nor  raised  by  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.
    Further  the  judge  has  referred  to  it  at  paragraph  13  of   his
    determination and importantly it is not  raised  as  an  issue  in  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  The submission therefore is spurious and  does  not
    constitute a material error of law.

15. Finally reference is made to irrelevances within the determination.  It
    is difficult to see  the  relevance  of  paragraph  16  to  20  of  the
    determination.  Judge Pirotta quite properly describes those paragraphs
    as irrelevant, specious, personal opinions and  a  meandering  personal
    diversion when granting  permission  to  appeal.   However  while  such
    paragraphs do, I agree, add nothing to the determination they do not in
    fact detract from it.  They are essentially irrelevant and  unnecessary
    and I do not think they should  have  been  included.   However  whilst
    their inclusion may well be construed as an  error  of  law  I  do  not
    consider it material to the outcome of this decision.

The Re-Making of the Decision

16. Consequently I am left with the fact the Secretary  of  State  has  not
    openly challenged the finding that the marriage of the Appellant  is  a
    valid one.  The sole ground upon which there was a  material  error  of
    law was the failure of the judge to link paragraph 10 to paragraph  15.
    However the following factors are clear:

      i) in taking the evidence the judge  addressed  the  concerns  of  the
         Secretary of State concluding the marriage was valid;

     ii) the Grounds of Appeal do not contend that that conclusion was wrong
         merely the manner in which it was reached was not shown;

    iii) but bearing that in mind and whilst acknowledging I have not  taken
         evidence it is clear that following the hearing before  the  First-
         tier Tribunal the Secretary  of  State  and  the  judge  were  both
         entitled to conclude that the evidence given by the  Appellant  and
         her spouse showed that the marriage was valid.

17. On that basis the judge was entitled to conclude that the Appellant met
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  It should be said that  the
    Secretary of State has not helped herself in this matter in the  manner
    in which the Grounds of Appeal are drafted.  They are drafted  in  very
    vague  and  general  terms.   They  do  not  raise,  as   Mr   Whitwell
    acknowledges, that the judge was not entitled on the evidence  to  find
    that the marriage was  valid  or  even  in  the  alternative  that  the
    maintenance requirements were not met.   Those  facts  as  far  as  the
    validity of the marriage is concerned are addressed  by  the  judge  in
    paragraph 15.  What he should have  said  is  that  having  made  those
    findings he is satisfied that the parties' marriage is valid and  meets
    the terms of the Immigration Rules.   There  is  no  reference  in  the
    Grounds of Appeal to the aspect of maintenance not being  met.   Indeed
    as Mr Chisti indicates it was not an issue before the judge  it  having
    been conceded by the Secretary of State in any event  in  a  short  one
    line sentence at paragraph 13 of the determination that the  judge  has
    addressed this issue.  In such circumstances I am  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant meets the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  by
    remaking the decision reaching effectively the same conclusion  as  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge the Appellant's appeal is allowed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

I found that there was a material error of law in the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal Judge and having set  aside  that  decision  the  decision  is
remade reinstating the decision and allowing the  Appellant's  appeal  under
the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

