
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33875/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 July 2015                      |On 30 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           zuawu mohammed abubakar
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Saunders given on 15  December  2014  whereby
    she allowed the appeal by the respondent who  is  a  citizen  of  Ghana
    against the refusal of the Secretary of State to grant him a  residence
    card as a family member of a French national, Ms Obaga-Obiang, whom  he
    had he said married by proxy in Ghana.  The issue which was material to
    the appeal was whether the proxy marriage,  which  was  said  to  be  a
    Ghanaian customary marriage, was one which was valid and recognised  so
    as to enable the appellant to be treated as  a  family  member,  or  an
    extended family member,  and  thus  was  entitled  to,  or  potentially
    eligible for, to a residence  card  in  accordance  with  the  relevant
    European Union Regulations.

2.   The First-tier Tribunal accepted that the proxy marriage was  a  lawful
    marriage under Ghanaian law, and that the respondent had  produced  the
    necessary documentation, and allowed the appeal.  However the Secretary
    of State appealed on the basis  that  the  Immigration  Judge  had  not
    properly considered in reaching her conclusion whether the marriage was
    valid under the laws of the country of the partner's nationality,  that
    is France.

3.   On 20 March 2015 my colleague, Judge Lindsley, found  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law and gave directions in a decision  which
    is appended to this one as Annex A. She concluded that the re-making of
    the appeal should be adjourned so that  the  respondent  could  produce
    material or evidence which showed that he had  a  durable  relationship
    with the  lady  in  question  or  that  the  French  authorities  would
    recognise the marriage and thus was her spouse  in  EU  law.  When  the
    appeal was heard Ms Obaga-Obiang was not present  because  she  had  to
    attend to family business and so was perfectly reasonably abroad at the
    time.  In fact her father had died and the funeral had been on 16 March
    2015.

4.    The  respondent  conceded  that  the  French  authorities  would   not
    recognise the marriage and so we awaited  evidence  which  showed  that
    this was indeed a durable relationship.  It was not a matter which  has
    been dealt with below beyond  a  finding  that  there  was  documentary
    evidence which indicated the respondent and Ms Obaga-Obiang  had  lived
    at the same address  since  April  2012,  or  indeed  directly  by  the
    Secretary of State in the refusal letter.  Some  further  evidence  was
    submitted for a hearing which took place on 27th May 2015 in  the  form
    of short written statements from Ms Obaga-Obiang and  friends,  however
    there was no attendance on this occasion  by  any  of  these  people  -
    indeed there was further evidence that Ms Obaga-Obiang remained  abroad
    for on-going medical and family reasons.  The  matter  was  once  again
    adjourned to a date when it was anticipated that Ms Obaga-Obiang  would
    be able to attend.

5.   However no one attended the hearing before us, neither  the  respondent
    nor Ms Obaga-Obiang, and there can be no doubt as far as we  are  aware
    that notice of this hearing date was properly  given.  We  cannot  find
    that the short written statements, emails, further evidence of a  joint
    address from bills  and  passport  copies  suffice  to  show  that  the
    respondent is in a genuine and subsisting durable relationship with  Ms
    Obaga-Obiang without supporting  oral  evidence  particularly  from  Ms
    Obaga-Obiang.

6.   It is, we suppose, possible  that  there  is  a  good  reason  why  the
    respondent has not attended today and so we will not regard this  order
    as final for a period of 21 days.  The respondent must be  notified  by
    the court that the Home Office has been allowed on the  basis  of  non-
    attendance but he then has the opportunity to explain in writing within
    21 days of receipt of such a notice from the court as to any reason why
    he failed to attend today, and if it appears to be a good  reason  then
    the matter will have to be reconsidered but subject to that this appeal
    must be allowed.

Notice of Decision

1.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law.

2.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

3.   The appeal is re-made dismissing the appeal under the EEA  Regulations.



No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 21st July 2015

[pic]

pp Mr Justice Collins

Annex A

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Introduction

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State but I will refer  to  the
       parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 2nd  September  1983.  He
       applied for an EU residence card as the spouse of  Ms  Grace  Diandra
       Obaga-Obiang, a citizen of France born on 28th April 1990 who is said
       to be exercising Treaty rights in the UK. The application was refused
       on 19th August 2014 on the basis that the Secretary of State was  not
       satisfied that the appellant and Ms  Obaga-Obiang  had  contracted  a
       valid Ghanaian proxy marriage and on the basis that  the  application
       for a residence card  under  Regulation  7  of  the  Immigration  EEA
       Regulations 2006 (henceforth the EEA Regulations) could  not  succeed
       in accordance with Kareem (Proxy marriages  -  EU  law)  [2014]  UKUT
       00024. The appeal against the  decision  was  allowed  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Saunders in a determination promulgated  on  the  15th
       December 2014.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted on the 25th January 2015 by Judge of
       the First-tier Tribunal Ford on the basis that it was  arguable  that
       the First-tier judge had erred in law as Judge Saunders had not  made
       any findings as to the validity of the appellant's marriage in French
       law as she was required to do by Kareem.

    4. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions

    5. Ms Savage relied upon the ground  of  appeal  that  the  guidance  in
       Kareem had not been followed and so the First-tier Tribunal had erred
       in law. She did not rely upon the second  ground  which  stated  that
       that the First-tier Tribunal was not entitled to make a finding about
       the appellant and Ms Obaga-Obiang  cohabiting  as  the  Secretary  of
       State had not dealt with the issue as to whether  the  appellant  and
       his wife were also in a durable relationship.

    6. I explained to the appellant that  I  accepted  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had  indeed  made  the  legal  mistake  argued  for  by  the
       Secretary of State. I set out my reasons in writing below.

Error of Law - Conclusions

    7. In accordance with Kareem and  perhaps  more  explicitly  in  TA  and
       Others (Kareem  explained)  [2014]  UKUT  316  the  determination  of
       whether there is a marital relationship for Regulation 7 of  the  EEA
       Regulations must always be examined in accordance with  the  laws  of
       the Member State from which the Union citizen obtains nationality.

    8. Judge  Saunders  made  valid  findings  about  the  validity  of  the
       appellant and Ms Obaga-Obiang's marriage in accordance with  Ghanaian
       law but did not consider whether there was evidence before her as  to
       whether it was valid in French law. There was no evidence before  the
       First-tier Tribunal that the appellant's marriage to Ms  Obaga-Obiang
       was valid in French law

    9. I therefore find that Judge Saunder's  erred  materially  in  law  in
       allowing the appeal under Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations as  she
       had no evidence that the appellant's  proxy  marriage  to  Ms  Obaga-
       Obiang was valid in French law.

Conclusions -Adjourning the Remaking of the Appeal

   10. The appellant clearly contended that he has  a  durable  relationship
       with Ms Obaga-Obiang in his application (he underlines  this  on  his
       form at 3.16). He appealed on grounds which asserted that he is  also
       entitled to a residence permit as an extended family  member  due  to
       being in a durable relationship in accordance with Regulation 8(5) of
       the EEA Regulations.

   11. Ms Saunders made a finding, which she was entitled to  do  and  which
       accorded with the evidence before her,  that  the  appellant  and  Ms
       Obaga-Obiang had cohabited since April  2012.  She  did  not  make  a
       finding as to whether they were in a  durable  relationship  however,
       and thus the First-tier Tribunal has not fully addressed  this  basis
       of appeal.

   12. The Secretary of State did not challenge any of the findings of Judge
       Saunders so whilst I set aside her decision I do not  set  aside  the
       findings she made in her determination.

   13. It was agreed that it was appropriate to adjourn the remaking hearing
       as the appellant produced a letter from his wife stating that she had
       travelled to Congo to attend her father's funeral. It was agreed that
       evidence from Ms Obaga-Obiang was  highly  relevant  to  whether  the
       appellant and she were in a durable relationship.

   14. At the hearing a new date of 26th May 2015 was given to  the  parties
       but this is in fact a day on which the Tribunal is not sitting  so  a
       date of 27th  May  2015  has  been  allocated.  I  explained  to  the
       appellant that he could succeed in his appeal on that day  either  by
       showing his proxy marriage was valid in French law or by  showing  he
       had a durable relationship (which might be described as a genuine and
       subsisting cohabitating romantic relationship) with Ms Obaga-Obiang.

Decision

   15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law.

   16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside but the findings
       of Judge Saunders are preserved.

   17. The remaking hearing is adjourned to Wednesday 27th May 2015.

Directions

       1. Any further evidence the appellant wished to adduce either to show
       that his proxy marriage is valid in French law or to show that he and
       Ms Obaga-Obiang are in a durable relationship should  be  filed  with
       the Tribunal and served on the Secretary of State at the  address  at
       the top of the notice of hearing by Wednesday 20th May 2015.

       2. Such evidence might include: a document from the French  Consulate
       stating whether they recognise the validity  of  the  proxy  marriage
       between the appellant and his wife; a signed statement from Ms Obaga-
       Obiang setting out the history of the relationship  between  her  and
       the appellant from the time they met to the present;  signed  letters
       or statements from friends or family confirming whether they view the
       relationship between the appellant and Ms Obaga-Obiang as genuine and
       their reasons for their opinions. (This evidence would be of  greater
       assistance to the Tribunal if these friends/family also attended  the
       Tribunal to give oral evidence).



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
20th March 2015

