
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/33479/2015
                                                               IA/33480/2015
                                                             & IA/33482/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 November 2017                        |On 9 November 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 JAMSHED [A]
                                  SAIMA [R]
                                    [M J]
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Claimants


Representation:
For the claimants:     Mr R Ahmed, instructed by Raims Law Solicitors
For the appellant:     Mr J Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davies   promulgated   7.12.16,   allowing   the
    appellants' linked appeals against the decisions of  the  Secretary  of
    State, dated 12.10.15, to refuse LTR as a Tier 1 Migrant with dependant
    family members, on the  basis  of  the  submission  of  a  fraudulently
    obtained ETS English language certificate.  The Judge heard the  appeal
    on 28.11.16.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge  O'Garro  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    19.5.17. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson granted permission on 29.8.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 8.11.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons set out below, I am not satisfied that  there  was  any
    material error of law in the making of the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal such as to require the decision to be set aside.

 5. The first claimant arrived in the UK in 2004, with leave as a  student,
    accompanied by his wife. Their child was born in the UK on  [  ]  2004.
    They were subsequently granted FLR as a  Tier  1  General  Migrant  and
    dependants. On 29.1.14 they applied for ILR  on  the  same  basis.  The
    first claimant submitted an ETS  TOEIC  English  language  certificate,
    obtained on 15.11.13. The certificate was subsequently invalidated  due
    to the suspected use of a proxy test taker and  the  scores  cancelled.
    The Secretary of State was satisfied  that  the  certificate  had  been
    obtained by fraud.

 6. The issue in the  appeal  was  thus  whether  the  first  claimant  had
    obtained a TOEIC ETS English  language  certificate  fraudulently,  the
    legal burden being on the Secretary of State.

 7. According to the decision, the evidence relied on by the  Secretary  of
    State and presented to  the  Tribunal  comprised  only  what  has  been
    referred to as the 'generic'  evidence.  The  judge  queried  with  the
    Secretary of State's representative what specific evidence relating  to
    the claimant was relied on and allowed  a  short  adjournment  for  the
    representative to  obtain  instructions  from  a  senior  case  worker.
    Despite suggestions that further evidence would  be  submitted,  namely
    the lookup tool, none was presented to the Tribunal.

 8. At [18] of the decision Judge Davies concluded that in the  absence  of
    any specific evidence relating to the  first  claimant,  despite  every
    opportunity to produce such evidence, the Secretary of State could  not
    discharge the burden of proof.  At [19] the  judge  recorded  that  the
    first claimant was found to be an entirely credible witness and that he
    had taken and passed the test, and that there was no evidence  that  it
    had been fraudulently obtained by  him.  In  the  circumstances,  Judge
    Davies found that the evidential burden had  not  been  discharged  and
    thus the Secretary of State failed to establish  that  fraud  had  been
    used.

 9. The grounds of application for permission to  appeal  submit  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to provide adequate reasons for finding that
    the Secretary of State had not discharged the  burden  of  proving  the
    appellant acted  dishonestly.  Reliance  is  placed  on  the  'generic'
    evidence of Peter Millington and  Rebecca  Collings,  as  well  as  the
    assertion  in  the  RFR  that  the  first  claimant's  test  had   been
    categorised as 'invalid,'  because  ETS  was  certain  that  there  was
    evidence of a proxy test-taker or impersonation.  "It  is  respectfully
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal has provided inadequate  reasons
    for finding the (first claimant) to be credible at paragraph 18 and  19
    of the determination."

10. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Hanson noted that the Secretary
    of State does not challenge that no more  than  the  'generic'  witness
    statements had been provided. It has been established that  in  appeals
    of this nature the evidential burden of proving deception rests on  the
    Secretary of State and if that burden has been discharged, it passes to
    the applicant, who, if he or she provides a  satisfactory  explanation,
    the burden will pass back to the Secretary of State. "In this appeal it
    appears no additional material was provided to support the statement in
    the refusal letter from ETS sufficient  to  enable  the  respondent  to
    discharge the evidential burden per se. It is not known  why  documents
    such as the ETS  lookup  tool  were  not  provided  to  the  First-tier
    specifically relating to the this appellant, from ETS."

11. However, in granting permission Judge  Hanson  noted  that  the  bundle
    contained the 'credibility interview' conducted with the first claimant
    on 25.8.15, addressing the circumstances of the taking of the test, and
    considered that Judge Davies had given inadequate reasons  for  finding
    that the Secretary of State acted unfairly in conducting the interview.

12. At [21] Judge Davies noted that the first claimant was able  to  answer
    questions put to him  in  English  and  did  so  in  a  fluent  manner,
    suggesting that he  had  not  been  coached.  Judge  Davies  found  the
    conclusion that he was not credible to be "grossly  unfair,"  as  there
    were no points in the interview where he appeared to lack  credibility.
    This observation ignores the opinion of the interviewer that there were
    indeed points where he appeared to lack credibility, in that he "wasn't
    sure of what he did in the test. He didn't explain very well,  and  was
    sure there (were) only two elements to this test."  Judge  Davies  also
    found it "grossly unfair" that the allegations that a  proxy  had  been
    used to take the test had not been put to him.

13. In granting permission,  Judge  Hanson  considered  that  Judge  Davies
    "appears to have misrepresented the conclusion in the interview  record
    sheet relating to whether there are any points in  the  interview  that
    gave rise to adverse credibility points being taken. This is arguably a
    material misdirection and material error of fact."

14. Judge Hanson also suggested an arguable issue that the use of the  term
    'invalid,' now that the term is more fully understood as  a  result  of
    the case law in the Upper Tribunal and Court of Appeal, carries greater
    weight than initially understood in relation to establishing the use of
    a proxy in the taking of an English language test.

15. I accept that Judge Davies may  have  misdirected  himself  at  [9]  in
    suggesting that the evidence suggested that the Secretary of State  had
    concluded that the first claimant belonged  to  a  "third  category  of
    persons" who had taken tests in test centres where there were a lot  of
    highly suspect results, and where the Secretary of  State  advised  the
    persons in this third category to retake the test, which it is said the
    first claimant did and passed.  That  was  not  the  assertion  of  the
    Secretary  of  State  in  the  present  case,  where  the  result   was
    invalidated and it said that the ETS was  certain  that  a  proxy  test
    taker or impersonator had been used. This was not a questioned  result,
    but an invalidated result.  However,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  this
    misdirection was  material  to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal,  as  the
    principal reason for allowing the appeal remains the finding  that  the
    Secretary of State failed to discharge the evidential burden.

16. I also reject  the  submission  in  the  grounds  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    evidential and legal burdens had not been discharged. It is quite clear
    from the decision that the judge concluded that there was  no  specific
    evidence relating to  this  appellant  emanating  from  ETS,  only  the
    'generic' evidence explaining the  process  of  analysis.  Mr  Harrison
    confirmed that even now he was unable to produce any specific  evidence
    such as the lookup tool. In SM & Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167, it is  the
    combination of the 'generic' and specific evidence, notably the look up
    tool, which is generally sufficient to discharge the evidential burden,
    but may not be enough alone to discharge the legal burden. Clearly,  if
    the evidential burden was not discharged in this  case,  as  the  judge
    found, the legal burden could not be discharged.

17. In that light, the issue of the judge's  alleged  misrepresentation  in
    relation to the 'credibility interview,' an issue  not  raised  in  the
    grounds of application for permission to appeal, is largely  immaterial
    to the outcome of the appeal. Whilst the conclusions of the interviewer
    may well go to credibility, and whilst the judge may  have  misread  or
    misunderstood those conclusions set out in the report,  that  interview
    was not sufficient even  with  the  other  evidence  to  discharge  the
    evidential burden, the failure in respect of which  was  fatal  to  the
    Secretary of State's case on appeal.

18. Mr Harrison was unable to  point  to  any  other  basis  on  which  the
    decision could or should be set aside. The grounds fail to address  the
    issue of the evidential and legal burden, other  than  suggesting  that
    the judge failed to give reasons for the conclusion that the evidential
    burden is not met. With respect to the  Secretary  of  State  and  that
    submission,  it  is  abundantly  clear  why  the  judge  reached   that
    conclusion. There was and remains no evidence before  the  Tribunal  to
    link the first claimant to the invalidated test result.

Conclusions:

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on  a  material  point  of  law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains allowed for the principle reason set  out
                    in the decision.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

