
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33095/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15 September 2015                 |On 17 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Mr OLUWASEUN AKANBI BABATUNDE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Ojokotola, Authorised Representative (SLA
Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
         granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge N J Osborne  on  15  May  2015
         against the decision  and  reasons  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         O'Keefe  who  had  allowed  the  Respondent's  appeal  against  the
         Secretary of State's decision dated 4  August  2014  to  refuse  to
         grant  the  Respondent  settlement  under  Appendix   FM   of   the
         Immigration Rules. The decision and reasons was promulgated  on  23
         March 2015.

    2.     The Respondent is a  national  of  Nigeria,  born  there  on  23
         February 1987.  He had married his sponsor in the United Kingdom on
         29 November 2013.  They have a child who was born  on  27  December
         2014, which was after the Respondent's application had been made in
         December 2013.  The Respondent's application  was  refused  because
         the financial requirements of paragraph E-LTRP.3.1 of  Appendix  FM
         were not met.   Paragraph  EX.1  was  inapplicable.   It  had  been
         accepted in the reasons for refusal letter that the Respondent  had
         a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  his  British  Citizen
         wife, his sponsor.  The Secretary of State  maintained  that  there
         were no exceptional circumstances and no breach of Article  8  ECHR
         as family life could be lived outside the United Kingdom.

    3.     It was accepted before Judge O'Keefe  that  the  Respondent  was
         unable to meet the maintenance requirements of Appendix FM, but  it
         was contended that the Respondent met the requirements of paragraph
         EX.1(a) as the father of a British Citizen  child.   Judge  O'Keefe
         noted the changed circumstances and found that the  Respondent  met
         the requirements  of  paragraph  EX.1(a)  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
         Immigration Rules.  The judge therefore did not consider Article  8
         ECHR.

    4.     Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
         Appellant was granted by Judge Osborne because he  considered  that
         it was arguable that the judge  had  failed  to  consider  all  the
         appropriate factors pertinent to the appeal.  The judge had  failed
         to give any  appropriate  consideration  to  section  117B  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  and  had  failed  to
         consider the public interest.

    5.     Standard directions were made by the Upper Tribunal.

    Submissions - error of law

    6.     Mr Tufan for the Secretary of State submitted that  this  was  a
         clear case of legal error, as the grant of permission to appeal  by
         the First-tier Tribunal indicated. EX.1(a) had not been met because
         the child had not even been born at the date of  the  Secretary  of
         State's decision.  But more relevant was the fact  that  the  judge
         had given no consideration to the question of whether it  would  be
         reasonable for the child to leave the United Kingdom.  That  was  a
         matter which had to be considered  under  section  117B(6)  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The  Respondent  had
         the option of leaving  the  United  Kingdom  and  making  an  entry
         clearance  application  from  Nigeria.   This  was  a   possibility
         considered in Chen [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC).  SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA
         Civ 387 showed that merely being a British Citizen was not a reason
         why a child could not leave the United Kingdom.  There had been  no
         evidence to show that it would not be reasonable for the  child  to
         leave.  Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440 was relevant to  the  issue  of
         "insurmountable obstacles".  The determination should be set  aside
         and the decision remade.

    7.     Mr Ojokotola for the Respondent  submitted  that  there  was  no
         material error of law in the determination.  The  judge  had  found
         that the Respondent had been in the United Kingdom lawfully at  all
         times.  In fact he was now in a  position  to  meet  the  financial
         requirements of Appendix FM, although that point had  been  rightly
         conceded at the hearing before  Judge  O'Keefe.   The  relationship
         with his British Citizen daughter had been accepted by  the  judge.
         The fact that the judge had made no express  reference  to  section
         117B did not  vitiate  her  decision  as  she  had  considered  the
         substance of the issue: see AM (S 117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260
         (IAC).

    The error of law finding

    8.     At the conclusion of submissions, the tribunal indicated that it
         found that the judge had fallen into material error of law, for the
         reasons succinctly indicated in the grant of permission  to  appeal
         by the First-tier Tribunal.  This should not be seen  a  reflection
         on  the  judge,  but  rather  an  indication  of   the   conceptual
         difficulties which arise  in  this  area  of  the  law.   Paragraph
         EX.1(a) of Appendix FM did not apply at the date of  the  Secretary
         of State's decision as the child had not been born.  The  basis  of
         the refusal under Appendix FM had been the  financial  requirements
         which it had been accepted before the judge had not been  met.   In
         any event, the judge had omitted  to  consider  the  reasonableness
         question which arises under paragraph EX.1(a), or had done so in  a
         manner which  was  insufficiently  clearly  reasoned  which  was  a
         material error of law in itself.  Thus if satisfied that there were
         exceptional circumstances, the judge had been required to  consider
         the situation outside the Immigration Rules under Article  8  ECHR,
         which was a matter requiring  consideration  at  the  date  of  the
         hearing and the application of section 117B.  That not  been  done,
         as it should have been.  There was, however, no  challenge  to  the
         judge's findings of fact, which  would  stand.   The  decision  and
         reasons would be set aside and the appeal  reheard  immediately  on
         the basis of submissions.  (Time to prepare submissions  was  given
         to Mr Ojokotola.)

    The rehearing and fresh decision

    9.     For clarity the tribunal will now refer to the parties by  their
         designations in the First-tier Tribunal.

    10.    Mr Ojokotola for  the  Appellant  submitted  that  the  relevant
         finding was that the Appellant had a genuine relationship with  his
         daughter, a British  Citizen  born  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
         child's mother was also a  British  Citizen,  born  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  It was not reasonable for the child to leave  the  United
         Kingdom.  The child was entitled to remain  on  the  basis  of  her
         British nationality.  Thus the appeal should succeed on  the  basis
         of paragraph EX.1(a) of Appendix FM.  The same result was  achieved
         by consideration of paragraph 276ADE(iv) and section 117B(6).   The
         father, i.e., the Appellant, should not be required  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom to make an entry clearance application, which  would
         amount to an unreasonable obligation.

    11.    Mr Tufan for the Respondent submitted that paragraph EX.1(a) was
         inapplicable as the Appellant's child had not been born as  at  the
         date of the Secretary of State's decision.  There  was  nothing  in
         the  judge's  findings  which  could  be  seen  as   amounting   to
         exceptional circumstances.  There was  thus  no  need  to  consider
         Article 8 ECHR.  If there were, AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260
         (IAC)  applied.   The  Appellant's  immigration  status  had   been
         precarious as (5) of the case headnote of AM showed.  The child was
         a dual national and could live in Nigeria which  was  a  reasonable
         choice for her parents to make.  In any event the  Appellant  could
         leave the United Kingdom to seek  entry  clearance  and  his  short
         absence would not be prejudicial to the child.   Chen  [2015]  UKUT
         00189  (IAC)  was  applicable.  It  was  proportionate  for   entry
         clearance to be sought or indeed a fresh "in  country"  application
         provided that it was made promptly.

    12.     In  reply,  Mr  Ojokotola  submitted  that   the   Respondent's
         construction of paragraph  EX.1(a)  was  mistaken.   The  child  in
         question was a British Citizen and that was an end of  the  matter.
         The child's mother had always lived in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
         child had medical needs.

    13.    The tribunal reserved its decision which now follows.  As at the
         date of decision, the Secretary of State had no reason to  know  of
         the existence of the Appellant's child, who was born  months  after
         the Appellant's application had been refused under Appendix  FM  on
         financial grounds.  The Appellant had been  free  to  make  another
         application to the Home Office instead of appealing to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal.  His documents were retained to  facilitate  removal
         in the event that he did not depart voluntarily but  that  did  not
         prevent a fresh application, addressing  the  deficiencies  of  the
         refused application.  In the tribunal's view, paragraph EX.1(a) was
         not applicable at the date of the  Respondent's  decision  and  the
         First-tier Tribunal was not entitled to consider the birth  of  the
         child,  notwithstanding  the  terms  of  section   85(4)   of   the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It was not a  matter
         which the Appellant had raised in his Notice of Appeal in  response
         to the section 120 notice served  by  the  Respondent.   It  was  a
         completely new situation which demanded a fresh application to  the
         Home Office.

    14.    If for any reason that may be considered too narrow an approach,
         the tribunal will consider paragraph EX.1(a) in any event.  Plainly
         the child cannot be required to leave the United  Kingdom  but  her
         parents were already  contemplating  a  family  visit  to  Nigeria,
         subject to the child's health, as Judge O'Keefe found  at  [31]  of
         her decision and reasons.  The judge also found that the  Appellant
         had ties in the form of friends and family in Nigeria.  While it is
         the case  that  the  child  would  have  the  benefits  of  British
         Citizenship by remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom,  there  was  no
         evidence that living in Nigeria would be a second best  option  for
         her, let alone one which would cause her harm.  She is still a baby
         so could hardly be better placed to adapt,  if  any  adaption  were
         required.  There was no evidence that any medical follow  up  could
         not be made in Nigeria.   She has relatives there.  As  her  father
         came to the United Kingdom as a student, it follows that he applied
         on the basis that he would be returning to Nigeria,  as  indeed  he
         has, most recently for a visit in 2013.   The  child's  mother  was
         born in the United Kingdom yet has Nigerian heritage.  There was no
         evidence that the family could not settle  in  Nigeria  with  ease.
         There was certainly no evidence of insurmountable  obstacles.   The
         Appellant's wife might have to leave some  of  her  United  Kingdom
         based family behind, but of course he faces a  similar  problem  by
         settling in the United Kingdom.

    15.    The obvious alternative to the child's  leaving  United  Kingdom
         with  her  parents  (which  for  the  reasons  given  the  tribunal
         considers  is  reasonable  in  all  the  circumstances:   see   the
         discussion in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387) is for the  Appellant
         to obtain entry clearance from Nigeria.  There was no evidence that
         this would take more than 90 days.  Part of that time could if  the
         Appellant and his wife chose be spent as  the  family  visit  which
         they said had  been  planned.   There  was  no  evidence  that  his
         temporary absence would cause serious hardship let  alone  harm  to
         anyone: see Chen [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC).  Such a choice (which  is
         a matter for the Appellant and his wife) is a  reasonable  one  and
         need not involve the child's leaving the United Kingdom against her
         parents' will.  The tribunal finds  that  the  Appellant  fails  to
         satisfy paragraph EX.1  (a)  as  his  temporary  absence  will  not
         require his British Citizen child to leave the United Kingdom.

    16.    There was no evidence that  the  Appellant's  temporary  absence
         would cause serious hardship to anyone.  Thus there was no need for
         the Respondent to consider the exercise of her  discretion  outside
         the Immigration Rules.

    17.    Again, if for any reason that were wrong or were too restrictive
         an approach, the tribunal will now consider  section  117B  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in the Article 8  ECHR
         context.  The live issue for the Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 analysis  is
         proportionality.

    18.    Although it was not in dispute that the Appellant speaks English
         and is financially self sufficient, AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015]  UKUT
         0260 (IAC) shows that these factors  are  not  true  positives  and
         confer no right on the Appellant whose status as at the date of his
         application for further leave to remain was precarious.   The  real
         issue is section 117B(6), i.e., whether it is reasonable to  expect
         the child to leave the United  Kingdom  as  a  consequence  of  the
         Appellant father's departure/removal.   This  brings  the  tribunal
         back to the gravamen of paragraph EX.1(a).  The tribunal  need  not
         repeat the reasons which have already been given for  finding  that
         the child does not have to leave the United Kingdom but that it  is
         reasonable in all the circumstances for the Appellant to leave  the
         United Kingdom on a temporary basis  to  make  an  entry  clearance
         application. Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 has  no  application  to  the
         facts of the present appeal.

    19.    Indeed, unless the tribunal is mistaken, the Appellant still has
         the further option of making a fresh "in country" application under
         Appendix  FM  within  28  days  of   the   promulgation   of   this
         determination, the window which is granted under the  post  9  July
         2012 Immigration Rules.  This  would  not  require  him  to  travel
         abroad to make an entry clearance application.

    20.    There was no application for  an  anonymity  direction  and  the
         tribunal sees no need for one.

    DECISION

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.  The tribunal allows the onwards appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, sets aside the original decision  and  remakes  the  original
    decision as follows:

    The appeal is dismissed




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell






    TO THE RESPONDENT
    FEE AWARD

    As the appeal was dismissed, there can be no fee award




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
