
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/33006/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4th April 2016                         | On 29th April 2016               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          MR NGONA RAPHAEL DIROKPA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Angbah (LR)
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge K Henderson, promulgated on  22nd  September  2015,  following  a
    hearing at Richmond on 24th August 2015.   In  the  determination,  the
    judge allowed the appeal of the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Respondent
    Secretary  of  State  subsequently  applied  for,  and   was   granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo,
    and was born on 8th January 1982.  He appealed against the decision  of
    the Respondent refusing him a residence card  as  the  extended  family
    member (in a durable relationship) of an EEA national, namely,  Aminata
    Cauwenbergh, a national of Belgium.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge held that  the  first  issue  was  whether  the  Sponsor  EEA
    national was a worker according to the Regulations and  held  that  she
    had provided adequate evidence to show that  she  has  been  exercising
    treaty rights as  a  worker,  in  the  form  of  wage  slips  and  bank
    statements (see paragraph 16).  When she had not been working  she  was
    on maternity leave.  She had commenced her  new  employment  from  July
    2014 to the present date (see paragraph  17).   The  second  issue  was
    whether the couple  were  in  a  durable  relationship  as  defined  by
    Regulation 8(5) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.   There  was
    evidence from a variety of sources to confirm that the couple had  been
    living together in a committed relationship for at least two years (see
    paragraph 19).  Moreover, there was a joint  bank  statement  with  the
    Metro Bank (see paragraph 21).  Furthermore, a child had been  born  to
    them and the paternity of the child  has  not  been  contested  by  the
    Respondent Secretary of State (see paragraph 22).

 4. The judge went on to hold that, "I conclude  taking  into  account  the
    totality of the evidence this is a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    which can be  termed  a  durable  relationship  using  the  terminology
    required under the EEA Regulations" (paragraph 25).

 5. The decision of the judge was that,  "I  allow  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006".

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  have
    allowed the appeal under the EEA Regulations without  bearing  in  mind
    the Tribunal decision in Ihemedu (Nigeria) [2011] UKUT 00340, where  it
    was made clear that regard must be had to Regulation 17(4) which  makes
    the issue of a residence card to an OFM/extended family member a matter
    of discretion.  Where the Secretary of State has not yet exercised that
    discretion the most an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to  allow
    the appeal as being not in accordance with the law leaving  the  matter
    of whether to exercise this discretion in the Appellant's favour or not
    to  the Secretary of State.

 7. On 23rd February 2016, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing  before  me  on  4th  April  2016,  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe
    emphasised the Rule in Ihemedu and submitted that  the  judge  had  not
    simply allowed the appeal as not being in accordance with the Rules but
    had allowed the appeal under the EEA  Regulations  which  she  was  not
    entitled to do.

 9. For his part, Mr Angbah submitted that he would have  no  objection  to
    the matter being remitted to the Secretary of State for the exercise of
    her discretion.

Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  re-make  the
    decision.

11. My reasons are that Regulation 17(4) does not allow a  judge  to  allow
    the appeal, except where the judge has made clear that the decision  of
    the Secretary of State is not  in  accordance  with  the  law,  thereby
    leaving the matter standing before  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the
    exercise of her discretion, such that the Secretary of State  can  take
    into account all the circumstances of the case, including all  relevant
    immigration matters.

Re-making the Decision

12. I re-make the decision on the basis of the  findings  of  the  original
    judge, and the submissions that I  have  heard  today.   I  allow  this
    appeal to the extent that the decision is not in  accordance  with  the
    law, and the exercise of discretion under Regulation 17(4) of  the  EEA
    Regulations remains outstanding before the Secretary  of  State  for  a
    decision as to whether or not a residence card is to be issued  to  the
    Appellant on the  basis  of  his  durable  relationship  with  the  EEA
    national.

Notice of Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the original judge.

14. I re-make the decision as follows.   This  appeal  is  allowed  to  the
    extent that, given that the Secretary of State has  not  yet  exercised
    her discretion the matter as to whether or not a residence card  should
    be issued to the Appellant remains outstanding before the Secretary  of
    State.

15. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 28th April 2016



