

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33493/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 28 October 2015                            |On 26 July 2016              |
|And 23 June 2016                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES

                                   Between

                          MAHA BAKRI MOHAMED BALDO
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sparks (Fisher Meredith Solicitors) (October
2015)
      Mr Fripp (for Fisher Meredith Solicitors) (June 2016)
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
(October 2015)
      Mr Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer) (Junior 2016)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of Maha Bakri Mohamed Baldo, a  citizen  of  Sudan
       born 18 December 1970, arising from the decision of the Secretary  of
       State of 1 August 2014 to refuse to vary her leave to remain  and  to
       make  removal  directions  against  her  under  section  47  of   the
       Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006. The matter  having  been
       dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal, the appeal  now  proceeds  with
       permission in the Upper Tribunal.


    2. Her case as put to the Home Office was based on having first come  to
       the United Kingdom to study dermatology at Oxford University. She had
       difficulties with her studies which meant that she did  not  complete
       her Ph.D. Her siblings and parents were  now  mostly  based  in  this
       country, her father having been a judge who had fallen out of  favour
       with the authorities and had relocated to the United  Arab  Emirates,
       where she had gone to live with him: subsequently she  lost  her  own
       residence rights there, and would find it difficult to reintegrate in
       Sudan, notwithstanding the presence of three aunts there.


    3. On 3 March 2014  her representatives wrote a further letter,  setting
       out that their earlier application, acknowledged by the Respondent on
       4  February  2014,  had   involved   an   application,   now   needed
       modification, as, given that some further time had passed,   she  had
       now completed ten years of lawful residence and  so  they  wished  to
       vary her outstanding application to encompass  an  application  under
       Rule 276B which countenanced settlement for a person who had  resided
       here continually for a decade where there  were  no  public  interest
       reasons counting against their being granted leave.


    4. The application was refused because, on the Home  Office  calculation
       based on her passport stamps, she had been absent for some  598  days
       rather than the 471 days that she had estimated she  had  been  away.
       Once her case was assessed against  Rule  276ADE  addressing  private
       life, she was a 42-year old woman who had lived here since  30  March
       2004 and she had not severed social, cultural  or  family  ties  with
       Sudan, and there were no insurmountable obstacles to  her  relocation
       there.


    5. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed her appeal, it  being  accepted  by
       her representative that she could not satisfy the requirements of the
       long residence or private life Rules, and finding that once  it  came
       to considering her case outside the Rules, she had  been  present  in
       time-limited and thus precarious capacities and  had  spent  over  18
       months outside the country,  which  counted  against  her.  Her  good
       character, the presence of parents and siblings here, her familiarity
       with UK life, and the difficulties she would face in Sudan,  did  not
       outweigh those considerations.


    6. The Appellant's grounds of appeal  challenged  the  decision  on  the
       basis that no findings of fact had been made in relation to  material
       aspects  of  her  evidence,  and  alleging  that   there   had   been
       insufficient engagement with either the difficulties that  she  might
       face if she went to Sudan or the ties she claimed to have  here  with
       numerous  close  family  members  including  parents  and   siblings.
       Permission was granted by Judge Simpson of the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       remarking that few if any findings of fact had been made and that the
       consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules was so terse  as  to  be
       arguably unfair, particularly given that the  Appellant's  background
       as a Ph.D student at Oxford University and  self-sufficient  economic
       status had apparently been overlooked.


  Findings and reasons: Error of law hearing


    7. I accepted that an error of law  was  established.  Reasons  must  be
       provided in sufficient detail to "enable  the  reader  to  know  what
       conclusion  the  decision  maker  has  reached   on   the   principal
       controversial issues" (Save Britain's Heritage v  No  1  Poultry  Ltd
       [1991] 1 WLR 153) and "The overriding test must  always  be:  is  the
       Tribunal providing both parties with the material which  will  enable
       them to know that the Tribunal has made no error of law  in  reaching
       its findings of fact? ... A party  appearing  before  a  Tribunal  is
       entitled to know, either expressly  stated  by  it  or  inferentially
       stated, what it is to which the Tribunal is addressing its  mind.  In
       some  cases  it  may  be  perfectly  obvious  without  any  expressed
       reference to it by the Tribunal; in other cases it may not. Secondly,
       the appellant is entitled to know the basis of fact  upon  which  the
       conclusion has been reached": Khan (Mahmud) [1983] 2 WLR 759.


    8. Here the principal issue which demanded reasoned adjudication,  given
       the realistic concession by the Appellant's advocate below  that  her
       case could not succeed under Rule 276ADE as she would not  face  very
       significant obstacles  to  integration  in  Sudan,  was  whether  the
       private and family life established in  the  United  Kingdom  by  the
       Appellant outweighed the public interest in her removal. That enquiry
       was to be conducted by reference to the factors identified in section
       117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


    9. The Appellant's case was that she had  close  connections  with  this
       country which were to be contrasted  with  her  comparative  lack  of
       connections with Sudan from where her close family had  departed  due
       ot her  father's  difficulties  with  the  establishment.  The  Sudan
       Country Profile (Social Institutions and Gender  Index;  25  November
       2014) set out various restrictions  under  which  women  laboured  in
       accessing public space, adding that male relatives often denied  them
       the right to leave the house unaccompanied. They had very  restricted
       access to land and other property and it was virtually impossible for
       them to manage their own assets freely. The Equal Rights Trust report
       (produced in partnership with the Sudanese Organisation for  Research
       and Development) In Search of Confluence - Addressing  Discrimination
       and Inequality in Sudan (October 2014) set  out  at  2.4,  under  the
       heading "Discrimination and Inequality Based on Gender", that


           "Women in Sudan suffer  discrimination  and  disadvantage  in  a
           number of areas of life, yet the Equal Rights  Trust's  research
           indicates that two principal factors shape their experience most
           significantly. First, there are a number of discriminatory  laws
           and legal provisions - in particular in the  areas  of  criminal
           law and personal status law - which restrict women's ability  to
           participate in many areas of life on an equal  basis  with  men;
           and which prevent progress in ending harmful practices  such  as
           female genital mutilation, child marriage and polygamy.  Second,
           in addition to the harsh legal environment, women are subject to
           increasingly repressive, conservative religious practices  which
           appear to be promoted by the regime."


   10. The reasoning provided by the  First-tier  Tribunal  fell  below  the
       minimum legal standard demanded by  the  authorities  such  as  those
       cited above. Whilst the Tribunal clearly accepted that the  Appellant
       had established private life here, there was no  attempt  to  balance
       (as opposed to simply itemise) the various factors counting in favour
       and against her expulsion being disproportionate. In particular,  the
       difficulties that her father has had with the regime, the  fact  that
       she only has relatively distant relatives residing in Sudan, and  the
       country  evidence  just  cited  above  which  clearly   indicated   a
       possibility that her private  life  on  return  would  be  much  more
       restricted than in this  country,  were  all  factors  that  required
       detailed consideration, as did her facility in the  English  language
       and economic self-sufficiency. It was not possible  to  discern  from
       the decision below why it was that the First-tier Tribunal considered
       the adverse factors outweighed the positive ones.


   11. As the assessment of proportionality needed to be lawfully conducted,
       a matter which potentially require  further  findings,  I  considered
       this matter  was  one  suitable  for  final  decision  by  the  Upper
       Tribunal. I accordingly adjourned the hearing.


  Findings and reasons: Continuation hearing


   12. It was agreed before me that the legal territory had somewhat altered
       by the time of the June 2016 hearing. The Appellant had now completed
       ten years of continuous residence and so Mr  Fripp,  who  represented
       her at the  further  hearing,  argued  that  she  satisfied  all  the
       requirements  of  the  Rules  and  that  the   Upper   Tribunal   had
       jurisdiction  to  consider  this  matter.  Mr  Bramble,  after   some
       discussion, accepted that in reality the only issue that had  led  to
       the original  long  residence  application's  refusal  had  now  been
       established to his satisfaction. In those circumstances I  can  state
       my reasons for allowing the appeal shortly.


   13. Here the situation is rather more straightforward than  the  scenario
       where the  original  application  was  not  made  on  long  residence
       grounds. In this case  long  residence  was  a  basis  on  which  the
       application was originally made.  So there is no difficulty in taking
       a change of circumstances based on the passage of time  into  account
       given  the  jurisdiction  under  section  85   of   the   Nationality
       Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  to  "consider  evidence  about  any
       matter which ... [is] relevant to  the  substance  of  the  decision,
       including evidence which concerns a matter arising after the date  of
       the decision." A person who qualifies under a different aspect of the
       Rules at the date of decision than that under which  he  applied  may
       succeed on appeal (at  least  so  long  as  it  is  within  the  same
       immigration route): "they are entitled to rely upon  that  change  as
       constituting a 'matter' which was "relevant to the substance  of  the
       decision" and which had arisen 'after the date of the decision'": see
       YZ and LX (effect of s 85(4), 2002 Act) China [2005] UKAIT  00157  at
       [17].


   14. Here the Secretary of State's  refusal  letter  calculated  that  the
       Appellant had been absent from the United Kingdom for 598  days  over
       the relevant qualifying decade preceding her  application,  as  at  1
       August 2014, which was  more  than  the  permitted  eighteen  months.
       However things have moved on. The  first  five  periods  of  absence,
       amounting to 77 days in total, have now dropped out of  the  relevant
       period for assessment now matters are considered as at June 2016, and
       once subtracted from the prior total, there  are  only  521  days  of
       absence, within the tolerated 540 days. There is no evidence  of  any
       further period of absence since then, and the  Appellant's  inability
       to travel since her application was refused  makes  further  journeys
       abroad inherently unlikely.


   15. As absence was the only consideration that was raised on the refusal,
       the appeal accordingly now falls to be allowed.


          Decision:

[pic]
Signed:                                            Date: 24 June 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal  based  on  different  considerations  than  those
prevailing at the date of decision and so I do not make a fee award.


Signed                            Dated 24 June 2016
                                  [pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes

