

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Numbers:    IA/33976/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 4th August 2014                           |On:  10th October 2014       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                MAZLOOM BEGUM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Ahmad, Marks and Marks Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan  date  of  birth  3rd  February
    1950.  She  appeals  with  permission[1]  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Davies[2] to dismiss her appeal against the Respondent's
    decision to refuse to vary her leave to remain and to remove  her  from
    the United Kingdom pursuant  to  s47  of  the  Immigration  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006[3].


 2. The Appellant had entered the UK as a visitor on the 3rd  January  2013
    and on the 26th June 2013 had sought to vary that  status  to  being  a
    dependent relative of her son, a person present and settled in the  UK.
    The Rules do not permit such a switch  and  so  when  the  appeal  came
    before Judge Davies the parties agreed that the only appeal route  open
    to the Appellant was human rights. Her grounds of appeal indicate  that
    she wished to rely on Article 8 ECHR.    Judge  Davies  considered  the
    facts that would have been applicable  had  this  been  an  application
    under the  Rules.  He  found  that  the  Appellant  had  no  particular
    dependency on her adult children in the UK.  He  did  not  accept  that
    there were any difficulties in the Appellant returning to live  in  her
    house in Pakistan and did not find it credible that her  brother,  with
    whom she had previously been living, would suddenly withdraw from  that
    arrangement, going  off  to  live  with  his  children.   The  evidence
    indicated that the Appellant had diabetes and high blood  pressure  but
    she had been paying for her own medication  in  Pakistan  using  rental
    income. On those facts the situation faced by the  Appellant  upon  her
    return to Pakistan fell well short of Article 3. In respect of  Article
    8 there was no reason why the Appellant  could  not  go  back  and  the
    decision was in all respects proportionate; it was  apparent  from  her
    actions that the Appellant had abused the immigration system by  making
    the application for leave to enter  as  a  visitor  when  she  had  not
    intention of returning to Pakistan at the end of her trip.  The  appeal
    was accordingly dismissed.


 3. At paragraphs 12-14 the determination records that  the  Appellant  was
    unrepresented before the First-tier Tribunal.  Her solicitors had faxed
    the Tribunal on the morning of the hearing  explaining  that  they  had
    confused the dates  of  the  hearing  and  had  booked  Counsel  for  a
    different day.  They  were  unable  to  find  alternative  Counsel  and
    requested that the hearing be adjourned. The application  was  refused.
    Judge Davies did not consider that  the  hearing  would  be  unable  to
    fairly proceed. The Appellant was present, and her representatives  had
    known for a long time that this was the hearing date.

 4. It is that refusal to adjourn that is  the  focus  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal. It is submitted that the Appellant was substantially prejudiced
    by the absence of her Counsel. In particular it is said that:

        i) it was not her fault;
       ii) she was denied the opportunity to properly plead her case;
      iii) she was asked very few questions, the hearing only lasting 10-15
           minutes;
       iv) the Tribunal did nothing to assist her in giving her evidence;
        v) she was "scared,  nervous  and  intimidated"  having  no-one  to
           represent her interests;
       vi) her family members who were present were denied  an  opportunity
           to give  evidence  and  explain  the  Appellant's  situation  in
           greater detail;
      vii) the Judge did not have the bundle before him so "could not fully
           appreciate the appellant's dire circumstances"

 5. It is  further  submitted  that  the  determination  fails  to  provide
    adequate reasons why the Appellant's removal is proportionate.




    Error of Law

 6. Rule 21 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure  Rules)  2005
    stipulates  that  the  Tribunal  must  not  adjourn  an   appeal   upon
    application by a party unless it is satisfied that  the  appeal  cannot
    otherwise be justly determined. There are a number of considerations to
    take into account when assessing whether the case can  justly  proceed.
    These include: (i) The importance of the proceedings and  their  likely
    consequences to the party seeking the adjournment; (ii) the risk of the
    party being prejudiced  in  the  conduct  of  the  proceedings  if  the
    application  were  refused;  (iii)  the  risk  of  prejudice  or  other
    disadvantage to the other party if the adjournment were  granted;  (iv)
    the convenience of the court; (v) the interests  of  justice  generally
    and the efficient despatch of Court business; (vi) the desirability  of
    not delaying future litigants by adjourning early and thus leaving  the
    court empty; and (vii) the extent to which the party applying  for  the
    adjournment has been responsible for creating the difficulty which  has
    led to the application[4].


 7. In this case the First-tier Tribunal has expressly considered (vii). It
    is apparent from paragraphs 12-14 that Judge Davies found the blame for
    Counsel's  absence  to   lie   at   the   door   of   the   Appellant's
    representatives. The faxed adjournment request simply states that  they
    have been unable to arrange  alternative  counsel.  It  gives  no  more
    detail. It does not for instance explain why no-one from their  offices
    could  attend,  or  what  chambers  had  been   contacted.   In   those
    circumstances Judge Davies was entitled to  take  a  dim  view  of  the
    reason behind the request.  It is implicit in his reasoning that he has
    given substantial weight to (v),  (vi)  and  possibly  (iii),  and  his
    overall reasoning would suggest that he did not consider  there  to  be
    any significant prejudice to the Appellant  in  proceeding,  since  she
    herself was present: (ii).   It does not appear  that  he  specifically
    addressed how important these proceedings were to  the  Appellant,  but
    that is arguably a matter which was self-evident.

 8. The composite question was whether or not this  appeal  could  only  be
    justly disposed of by adjourning it. As Mr  Harrison  points  out,  the
    answer lay in the substantive matter of the appeal itself. The  grounds
    do not contend that there were any particularly weighty matters of  law
    in this appeal, but submit that the  unrepresented  Appellant  was  not
    able to put forward her evidence as well as she would have done had she
    been represented. In particular it is contended that her family members
    were deprived of an opportunity to speak to  the  "dire  circumstances"
    faced by the Appellant.

 9. I have reviewed the  bundle  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.
    Contrary to the assertion in the grounds the Judge did have this before
    him and did give it his full attention: this is expressly noted in  the
    determination at paragraph 11.   That bundle was served late,  but  the
    Judge had it. It contains detailed statements from the  Appellant,  her
    son,  daughter-in-law  and  letters  from  some  of   the   Appellant's
    grandchildren.  Their evidence inter alia confirms that  the  Appellant
    owns her own home in  Rawalpindi  from  which  she  receives  a  rental
    income, has a number of siblings in Pakistan with whom she has  a  good
    relationships and that although she is unwell she has been managing her
    diabetes and high blood pressure with  medication  that  she  purchases
    herself.  It explains that the Appellant has a number of  close  family
    members in the UK including grandchildren, her son and  daughters.  She
    misses them a lot when she is not here and prior to her last  entry  to
    the UK was feeling "a bit depressed".   The  crux  of  the  Appellant's
    case appears to be that her brother has decided to move  to  live  with
    his family in Islamabad, and that the security situation in Pakistan is
    now such that she cannot be expected to live on her own or to hire help
    in the house as this would be "risky".    The First-tier  Tribunal  has
    taken all of that evidence into account. I am  not  told  what  if  any
    evidence the witnesses could have added to their  detailed  statements,
    nor if there was substantive further information, why that was  not  in
    the witness statements in accordance with directions.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal  was  not  disadvantaged  by  the  absence  of  Counsel,   nor
    materially was the Appellant, since her solicitor had  already  drafted
    these very detailed statements setting out her case.   The  grounds  of
    appeal assert that the hearing was very short. This would indicate that
    there was next to no cross-examination for Counsel to shield her  from.
     She may have felt confused or lacking in confidence on  the  day,  but
    since her case was fully set out in the bundle this did  not  prejudice
    her.  Having had regard to the evidence presented, and to the  grounds,
    I am not satisfied that  there  was  any  material  unfairness  in  the
    refusal to adjourn.  All the relevant facts were considered.


10. In respect of the reasons-challenge in the second ground  of  appeal  I
    find the reasoning in the determination to be adequate.  The  facts  of
    this  case,   taken  at  their  highest,  do  not   amount   to   "dire
    circumstances" as it is expressed in the grounds. This is a 63 year-old
    lady of independent means who has moderate health problems. She is  not
    in need of care. She understandably misses her family, but this is  not
    a sufficiently compelling reason to warrant a grant of leave to  remain
    on human rights grounds.  Her brother may well wish to spend more  time
    with his family but since Islamabad is right next to  Rawalpindi  there
    is no difficulty in maintaining regular contact. There was no objective
    evidence to support the contention that the Appellant would in any  way
    be in danger in Pakistan, in particular no evidential support  for  the
    assertion that the family would be unable to hire domestic help for her
    because this would be "risky".




      Decisions

11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
    of law and it is upheld.







                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         30th September 2014
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Osbourne on the 16th
January 2014
[2] Determination promulgated on the 19th December 2013
[3] Reasons for refusal letter dated 7th August 2013, decision served on
the 9th August 2013.
    [4] See for instance Ex parte Martin [1994] Imm AR 172.


