

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/33494/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14 July 2017                        |   On 24 July 2017                  |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                           MD MOFIZUL HOQUE SIKDER
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr S Karim of Counsel, instructed by SG Law
For the Respondent:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. The appellant challenges the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge  Callender  Smith   dismissing   his   appeal   against   the
         respondent's refusal on 4 March 2015 to grant him indefinite  leave
         to remain as the spouse of a person present and settled here  under
         paragraphs A277A(a) and (b), 284(vi),  A277B,  276ADE,  287(a)(ii),
         (vi), (vii) and 322(10). There was no appearance by or on behalf of
         the appellant at the hearing on 4 November 2016 at Taylor House and
         the judge proceeded in his absence. He dismissed the appeal by  way
         of a determination promulgated on 17 November 2016.


      2. The appellant is a Bangladeshi national born on  2  June  1983  who
         arrived here in September 2009 as a student  with  leave  until  31
         July 2011. Further Tier 4 leave  was  granted  from  February  2012
         until 23 June 2012. In May 2012, he  married  Khadra  Mohamed  Omer
         and, on 4 March 2013, obtained leave to remain on that basis  until
         4 March 2015. When he made his application for indefinite leave  to
         remain through Gull Law Chambers on the last day of his  leave,  it
         was conceded that he had not  taken  the  Life  in  the  UK  and/or
         language tests but his representatives maintained  that  a  booking
         had been made and the results would be sent "as soon as  possible".
         No such evidence has materialised.


      3. The appellant and his representatives were notified of the November
         date of hearing on 29 June 2016. On 5 October 2016,  the  appellant
         changed representatives and on 31 October a written request for  an
         adjournment was made by his new solicitors in the following  terms:
         "...we write to inform you that we  have  been  instructed  by  our
         client that the sponsor of the appellant has went to outside the UK
         to visit her mother  who  was  critically  ill  in  Dubai.  Medical
         evidence and other evidence will be provided once  it  is  received
         from the sponsor...the presence of the sponsor is vital to make the
         decision in appeal to  establish  subsisting  relationship  as  the
         appellant claimed to have received no letter from the  Home  Office
         or his previous representative to  attend  for  the  interview".  A
         letter in respect of Fadumo Handulle dated 13 October  2016  giving
         her an appointment for an annual diabetic  eye  screening  test  at
         Acton Town Medical Centre was attached.



      4. On 2 November 2016, the adjournment application was refused on  the
         basis that there was no evidence to confirm the sponsor's inability
         to attend appeal and that it was for the appellant to organise  the
         evidence of his witness. Both the appellant and his representations
         were informed of this decision.



      5. In his grounds, the appellant maintains that a further  adjournment
         request had been made on the morning of the hearing,  that  he  was
         ill, that his sponsor was still outside the country  and  that  the
         judge ought to have adjourned the hearing.  It  is  argued,  rather
         confusingly, that "as the FTJ had heard the appeal, he should  have
         recused himself and granted an adjournment.  His  consideration  of
         the adjournment request was tainted by the fact that  the  previous
         adjournment application was refused". It was also argued  that  the
         judge had not considered the appellant's illness  when  considering
         whether to adjourn. The grounds further argue that  the  judge  had
         failed to consider material in the appellant's  bundle  which  went
         towards establishing cohabitation and had failed  to  consider  the
         appellant's explanation for not attending the  interview  with  the
         Home Office. It is maintained that the judge's observation that the
         appellant "chose not to attend the hearing" was unfair  given  that
         he had been ill.



      6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Page
         on 22 May 2017 because of the brevity of the decision  and  paucity
         of reasoning. He also observed that there may have been  a  fax  to
         the judge which had not been placed before him.
         The Hearing


      7. At the hearing before me on 14 July 2017, I heard submissions  from
         the parties. The appellant did not attend and nor did the sponsor.


      8. Mr Karim submitted a copy of the adjournment request faxed  to  the
         Tribunal at 9.55 a.m. on the morning of the hearing. He relied on a
         copy of the Upper Tribunal's judgment in MM  (unfairness:  E  &  R)
         Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105. Headnote (2) reads: "A  successful  appeal
         is not dependent on the demonstration of some failing on  the  part
         of the FtT. Thus an error of law may be found to have  occurred  in
         circumstances where some material evidence, through no fault of the
         First-tier   Tribunal,   was   not   considered,   with   resulting
         unfairness".



      9. Mr Karim submitted that the grounds raised two  issues.  First,  an
         adjournment application had been made on the day of the hearing and
         it was procedurally unfair for it not to have been considered.  Had
         the judge seen the fax, he may have  granted  an  adjournment  and,
         even if it had been  refused,  he  may  have  considered  the  non-
         attendance differently. Secondly, there was a lack of  findings  in
         the determination. The judge referred to the appellant's bundle but
         had failed to grapple with the evidence. Crucially he had not taken
         account of the appellant's complaint in  respect  of  his  previous
         representatives who had not informed him of the scheduled  marriage
         interviews. Mr Karim submitted that the bundle contained a  tenancy
         agreement and utility documents in joint names. He  submitted  that
         the judge had misunderstood the medical evidence in respect of  the
         sponsor's mother. The determination contained material  errors  and
         should be set aside.


     10.  Mr  Clarke  responded.  He  submitted  that   the   grounds   were
         misconceived. Good grounds were required to  establish  unfairness.
         The appellant was represented and his  representatives  could  have
         attended, particularly as a previous adjournment request  had  been
         unsuccessful. No evidence  had  been  submitted  of  the  sponsor's
         mother's illness or the appellant's. There was no evidence  at  all
         from the sponsor; a witness statement  could  have  been  obtained.
         The failure to attend interviews was not the only  reason  for  the
         refusal. There was limited evidence relating  to  the  relationship
         and the appellant had not taken the Life in the UK  test.  On  that
         point alone he could not qualify for indefinite  leave  to  remain.
         The appellant had had a year to prepare his appeal and he had  been
         represented  throughout.  The   submitted   evidence   was   wholly
         inadequate. The appeal should be dismissed.



     11. Mr Karim replied. He stated that the appellant had not sat the Life
         in the UK test because his passport was with the  Home  Office.  In
         the absence of that test, he expected to be granted a  further  two
         years of leave. The evidence showed that the appellant  lived  with
         his sponsor and her mother; that was  a  genuine  set-up.  Had  the
         relationship not been genuine, how would the appellant had obtained
         a copy of the sponsor's  passport  and  the  letter  regarding  her
         mother's diabetic  eye  test.   The  representatives  were  without
         instructions to attend because the appellant was ill.


     12. At the conclusion of the hearing, I reserved my determination which
         I now give.


                   Findings and conclusions

     13. Mr Karim's submissions put  forward  two  complaints.  First,  that
         there was procedural unfairness to the appellant by the failure  of
         the judge to consider his second application  for  adjournment.  It
         has to be said that the written grounds made a  slightly  different
         point; they did not appear to argue that the judge had not seen the
         second request for an adjournment, but that he had wrongly  refused
         it. However, Mr Clarke did not seek to take issue with  Mr  Karim's
         clarification  and  so  I  deal  with  the  argument  as   put   in
         submissions.


     14. It seems clear that the application for an adjournment faxed to the
         Tribunal five minutes before the scheduled hearing did not make its
         way to the judge; indeed, a copy was not on the court  file  and  I
         had no sight of the letter until it was submitted by Mr  Karim.  No
         explanation for such a late application was put forward  especially
         as the letter itself appears to suggest  that  the  representatives
         were aware of the appellant's alleged  indisposition  the  previous
         day. What they should have done was to attend the hearing and  make
         an application in person. It is also clear from MM  (op  cit)  that
         procedural unfairness can occur through no fault of the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge. It is certainly not Judge Callender  Smith's  fault
         that he was not given a  copy  of  the  fax  from  the  appellant's
         representatives.



     15.  In  order  to  determine  whether  there  was  unfairness  to  the
         appellant, such as to amount to a material error  of  law,  I  must
         consider the history of the application and  the  appeal.  Plainly,
         there  are  issues  with  non-attendance  and  evidence.  When  the
         appellant made his application for indefinite leave  to  remain  he
         claimed to have made a booking to take his Life in the UK test.  He
         undertook to provide the results to the respondent. They  have  not
         materialised. Mr Karim  maintained  in  his  submissions  that  the
         appellant did not take the test as he did not have his passport but
         that was not the  evidence  of  the  appellant  when  he  made  his
         application. It was his case that the test had been  booked.  There
         was no claim at that stage that  he  had  been  unable  to  make  a
         booking because he did not have his passport. So,  on  that  point,
         alone, the appellant would be  unable  to  qualify  for  indefinite
         leave to remain and  the  challenge  to  the  judge's  decision  is
         academic. Mr Karim submitted that the appellant expected a grant of
         two years' leave in the absence  of  a  test  certificate  but  his
         application was for indefinite leave  to  remain  and  not  further
         limited leave. Any such expectation was misconceived.


     16. It is correct, as Mr Clarke pointed out,  that  the  appellant  had
         over a year to prepare for his appeal hearing. His application  was
         refused on 14 October 2015 and his appeal was  not  heard  until  4
         November 2016. Despite that lengthy  period  for  preparation,  the
         appellant's bundle, received by the Tribunal on  3  November  2016,
         was very modest; it contained the  appellant's  witness  statement,
         copies of his and the sponsor's passport, a copy  of  his  marriage
         certificate, tenancy agreement, a letter of complaint  against  the
         previous representatives, a letter from the NHS in respect  of  the
         sponsor's mother, utility bills, the appellant's bank statement and
         his P60 certificate.  Several  of  these  documents  (such  as  the
         passport copies, marriage certificate and tenancy  agreement)  were
         already before the respondent and  are  contained  in  her  appeals
         bundle. The  fresh  evidence  of  a  subsisting  relationship  was,
         therefore, extremely limited. No explanation has been  offered  for
         why a witness statement from the sponsor  had  not  been  included.
         Given the basis for the  refusal,  one  would  have  expected  such
         evidence to have  been  obtained  and  the  sponsor's  undocumented
         absence from the UK does not excuse or explain  the  lack  of  such
         evidence.


     17. It is important to note that  despite  the  refusal  of  the  first
         adjournment request on  the  basis  that  no  confirmation  of  the
         sponsor's travel abroad had been provided, the  appellant  took  no
         steps to obtain that evidence. Judge Callender Smith had regard  to
         that refusal and noted that the claim that the sponsor's mother was
         seriously ill overseas was at odds with the only  medical  evidence
         adduced: a diabetic eye screening test appointment letter. Mr Karim
         submitted that the judge misunderstood the evidence but  I  do  not
         agree. No explanation as to  why  this  letter  was  submitted  was
         offered by the representatives and, in spite of promises to  adduce
         "medical evidence and other evidence" from the  sponsor,  none  has
         been forthcoming and, even now, some seven months along,  there  is
         no information as to whether the sponsor and her mother are back in
         the UK.



     18. I have had  regard  to  the  contents  of  the  second  adjournment
         application. It is equally as vague as the first. It is  maintained
         the appellant "has got a high fever"  and  that  "medical  evidence
         will be  forwarded  to  the  Tribunal  as  soon  as  the  appellant
         recovers".  No further details are given and no evidence  has  been
         forthcoming. Promises of providing evidence and then not  following
         up on them seem to be a pattern in this case. I also note that  the
         representatives ask that the appeal be determined on the papers  if
         an adjournment is not granted. There is no claim made in  this  fax
         that the evidence of either the appellant or the sponsor is crucial
         for the appeal.



     19. As I noted, earlier, this fax did not make its way to the judge  or
         the Tribunal file. However, given that it was a second  adjournment
         request, that it was unsupported by  any  detailed  information  or
         evidence, that the promised evidence has not been forthcoming  from
         this  or  the   previous   adjournment   request   and   that   the
         representatives suggested a paper determination in the  event  that
         an adjournment was refused, I conclude that there was no procedural
         unfairness to the appellant such as  to  merit  setting  aside  the
         judge's determination. Even if the judge had seen the fax, I cannot
         see how he  could  have  granted  the  adjournment  given  all  the
         circumstances.



     20. The second complaint raised is that the  judge  failed  to  grapple
         with the appellant's evidence. It is certainly the  case  that  the
         findings are very brief and whilst I do not  condone  that  in  any
         way, having carefully considered all the evidence, I cannot see how
         a more detailed analysis of the documentary evidence could have led
         to a different outcome.



     21. There are significant shortcomings  in  the  evidence  and  serious
         problems raised by the documents adduced. Had these been considered
         by the judge, he would have had even more reasons  to  dismiss  the
         appeal. I now set out  some  of  the  difficulties  raised  by  the
         evidence.



     22. The tenancy agreement is dated 10 March 2014 and had  already  been
         submitted to  the  respondent.  It  relates  to  a  property  at  [
                                ] but the address given by the appellant  as
         his residence in his witness statement is [             ]. There is
         no tenancy agreement for that address.



     23. The appellant maintains in his  statement  that  he  had  not  been
         notified  of  the  Home  Office  interview  dates  by  his   former
         representatives and that he only discovered  that  dates  had  been
         arranged when he received the decision  letter.  The  decision  was
         served on 14 October 2015 but his letter of complaint was not  made
         until a year later, on 14 October 2016. There is no explanation for
         why he waited so long to make a complaint or why  he  continued  to
         instruct them during that period and  no  evidence  of  whether  he
         carried out his threat to report the firm to the SRA.  Contrary  to
         what is  argued  in  the  grounds,  the  judge  was  aware  of  the
         explanation offered for non-attendance (at paragraph 19) but he did
         not find this to be credible (at 28).



     24.  The  appellant's  address  on  the  letter  of  complaint  was   [
                        ] but the  letter  to  his  mother-in-law  dated  13
         October 2016 (the day before) was sent to
         [                       ]even though it is  claimed  by  Mr  Karim
        that the appellant, his wife and her mother all live  together.  It
        is of note that the Sinclair House address was  where  the  sponsor
        was living at the time of the marriage in May 2012.  The  Nat  West
        bank statements for May - August 2014 which post-date  the  tenancy
        agreement  by  a  few  months,  give  a  different  address  of   [
         ] as do the appellant's pay slips  for  January  2014  -  February
        2015.  The  P45  for  January  2014   gives   an   address   of   [
            ] The British Gas bills for August 2015 - September 2016 give [
                            ] as the residential address for the appellant,
        Mrs Omer and Faraha Forkun. There is  no  explanation  as  to  this
        third individual is. The sponsor's mother's name is given as Fadumo
        Handulle. It has never been claimed that the appellant  lives  with
        Ms Forkun.
     25.   Whilst   the   appellant   claimed   to   be    living    at    [
          ] when he filed his notice of  appeal  on  26  October  2015,  Sky
         Broadband bills to  his  wife  for  that  period  and  beyond  were
         addressed to [                            ].



     26. Whilst there are bank statement in respect of the  appellant  there
         are none relating to his wife and indeed the only joint evidence of
         cohabitation is  the  tenancy  agreement  which  shows  an  address
         unsupported  by  any  other  documentary   evidence,   and   indeed
         contradicted by it and British Gas bills which bear the name of  an
         unknown individual along with the appellant and Mrs Omer. It cannot
         even  remotely  be  argued  that  this  wholly  unsatisfactory  and
         inadequate   documentary   evidence   establishes   a    subsisting
         relationship.


     27. It is my view, therefore, that even if the judge  had  conducted  a
         fuller assessment of all the documentary evidence,  he  would  have
         arrived at the same conclusions as he did. No material errors  have
         thus been identified and the determination stands.


     28. Decision


     29. The appeal is dismissed.

    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 21 July 2017




