
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Numbers: IA/33363/2014
                                  IA/33364/2014

                                                       IA/33368/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |            Decision & Reasons       |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 16 February 2016                    |            On 29 February 2016      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before


                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                  f l s c s
                                    a s s
                                    m l s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr S Canter, Counsel, instructed by Proficient
                    Immigration Services

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease of reference I will refer to  the  parties  as  they  appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Thus the Secretary  of  State  is  the
    Respondent and the three members of the S  family  are  once  more  the
    Appellants.
 2. The Respondent appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bowes (the judge), promulgated on  10  July  2015,  in  which  he
    allowed  the  Appellants'  appeals  on  the  limited  basis  that   the
    Respondent's decisions were not otherwise in accordance with the law.
 3. The judge's conclusion was based  upon  particular  references  in  the
    Respondent's reasons for refusal letter of  8  August  2014,  in  which
    incorrect terminology was used when assessing the Appellants' Article 8
    claims.  In particular, at paragraph 18 of  the  letter  reference  was
    made to social and cultural "ties" with Brazil.  In fact,  the  correct
    test to be applied under paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration  Rules
    (the Rules) was whether there would be "very significant obstacles"  to
    reintegration into Brazilian society.  Further, at paragraph 20 of  the
    letter reference was made to whether or not the third  Appellant  would
    face "exceptional disruption" to his life if he was removed to  Brazil:
    the correct question was whether departure would be reasonable.  It was
    the judge's view that these matters rendered the decision under  appeal
    unlawful, and he therefore allowed the appeal on a limited  basis.   No
    findings of fact were made.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. The Respondent sought permission to appeal.   Her  grounds  were  based
    upon the argument that notwithstanding the incorrect  terminology  used
    in the reasons for refusal letter the judge ought to have gone  on  and
    assessed the merits of the appeals using the correct legal tests.
 5. In granting permission  to  appeal  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  made
    reference to the decision in  CP  (Dominica)  [2006]  UKAIT  00040  and
    commented that the judge should have gone on to determine  the  appeals
    on their merits in light of the correct terminology of  the  applicable
    Rules.  The grant of permission is dated 17 November 2015.

    The hearing before me


 6. At the outset of the hearing Mr Canter provided me  with  his  rule  24
    response.  He also informed me that before the judge he  had  submitted
    that the merits of the appeals should have been  dealt  with,  findings
    made, and that the appeals should  have  been  allowed  outright  under
    Article 8.  The 'not in accordance with the law' point was,  Mr  Canter
    informed me, only his fallback position.
 7. In the circumstances, I did not call upon Ms Willocks-Briscoe  to  make
    submissions.

    Decision on Error of Law

 8. In the circumstances of these appeals I did not find  it  necessary  to
    call upon Ms Willocks-Briscoe for submissions.  In my  view  there  are
    clear material errors of law in the judge's decision.
 9. In CP (Dominica) it was stated that the usual course of events where an
    incorrect Rule has been applied to an application was for the judge  to
    go on and consider the correct Rule subject to issues of fairness and a
    potential lack of relevant evidence.  Allowing an appeal on the limited
    basis that  the  matter  could  not  be  determined  substantively  was
    regarded as being an unusual route to take.
10. In the case before me the correct  Rule  was  in  fact  stated  in  the
    reasons for refusal letter (see page 5).  The error in terminology lies
    only in paragraph 18 where reference is made to  "social  and  cultural
    ties".  It was in my view obvious to all concerned  that  the  relevant
    test was indeed "very significant obstacles" and  not  "ties".   It  is
    clear that the Appellants approached the appeal  on  a  correct  basis.
    They presented evidence, and indeed oral  evidence  was  taken  by  the
    judge.  There  was  no  prejudice  caused  to  the  Appellants  by  the
    infelicitous use of the word "ties" in paragraph 18 of the letter.  The
    Appellants had come prepared with relevant evidence on relevant issues.
     Further, there is no reasoning by the judge as to why the approach set
    out in CP (Dominica) was not to have been followed (in other words that
    the unusual route of allowing on a limited basis was to be taken).
11. In short, the judge was not entitled to conclude as he did, in the  way
    that he did.
12. The same applies to the issue arising from paragraph 20 of the  reasons
    for  refusal  letter.   Although  there  is  no  test  of  "exceptional
    disruption", the reasons for refusal  letter  does  make  reference  to
    reasonableness at paragraph 24 and deals with the issue of education at
    paragraphs 22 and 23. Once again,  it  was  obvious  to  all  what  the
    appropriate provision of the Rules was, what the correct test was to be
    applied, and  that  one  of  the  live  issues  related  to  the  third
    Appellant's educational prospects on return to Brazil. Again, there was
    no prejudice to anyone, the evidence was before the judge, and there is
    no reasoning as to why he proceeded as he did.
13. In respect of paragraph 23, the reference to the production of  further
    evidence is, in my view, an afterthought by the judge following on from
    his conclusion that he was going to allow the appeals  on  the  limited
    basis that he did.  What he is not saying there is that he  was  simply
    unable to reach a decision on the merits through lack of evidence.
14. For these reasons I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
15. I would just add one observation. It is unsurprising that Mr Canter had
    asked the judge to deal with the appeals substantively:  that  approach
    is consistent with  CP  (Dominica)  and  the  interests  of  appellants
    obtaining final judicial decisions  expeditiously  (particularly  where
    children are concerned). It is  unfortunate  that  the  judge  did  not
    follow this course and thus avoid the errors of law outlined above.  It
    is also unfortunate that he failed to state in his decision that he had
    been asked, in the first instance, to consider  the  appeals  on  their
    merits.

    Disposal

16. Although I considered retaining these appeals in the Upper Tribunal,  I
    have decided to remit them all to the First-tier  Tribunal  bearing  in
    mind paragraph 7 of the relevant  Practice  Statement.   In  this  case
    there have been no findings of fact whatsoever and there is no  overall
    agreement as to the factual basis upon which these  appeals  should  be
    decided.
17. In light of this and the probable need for additional evidence relating
    to the third Appellant, it is appropriate to remit.

18. I issue relevant directions below.




    Anonymity

19. The First-tier Tribunal made a direction and I maintain it in order  to
    protect the identity of the third Appellant.




    Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions to the parties

    1. These appeals are  all  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
       complete rehearing;


    2. The issues to be considered at the remitted hearing concern  Article
       8 both within and without the Immigration Rules. In  particular,  it
       is accepted  by  the  Respondent  that  at  the  date  the  relevant
       applications were made, the third Appellant had been in  the  United
       Kingdom for seven years. Therefore, paragraph 276ADE(iv) is  a  live
       issue;

    3. Any further evidence relied upon shall be filed with the  First-tier
       Tribunal and served upon the other party no later than 14 days prior
       to the hearing of the remitted appeals;

    4. The Appellants are to file with the First-tier  Tribunal  and  serve
       upon the Respondent no later than 14 days prior to  the  hearing  of
       the remitted  appeals  a  skeleton  argument  setting  out  relevant
       issues, with reference to evidence and case-law;

    5. Both parties shall comply with any other directions  issued  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal.


Directions to Administration

    1. The appeals are all remitted and shall be heard at the Hatton  Cross
       hearing centre on a date to be fixed by that centre;


    2. The remitted appeals shall be reheard by First-tier Tribunal Judge N
       Bowes;

    3. A Portuguese interpreter is required;

    4. There is a time estimate of 2 hours for the hearing.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date: 25 February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor







