
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33714/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 2nd December 2015                 |On 5th January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      MRS SAHUNTHALADEVI MAHANDRANATHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss C Bayati, Counsel, instructed by Jein
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the Secretary of State is the Appellant in these proceedings I
    refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a national of Sri  Lanka,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department dated 12th August 2014 refusing the Appellant's  application
    for leave to remain under paragraph 51 of the Immigration Rules and for
    an extension of stay as a visitor for private medical treatment.    The
    Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Eldridge allowed the Appellant's appeal.  The Secretary of  State
    appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant entered the  UK  on
    19th November 2013 on a 180 day multi-visit visa  valid  until  12  May
    2014.  On 10th May 2014 she applied  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    further leave to remain. The application was based on her physical  and
    mental health difficulties and the fact that she was living in  the  UK
    and being maintained by her daughter and son-in-law who  were  covering
    all of her medical expenses.

 4. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant and from her  daughter  and
    from her son-in-law.  The Secretary of State was not represented at the
    hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  judge  noted  that  the
    Appellant did not rely upon any provisions of the Immigration Rules and
    considered the appeal on the basis of Article 8 of the ECHR.  The judge
    found that the Appellant would meet the provisions of Section EC-DR  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules which applies to applications  for
    entry clearance from adult dependant relatives.  In particular he found
    that the Appellant would meet E-ECDR 2.4 as someone requiring  personal
    care and she probably now needs long term care. He found that she meets
    E-ECDR2.5 in that she had shown that  she  is  unable,  even  with  the
    financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the required level of care  in
    Sri Lanka. He found "that given no relative can do  so  I  consider  it
    unlikely that a stranger, even for sensible payment, could provide  the
    total care (including emotional support) needed" [22].  The judge  went
    on to find that the Appellant would meet the requirements of E-ECDR 3.2
    and E-ILRDR.1.2. The judge considered Section 117B  of  the  2002  Act.
    The judge concluded "this is a  case  in  which  there  are  compelling
    circumstances to justify the conclusion that removal  breaches  Article
    8".  The judge therefore allowed the appeal  under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.

 5. In her grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal the Secretary  of  State
    firstly contends that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred  in  that  it
    was unclear from the evidence whether or not the Appellant  would  meet
    the requirements in relation to an adult  dependent  relative.   It  is
    contended that the judge found that GP visits are not  being  paid  for
    and therefore it is contended the  Appellant  is  dependent  on  public
    funds.  It is contended that the judge erred in that he found  that  he
    had no doubt that the families would  give  the  required  undertakings
    required in E-ECDR3.2 but it was  submitted  that  there  was  no  such
    evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  to  make  this  finding.  The
    second ground contends that there was no  evidence  to  show  that  the
    Appellant would meet the requirements of Appendix FM-SE in relation  to
    adult dependent relatives and the Secretary of State relied on the case
    of SSHD v SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ  387  [52-53].   It  is
    thirdly submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  fully
    engage with the public interest factors contained within the Rules when
    considering proportionality and the Secretary of State  relied  on  the
    case of PG (USA) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 118.

 6. In granting permission to appeal Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Rimington
    noted that, although the judge found that the Appellant was financially
    independent, there was extensive evidence of NHS medical  treatment  at
    tax payers' expense within the UK and it was arguable  that  the  judge
    had not engaged appropriately with the public interest factors.

 7. A Rule 24 response was submitted on behalf of the Appellant.   In  that
    Rule 24 response it is submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    conclusion that the family would providing  the  necessary  undertaking
    was not based on assumption and it was pointed out  that  in  fact  the
    necessary undertaking was provided with the application (albeit that it
    would have been for the duration of a shorter period as the application
    was made for a limited period).  It is further contended  that  in  the
    witness statements of the Appellant's  daughter  and  her  son  it  was
    expressly  stated  that  the  Appellant   would   be   maintained   and
    accommodated without recourse to public funds and  that  the  necessary
    undertakings would be provided.  It is  therefore  submitted  that  the
    Secretary of State's contention that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    conclusion was based upon assumptions and that evidence  was  factually
    incorrect.

 8. In terms of public funds, it is  contended  that  the  judge  correctly
    noted that GP visits are not being paid for but the judge had regard to
    the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was  paying  for  hospital  treatment,
    counselling and prescriptions as evidenced  in  both  the  Home  Office
    bundle and in the Appellant's bundle.  It is further submitted that the
    judge made clear findings of fact on  the  evidence  before  him,  both
    documentary and oral, having had the benefit of a  considerable  amount
    of medical evidence in relation to the Appellant's physical and  mental
    health. The judge had also considered two reports from  an  independent
    social worker.   It is submitted that the  judge  expressly  considered
    whether the Appellant would satisfy  the  Rules  if  she  returned  and
    applied for entry clearance and that the conclusions  that  the  family
    would provide the necessary undertakings was one  open  to  him  having
    regard to the evidence.

 9. At the hearing before me Miss Willocks-Briscoe submitted that the judge
    had not taken into account factors  in  relation  to  the  respondent's
    legitimate aim.  In relation to the Immigration  Rules  Miss  Willocks-
    Briscoe submitted that paragraph 51 of the Rules was  initially  before
    the judge and that it was accepted and noted by the judge at  paragraph
    5  of  the  determination  that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet   the
    requirements of that paragraph. The  judge  was  therefore  obliged  to
    consider that  matter  when  considering  the  appeal  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules and that should have carried some weight in  relation
    to the proportionality assessment.  She submitted that the  judge  made
    reference to the fact that the Appellant would succeed under the  adult
    dependent relative route but had not engaged with any of  the  evidence
    in relation to that issue.

10. In any event she submitted that an application as  an  adult  dependent
    relative can only be made outside the country.  In relation to  the  GP
    visits, she submitted that the judge did not engage with the  issue  as
    to whether GP visits had been  paid for and that this  shows  that  the
    balancing exercise was accordingly skewed n favour of the Appellant.

11. Miss Bayati submitted  that  when  the  application  was  made  it  was
    originally for further limited leave to remain and that was  why  there
    was a reference to paragraph 51.  However she  submitted  that  it  was
    clear in the Grounds of Appeal and at the hearing before the First-tier
    Tribunal that that is not how the case was  being  put.  The  case  was
    actually put in terms of Article 8 and proceeded on the basis the Rules
    around adult dependent relatives rather  than  on  paragraph  51.   She
    submitted that the only reason the Appellant could  not  succeed  under
    the adult dependent relatives provisions is because it is not  possible
    to switch to that status in-country and it requires an out  of  country
    application.  She submitted that the judge took the correct approach in
    this case in that he considered the evidence, made  clear  findings  of
    fact, accepted the medical evidence and the social  worker's  evidence,
    made clear findings that the Appellant would be unable  to  look  after
    herself and that the required support of the family here would  not  be
    available in Sri Lanka.  She submitted that the judge found  there  was
    no additional recourse to public funds and that the  judge  found  that
    the GP was not being paid for.  She submitted that the judge looked  at
    the adult dependent relative provisions and reached the view that those
    requirements were met.

12. Ms Bayati submitted that the judge then went on to look  at  Article  8
    and concluded there would be interference  to  the  family  life.   The
    judge accepted that the decision was lawful and  justified.  The  judge
    went on to consider proportionality and considered Section 117B in that
    context.  The judge said why, despite the public interest,  there  were
    compelling circumstances in this  case  why  the  Appellant  could  not
    return to Sri Lanka to make an entry clearance application  [26].   She
    submitted that when the  determination  is  looked  at  the  judge  has
    clearly adopted the correct approach.  She submitted there was evidence
    before the Tribunal that  counselling  and  hospital  appointments  and
    medication were all paid for but that GP visits were not paid for.  She
    submitted that her instructions were that the oral evidence before  the
    judge was that the GP had not billed the family for the visits and that
    that is a matter of discretion for GPs.   She  submitted  that  it  was
    clear from the other medical evidence that the Appellant has  paid  for
    her treatment and the Appellant cannot be criticised in relation to the
    GP's failure to bill her.  She submitted therefore that  permission  to
    appeal was granted on  the  basis  of  a  misunderstanding  as  to  the
    evidence before the judge.

13. Miss  Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  that  the  judge  cherry-picked  one
    element of  the  Rules  but  did  not  consider  the  entirety  of  the
    provisions of the adult dependent  relative  Rules.   However,  when  I
    asked her what other elements of the provisions in  relation  to  adult
    dependent relatives should have been considered she was unable to point
    those out. She submitted  that  the  judge  said  that  there  were  no
    relatives and that caring could not take place in Sri  Lanka  but  that
    the judge had no documentary evidence before him  in  relation  to  the
    provision of care in Sri Lanka.  This was just a mere assertion of  the
    family and that evidence would have an element of bias.  She  submitted
    further that the judge did not consider the precarious  nature  of  the
    Appellant's ties in the UK when they were created.  She submitted  that
    the judge made no consideration of  the  case  of  GS  in  relation  to
    medical grounds.

14. Miss Bayati objected that the additional matters referred  to  by  Miss
    Willocks-Briscoe in her reply were not in the grounds.  Miss  Willocks-
    Briscoe submitted that these come under ground 3  which  contends  that
    the judge failed to properly engage with the public interest.   I  gave
    Miss Bayati the opportunity to respond to the new matters  raised.  She
    objected to these further grounds being relied on but in any event  she
    submitted that the grounds had been addressed and  that  the  case  had
    been put to the First-tier Tribunal Judge on the basis  of  Articles  3
    and 8 and that the judge  made  clear  determinations  in  relation  to
    Article 8.  In relation to the GS case she submitted that  that  was  a
    private life case involving health where it was recognised that Article
    8 would not resolve the issue if an Appellant had failed under  Article
    3 unless the Appellant had family life and the  medical  treatment  was
    considered as a part of the proportionality  exercise.   She  submitted
    that this is the case in this appeal where this Appellant has a case of
    family life and dependency. She submitted that the judge considered all
    factors relevant in relation to proportionality.   She  submitted  that
    the judge did  conclude  that  the  Appellant  required  care  and  did
    consider whether care could be provided in Sri Lanka in the context  of
    the Appellant's physical and mental health needs.

Error of Law

15. I have considered all of the submissions made by both parties  and  all
    of the material before me. I am satisfied that the judge made no  error
    of law in this decision.  The evidence before the judge was that the GP
    visits were not being paid for but prescriptions,  her  hospitalisation
    and counselling were all  being  funded  by  the  family  [23].   I  am
    satisfied that the judge had sufficient evidence to make  this  finding
    and also I accept Miss Bayati's submission, which was not  disputed  by
    Miss Willocks-Briscoe, that there was evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge that the GP had not billed the family  for  visits.   In
    these circumstances the judge's conclusion was open to him and in these
    circumstances it was open to the judge to conclude on the basis of  all
    of the evidence that the Appellant is financially independent in  terms
    of Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

16. The judge found at paragraph 23 that he  had  no  doubt  that  the  two
    families in the UK would give the required undertakings  as  to  future
    financial requirements for the five year period mentioned in E-ECDR3.2.
    I am satisfied on the basis of  the  evidence  before  him  as  to  the
    undertakings already given by the  Appellant's  son  and  daughter  and
    their clear intentions as expressed in the evidence  before  the  judge
    that this was a finding open to  the  judge  and  therefore  a  finding
    relevant  to  Section  117B   that   the   Appellant   is   financially
    independent[25].

17. I am therefore satisfied that the judge made no error in terms  of  the
    assessment of the Appellant's financial independence and  in  terms  of
    this element of the public interest requirements.

18. The judge considered the provisions of  Appendix  FM   in  relation  to
    adult dependent relatives.  I am satisfied  that  the  judge  undertook
    this exercise properly. Although Miss Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  that
    the judge had not engaged with all elements of Appendix FM in  relation
    to adult dependent relative she was unable to point to  any  particular
    aspect that the judge had omitted.  I accept the submission put forward
    by Miss Bayati that the findings in paragraph 22 made by the  judge  in
    relation to the availability of care in Sri Lanka were open to  him  on
    the evidence. It was open to the judge  to  conclude  that  appropriate
    care,  including  the  emotional  support  required  in  light  of  the
    Appellant's mental health issues, could not be provided in  Sri  Lanka.
    in these circumstances I am  satisfied  that  the  judge  did  properly
    consider the provisions of Appendix  FM   which  were  the  appropriate
    Immigration Rules in this case in  his  assessment  of  proportionality
    under Article 8.

19. In the Grounds of Appeal the Secretary of State relied on the  case  of
    PG (USA).  However I note that that  was  in  the  context  of  migrant
    workers and the family of migrant workers temporarily living in the UK.
     In this case the Appellant's  daughter  is  British  and  her  son  is
    settled in the UK and I am satisfied that the judge took  into  account
    all of the circumstances of the Appellant and of her son  and  daughter
    in assessing proportionality in this case.

20. I  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  engage  with  all
    appropriate issues in this case. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  looked
    at the relevant Immigration Rules in this  case,  the  adult  dependent
    relative provision of Appendix FM, the judge considered Section 117B of
    the 2002 Act and the judge  considered  all  of  the  evidence  in  the
    context of the proportionality assessment under Article 8.

21. I am satisfied that the judge made  a  decision  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence and the grounds disclose no material error of law.

Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contains  no  material
    error of law.  The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  shall
    stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 22 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


Signed   Date: 22 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
