
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33382/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 24th April 2015                           |On 6th May 2015               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                           MR paul olumese akhigbe
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Akindele, Solicitor instructed by A & A
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria whose date of birth  is  recorded
    as  24th  September  1985.   On  or  about  11th  April  2014  he  made
    application for  a  Residence  Card  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as confirmation of a right to reside in
    the United Kingdom.  The basis of the application was  that  his  wife,
    Patricia Lemos, a Portuguese citizen, was exercising treaty  rights  in
    the United Kingdom.

 2. On 8th August 2014 a decision was made to refuse the  application.   In
    refusing the application the Secretary of State was not satisfied  that
    it had been established that the Sponsor was exercising  treaty  rights
    as contended for.  A number of issues were taken in  the  refusal.   It
    had been the Appellant's case that his wife was working for a  company,
    Montago Management Limited.  The  Respondent  said,  however,  that  an
    attempt had been made to contact that  company,  without  success.   In
    those circumstances it had not been possible for the Secretary of State
    to establish that the company was genuine.   Additionally,  wage  slips
    provided were photocopies whereas the Secretary of State had made plain
    that only original documents would be accepted.

 3. The Appellant appealed and on 19th December 2014 the appeal, which  was
    to be dealt with as a paper appeal, came before Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Freer.  The Appellant  through  his  solicitors  provided  the
    Tribunal with various supporting  documents  and  a  witness  statement
    purporting to be from the Sponsor.  That witness statement is dated 3rd
    November 2014.  Judge Freer  noted  the  various  documents  that  were
    placed before him and made reference to them  at  paragraph  9  of  the
    Decision  and  Reasons.   He  set  out  the  law  which  directed   his
    considerations and noted what the Appellant had to say at paragraph 17,
    namely that electronic payslips were being used, explaining  why  there
    were no original documents and asserting also that no  phone  call  was
    made to the company, though how it was established  that  no  call  had
    been made, I do not know. Nevertheless that was the  case  advanced  by
    the Appellant.

 4. Significantly, in making findings the judge said at paragraph 19:

         "(i) The Appellant's wife has not given any oral evidence so  I  do
             not know if she is still working or if she still supports  the
             appeal; her witness statement is dated 3 November 2014 but she
             has not appeared before me to verify it or to adopt it as  her
             evidence-in-chief."

 5. The issue in relation to the phone calls was in fact  resolved  in  the
    Appellant's favour and I note what the judge had to  say  at  paragraph
    21.

 6. As to the veracity of the Appellant's contention that the company truly
    existed, at paragraph 22 of the Decision and Reasons Judge Freer said:

         "If the company is genuine, which  precursor  point  has  not  been
         shown, it also has to  be  shown  that  it  genuinely  employs  the
         partner of the Appellant.  Documents can  be  unreliable.   In  the
         absence of any oral evidence or any document  verification  report,
         it must be said that neither Appellant  nor  Respondent  have  done
         everything possible to resolve the issues.  In an  oral  hearing  I
         could  possibly  have  heard  evidence  from  co-workers   of   the
         Appellant's wife that they have not even put in witness statements;
         there is simply  an  HR  Department  letter,  which  has  not  been
         verified."

 7. Judge Freer then went on to consider the documentary evidence  provided
    to him notably bank statements and payslips and found  that  they  were
    not actually supportive of the Appellant's claim and  went  on  to  say
    that the documents that had been submitted, being copies,  were  to  be
    given no weight.  I refer to paragraph 24 of the Decision and again  at
    paragraph 27. Judge Freer found that there was no  evidence  of  weight
    before him of any money from the company entering  either  of  the  two
    accounts in the name of the Sponsor. It has to be said that there was a
    basis for that finding from the documentary evidence but the  issue  is
    whether the judge was entitled to make  the  finding  in  isolation  of
    other evidence.

 8. Not content with the decision to  refuse  the  application,  by  Notice
    dated 23rd January 2015 the Appellant sought permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  A number of grounds were relied upon but when  the
    matter came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Kelly  he  granted
    permission solely in respect of the manner in which Judge Freer treated
    the evidence of the Appellant's wife.  Thus the matter comes before me.



 9. At the outset I drew the attention of the parties to the case  of  Shen
    (paper  appeals;  proving  dishonesty)  [2014]  UKUT  00236  (IAC).   I
    appreciate that that case, in which I had a passing interest,  was  not
    one such as the instant case, in that in the case  of  Shen  dishonesty
    was very much at large.  Nevertheless, the case of Shen does assist  in
    what a judge might properly do, or what is open to a judge  to  do,  in
    circumstances where he holds significant doubts about  certain  aspects
    of the evidence.  At paragraph 27 in the case of Shen Green J said:

         "In our view if the judge entertained doubts as to the  Appellant's
         story, he should have sought to investigate further.  He could have
         exercised the powers that he has pursuant to Rules 45 and/or 51  of
         the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  [now
         Rules to be found at Rule 4 of the 2014  Rules],  to  require,  for
         example, the Appellant to adduce supporting  documentary  evidence,
         or the Secretary of State for the Home Department to  comment  upon
         the Appellant's evidence and adduce such evidence as the  Secretary
         of State for the Home Department considered appropriate  to  refute
         the Appellant's evidence.  In extremis the judge  could  remit  the
         matter for oral hearing.  A further alternative would have been for
         the judge to have allowed the  appeal  but  to  have  remitted  the
         matter to the Secretary of State for the Home Department to be  re-
         taken, this time with a proper focus upon the  evidence,  with  the
         Appellant's explanations and evidence now clearly upon  the  table,
         and having regard to the dishonesty test."

10. As I have said, I recognise that the instant  appeal  is  not  so  much
    concerned with the issue of dishonesty in that this is not  a  case  in
    which the Secretary of State bears a burden, though I have  to  say  in
    reading the decision of Judge Freer it does read  as  if  he  certainly
    entertained  some  doubts  about  the  veracity   not   only   of   the
    documentation, but the  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor, for it is not otherwise explicable  why  he  dealt  with  that
    issue at all since it was not one that was raised by the  Secretary  of
    State.  Nevertheless, he recognised at paragraph 19(ii) that:

         "Unless there is shown to be a divorce, provided the  marriage  was
         genuine when contracted, it is still to be treated as  such,  as  a
         matter of law."

11. Ms Isherwood valiantly sought to maintain the decision  of  the  judge.
    She took me to the matters  dealt  with  by  him  at  paragraph  23  in
    particular and to  the  various  documents  to  which  the  judge  made
    reference.  She pointed to the fact that one of the payslips  suggested
    that there had been payment to a bank account yet  the  bank  statement
    produced by the Appellant did not show a corresponding entry.  There is
    some force in the submissions made by Ms Isherwod and it  may  be  that
    notwithstanding the material error of law I find,  on the re-making and
    re-visiting of this appeal still the Appellant will be unsuccessful but
    in my judgment there has been significant unfairness in the  manner  in
    which the judge approached the evidence.

12. The Appellant's wife purported to submit a statement.   I  deliberately
    make no finding as to whether that witness statement is hers.  That  is
    a matter that will have to be determined in the re-making, but  if  the
    judge was not going to accept the witness  statement  as  hers  he  was
    obliged to give reasons.  Absent any sufficient basis for rejecting  it
    some weight, however small, was attributable to  it.   If  a  judge  in
    receipt of witness statements in a paper  appeal  gives  no  weight  to
    those witness statements it is difficult to see how any Appellant in  a
    paper appeal could ever succeed.  An Appellant might  submit  documents
    but one reasonably might expect a witness  statement,  albeit  a  short
    witness statement, to accompany the documents to explain what they are.
     Yet it would seem by the approach of this judge that no  weight  would
    be given to the witness statement.  It  follows  that  no  weight  then
    should be given to the documents and so in  every  case  the  Appellant
    would be unable to succeed.

13. In this case the Sponsor's witness statement was to the effect that she
    was working at Montago Management Limited and still working there.  She
    said that she was self-employed and produced a P60 confirming  earnings
    with that company as well as a letter from Human  Resources  confirming
    that payslips were properly issued to her.  The judge  was  obliged  to
    deal with that witness statement.  He could not simply set  it  to  one
    side and give it no weight.

14. Further there is an inconsistency in the approach of the judge  because
    he then goes on to criticise the Appellant in the manner  in  which  he
    has presented his case by not putting in witness statements from others
    at the company.  If the judge were going to attach no weight to witness
    statements that were not verified by the  presence  of  the  makers  of
    those witness statements then the criticism is of no  worth.   What  he
    said was:

         "In an oral hearing I could possibly have heard evidence  from  co-
         workers of the Appellant's wife that  they  had  not  even  put  in
         witness statements, there is simply an HR department letter,  which
         has not been verified."

15. That HR department letter was another document to which it  would  seem
    the judge attached no weight.

16. This determination simply cannot stand.  I have considered  whether  it
    is possible to re-make it but it seems to me it is  beyond  redemption.
    This is a case that will need to be made again.



Directions

17. Given that this judge has formed  a  clear  view  that  matters  cannot
    adequately be resolved on paper and that the documents which have  thus
    far been submitted require further examination, and  so  as  to  ensure
    that this case does not fall yet again to be considered  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis there has not been a full  consideration  of  all
    matters, I direct in remitting this matter to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that there shall be an oral hearing.  It will be a matter of course for
    the Appellant whether or not he now produces for cross-examination  his
    spouse and those co-workers.  If he does not then it will  be  open  to
    the  Tribunal  to  draw  such  inferences  as  it  thinks  appropriate.
    Additionally, the Appellant has now  been  put  on  notice  as  to  the
    inadequacy of the documentary evidence and  it  will  be  open  to  the
    Appellant, in the re-making to  produce  such  evidence  as  is  deemed
    necessary in order for the Appellant, upon  whom  the  burden  lies  to
    discharge it.

18. All matters remain at large.

19. The appeal is remitted to Birmingham.

20. Portuguese interpreter is required.

21. For the purpose of listing the Appellant's solicitors shall  within  21
    days inform the Resident Judge at  Birmingham,  and  the  Secretary  of
    State of the names of all witnesses to be called and  in  the  case  of
    none UK witnesses any applicable HO reference number or numbers.

Notice of Decision

22. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.  The decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal is set aside.  The matter is now remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be heard by way of oral hearing, by a judge other than
    Judge Freer, at which hearing all matters will be at large.



Signed        Date 24th April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

