
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33617/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 December 2016                  |On 13 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Lisa Merline morgan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Iengar, Counsel instructed by Divine Legal
Practice


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (hereafter the claimant) is a citizen of Jamaica.  On  6
    October I found that there had been a material legal error on the  part
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ferguson  who  on  11  November  2015  had
    allowed her appeal under the Immigration Rules and outside the Rules on
    Article 8 grounds.   However,  expressly  preserving  Judge  Ferguson's
    findings of fact, I noted that one of the essential requirements to  be
    considered when the decision was re-made was  whether  there  are  very
    significant obstacles to the claimant's reintegration  in  Jamaica  and
    the evidence and submissions on that up to that point were insufficient
    for me to reach a considered view.

2.   At the resumed hearing before  me  I  heard  evidence  first  from  the
    claimant's daughter, Miss Powell.  She said that she had been  back  to
    Jamaica for a visit in July-August 2016.  She had seen her brother  the
    same day she was due to come back to the UK.  He had explained  to  her
    that there had been trouble at his property and men who  lived  in  the
    area had destroyed his home.  He  had  fled  to  Haiti  to  escape  the
    trouble.  His wife and children had stayed behind with her (his wife's)
    mother.  Miss Powell said she was no longer in contact with him.   Miss
    Powell said that she had gone to Jamaica to visit her aunt Gloria  (her
    mother's sister) and her family.  Miss Powell said  that  the  property
    her brother had lived in before it was destroyed was  family  property,
    having been owned by her late father.  Aunt Gloria lived about an  hour
    and ten minutes away  from  the  property.   Aunt  Gloria's  house  was
    already overcrowded; the claimant would not be able to live there.

3.   I heard submissions from the representatives.

4.   Mr Bramble said that as a result of my error of  law  decision  it  was
    clear that the claimant had to show she met  the  requirements  of  the
    post-9 July 2012 Rules.  It was not in dispute that the claimant  could
    not meet the partner Rules, not least  because  as  an  overstayer  she
    could not fulfil the suitability requirements.  As regards the  private
    life requirements contained in paragraph 276ADE, she could only succeed
    if able to show there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
    reintegration in Jamaica.  As  regard  her  ties  in  the  UK,  it  was
    difficult to see these as constituting  family  life  ties  within  the
    meaning of Article 8, but he accepted they were important relationships
    within the private life context: she had her  daughter  and  grandchild
    and also her partner and she had lived in the UK some eighteen years or
    so.  He was prepared to accept as credible the evidence given today  by
    the Miss Powell and the claimant regarding her son's recent  flight  to
    Haiti, but it still remained that the claimant had  family  in  Jamaica
    and was in contact with them.  As regards  her  relationship  with  her
    partner in the UK, the FtT judge recorded her  partner's  'speculation'
    that he could possibly go to live with the claimant in Jamaica, but  in
    any event their relationship could be maintained by him visiting and by
    electronic means.  Her relationship with her partner had been formed at
    a time when her immigration status was precarious.  The claimant has  a
    poor immigration history.

5.    Ms  Iengar  submitted  that  Mr  Bramble  had   put   the   claimant's
    relationship with her family  in  Jamaica  too  highly.   She  had  two
    sisters in Jamaica, both were unwell and she had not  been  to  Jamaica
    for over eighteen years.  It was a country from which she had  left  to
    escape an abusive relationship.  Her son's flight to Haiti meant he and
    his family were  not  there  to  support  the  claimant.   She  had  no
    significant family contacts in Jamaica and no-one in her  family  could
    accommodate  or  support  her.   The  family  property  occupied  until
    recently by her son had been destroyed and was likely only in any event
    to be co-owned by her as a three-way inheritance with her two  sisters.
    The claimant was  a  49  year  old  woman  who  had  not  obtained  any
    qualifications in the UK, had not worked in Jamaica before she left and
    had poor prospects of finding work in Jamaica and she was at real  risk
    of destitution.  The claimant had surely demonstrated that there  would
    be very significant obstacles to her reintegration.

6.   As regards the claimant's circumstances in the  context  of  Article  8
    outside the Rules, Ms Iengar  took  issue  with  Mr  Bramble  seemingly
    questioning that the claimant enjoyed a family life within the means of
    Article 8(1) ECHR.  She pointed out that one of the preserved  findings
    of fact was that she enjoyed a "settled family life in the UK" ([38] of
    the FtT judge's decision).  Whilst she  did  have  a  poor  immigration
    history as a long-term overstayer, the SSHD had not taken any steps  to
    remove her and, so far from any non-compliant behaviour,  the  claimant
    had taken repeated steps to try and regularise her stay.  She had never
    been dependent on public funds.  She was dependent on financial support
    from her partner.  It was incorrect of  Mr  Bramble  to  refer  to  the
    judge's note that the claimant's partner was speculative about  joining
    her in Jamaica if she was removed.  His witness statement made clear at
    paragraph 11 that he  could  not  leave  the  UK  as  he  had  a  well-
    established restaurant business.  He was the claimant's  sole  provider
    so if he had to abandon his business he would not be  able  to  support
    her.  It was unreasonable  to  expect  the  couple  to  maintain  their
    relationship by visits and Skype.  She had a  very  close  relationship
    with her daughter and was involved in the care of her granddaughter  on
    a daily basis.

My Assessment

7.   There is no real dispute about the facts in  this  case.  A  number  of
    findings of fact were expressly preserved by me at  the  error  of  law
    hearing and Mr Bramble has  not  challenged  the  oral  evidence  given
    before me at the resumed hearing.  If  my  decision  were  dictated  by
    sympathy I would allow the claimant's appeal, but it does not  seem  to
    me, applying the relevant legal criteria to the claimant's appeal, that
    she can succeed.

8.   I should  first  of  all  clarify  that  in  assessing  the  claimant's
    circumstances under the Immigration Rules and  outside  the  Rules,  my
    starting point is  that  the  claimant  enjoys  ties  in  the  UK  that
    constitute family life within the meaning of Article 8(1)  ECHR.   That
    was an unchallenged finding  of  fact  made  by  the  FtT  judge  whose
    findings, as already noted, have been preserved.

The Paragraph 276ADE Issue

9.   It is not in dispute that the claimant can only meet  the  requirements
    of  paragraph  276ADE  if  able  to  show  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to her integration there.

10.  Cleary if considerable weight were  to  be  attached  to  her  ties  of
    family and  private  life  in  the  UK,  that  would  go  some  way  to
    establishing there were very significant obstacles  because her removal
    from the UK would disrupt her existing relationships and her degree  of
    integration in the UK.  Her family  life  ties  include  her  long-term
    relationship since 2000 with her  partner,  Mr  Valentino,  who  is  an
    Italian national.  It is an  unorthodox  relationship  in  that  he  is
    married to another woman and only stays with the claimant three days  a
    week,  but  it  is  not  disputed  that  it  is  a  close  and   loving
    relationship. In addition, the claimant has a close  relationship  with
    her adult daughter and her granddaughter, the  latter  who  stays  over
    with her on some nights; the claimant also  does  the  child's  "school
    run". There is a significant grandmother-granddaughter relationship.

11.  Also to be weighed in  the  balance  when  considering  the  degree  of
    obstacles to reintegration in Jamaica is the extent of  the  claimant's
    private life connections with the UK.  Although she has been in the  UK
    unlawfully and has not contributed to the economy by working,  she  has
    lived for over 18 years in  this  country,  and,  in  addition  to  her
    relationship with her partner and daughter and granddaughter, she has a
    sister and other cousins.

12.  At the same time, it is relevant  when  considering  these  family  and
    private life connections that she  has  chosen  to  remain  in  the  UK
    unlawfully and has either commenced  or  reinforced  her  relationships
    here at a time when she knew her immigration status was precarious.  In
    addition, she has no significant health problems and at 49 she  is  not
    old or infirm.

13.  As regards obstacles she would directly face in Jamaica,  there  is  an
    important new development, the factual basis which is not  disputed  by
    Mr Bramble  after  hearing  from  the  claimant's  daughter,  that  the
    claimant can no longer look to her son or her son's wife  and  children
    for support and/or accommodation.  He has fled  to  Haiti;  the  family
    property has been destroyed; his wife remains in Jamaica but has  moved
    back with her own family.  In addition, her two  sisters  have  serious
    health problems and their accommodation is already crowded.

14.  On the other hand, it is difficult  to  overlook  the  existence  of  a
    number of factors that  will  reduce  the  nature  and  extent  of  the
    obstacles she will face on return.  Jamaica is her  own  country  where
    she lived for some 30 years.  Although she left when a young  woman  to
    get away from an abusive relationship, there is no suggestion that this
    poses any current threat to her well-being.  She  speaks  the  language
    and dialect and knows the culture well.  Even though  she  may  not  be
    able to  have  the  material  support  of  family  there  in  terms  of
    accommodation and basic essentials, she does have family with whom  she
    has stayed in contact and  with  whom  she  can  resume  or  strengthen
    relationships.  As regards her material needs, it is more  than  likely
    that her current partner (whose  supports  her  financially  presently)
    would see to it that she is supported financially and  helped  to  find
    somewhere to live in Jamaica; indeed he has in the past helped  one  or
    two members of the claimant's family when he visited Jamaica.

15.  The submissions of both parties very properly sought  to  consider  the
    impact on the claimant and her other UK family members of  her  removal
    and its significance, both for the nature of the life she would face in
    Jamaica and for their own family needs.  As regards her partner, it  is
    clear that he has a great deal to lose financially if he were  to  move
    to Jamaica to be with the claimant - not just because of his   business
    here, but because that business provides the basis for the  support  he
    gives to the claimant and to his wife and children: At the  same  time,
    it is part of the preserved facts that he  was  prepared  to  speculate
    about taking such a step and it was his own evidence that he no  longer
    has a close relationship with his wife.  It is therefore  a  matter  of
    choice for him whether he wishes to rearrange his  affairs  so  he  can
    spend significant time with the claimant in Jamaica or get by otherwise
    with occasional visits and electronic means of communication.  He is  a
    married man who lives with his wife and has children  by  her  whom  he
    helps financially as well as emotionally.  The fact that he has a close
    relationship with the claimant does not mean he is to be considered  in
    the same way as a partner with no other family commitments.

16.  It is also important  to  accord  due  weight  to  the  fact  that  the
    claimant entered into her relationship  with  him  when  she  knew  her
    immigration status was precarious.  Whether her relationship  with  him
    is classified as family life or private life, the precarious  state  of
    her own immigration status reduces the weight that can be  accorded  to
    it: see Rajendran (s117B - family life) [2016] UKUT 138 (IAC).  I would
    add that whilst she has not hidden from the authorities during her stay
    in the UK, it remains that despite her repeated  applications  to  stay
    being rejected each time and her being told  each  time  that  she  was
    required to leave, each time she chose not to.

17.  The claimant has a  family  relationship  with  her  own  daughter  and
    grandchild and it can be assumed that she is an important figure in the
    life of her grandchild, but it is not  suggested  that  her  grandchild
    lacks proper care from her  mother  or  that  the  claimant's  daughter
    supports the claimant.

18.  Having considered the factors  pertaining  to  the  assessment  of  the
    extent of the obstacles to the claimant's  integration  in  Jamaica,  I
    conclude that they do not amount to  very  significant  obstacles.   In
    particular I do not accept that she will face destitution or  lack  any
    kind of family support there.   I  do  not  accept  that  the  relative
    strength of her relationships in the UK as assessed  above  suffice  to
    make the obstacles she will face in Jamaica very significant.

19.   Accordingly,  I  conclude  that  the  claimant  does  not   meet   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

20.  I  do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  conduct  a  detailed  separate
    assessment of the claimant's Article 8 circumstances outside the Rules.
     The fact that she does not qualify under the Rules  is  a  significant
    indication that her continued stay is not in the public interest.   The
    considerations that must be taken into account pursuant to Section 117A-
    D of the NIAA 2002 do not add to the balance of  factors  that  I  have
    already considered in the context of paragraph  276ADE.   If  anything,
    they add to the weight of the factors weighing against her in that even
    though she has good English, she is not financially dependent  and  she
    formed her private life relationships when her immigration  status  was
    precarious.  She is someone who has lived in the UK  as  an  overstayer
    for a lengthy period and has only been able to accumulate the period of
    residence she has by deliberately ignoring instructions  given  to  her
    that she must leave. I do not consider that  she  has  shown  that  her
    Article 8 circumstances are exceptional or compelling.

21.  For all the above reasons I conclude that the  decision  I  should  re-
    make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal against the  decision  of  the
    SSHD to refuse her leave to remain and to remove her.

22.  To summarise:

     The FtT judge has previously been found to  have  materially  erred  in
         law and his decision has been set aside.

     The decision I re-make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]                          Date


Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

