
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33694/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 July 2014                                |On 25 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HADDON-CAVE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                              vafi kadi kamara


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Vidyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Cheng, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Eban promulgated on 28  March  2014.  The  claimant
    Vafi Kadi Kamara was refused a permanent residence card as  the  family
    member of an EEA national under the 2006 Regulations. The  Reasons  for
    Refusal are as set out in the Secretary  of  State's  letter  dated  27
    August 2013.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge Eban found that the claimant had acquired
    a right to permanent residence under Regulation 15(1)(d) as the  spouse
    of a  worker  who  had  ceased  activity.  Miss  Vidyadharan,  for  the
    Secretary of State, has submitted that there is a fundamental error  of
    law in the First-tier Tribunal's Determination and Reasons: namely, the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to  have  regard  to  Regulation  5(3)
    which requires findings  to  be  made  that  the  EEA  sponsor  has  to
    "terminate his activity in the United Kingdom  as  a  worker  or  self-
    employed person .. as a result of a permanent incapacity to work".  The
    judge made reference to Regulation 15(1)(d)  but  failed  to  make  any
    reference to Regulation 5(3) or to refer to that provision.

 3. The Judge  then  directed  herself  that  the  enquiries  made  by  the
    Department of Work  and  Pensions  (DWP)  when  deciding  to  give  the
    claimant  Employment  Support  Allowance  (ESA)  would  have   included
    determining whether he was permanently incapable of work:

         "The EEA spouse has been receiving ESA since September 2012. ESA is
         a benefit for people who  available  limited  capability  for  work
         because of health condition or disability. DWP would  have  assured
         themselves that the EEA spouse was entitled to receive this benefit
         before paying it to him. As I understand it DWP would have  checked
         whether the EEA spouse was an EEA national who was a worker or self
         employed person who had become permanently incapable of work within
         Regulation 5(3)."




Regulation 5(3)

 4. It is for the  claimant  to  show  that  the  condition  of  'permanent
    incapacity' is met: the letter from the Department of Word and Pensions
    did not in terms say that such a check  had  been  made,  nor  was  the
    letter itself evidence  that  the  claimant's  incapacity  to  work  is
    'permanent' as defined in Regulation 5(3) of the  EEA  Regulations.  So
    far as relevant, that provision is as follows:

    "Worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity"

    5. (1) In these Regulations, "worker or self-employed  person  who  has
    ceased activity" means

    An EEA national who satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4)
    or (5).

    (3) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if -

    (a) he terminates his activity in the United Kingdom  as  a  worker  or
    self employed

    Person as a result of permanent incapacity to work; and

    (b) either -

    (i) he resided in the United Kingdom continuously  for  more  than  two
    years prior to the termination; or

    (ii) the incapacity is  the  result  of  an  accident  at  work  or  an
    occupational disease that entitles him to a pension payable in full  or
    in part by an institution in the United Kingdom"

 5. In our judgment, it is clear that the judge failed to address her  mind
    to the fundamental question of permanent incapacity. For these reasons,
    the judge's decision is plainly flawed and cannot stand.

 6. Mr Chen, who appears for Mrs Kamara, seeks by way  of  cross-appeal  to
    rely on a  separate error of law, namely an assertion by  the  Tribunal
    Judge that she had no jurisdiction to deal with any  of  the  the  ECHR
    issues and would therefore not deal with those issues.   We  find  that
    submission by Mr Cheng surprising given what the Tribunal judge records
    at paragraph 5 of her judgment:

         "At the outset of the hearing Mr Cheng and Mr  Pos  agreed  that  I
         should only  hear  the  appellant's  claim  for  an  EEA  residence
         document and not her claim under  Article  8  as  the  decision  to
         refuse to issue a permanent residence card did not give rise to any
         interference with Article 8 and should a decision be made  at  some
         point to remove the appellant from the UK, Article 8 could then  be
         argued. It was accepted that the appellant's claim under Article  3
         had not been made on the correct form."

 7. Mr Cheng had prepared no statement of truth or copy  of  his  notes  to
    support his assertion that the Judge had herself refused to  deal  with
    Article 8. Nor had he sought a transcript of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing to justify his submission, in effect, that the  Tribunal  Judge
    had misrecorded what had taken place. We would find it surprising  that
    an experienced Tribunal Judge would make an assertion that she  had  no
    jurisdiction to deal with ECHR issues without recording it. We find  it
    far more likely that the Judge's  summary  of  Counsel's  agreement  at
    paragraph 5 is correct and we approach this appeal on  the  basis  that
    Article  8  was  lawfully  excluded  from  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    determination and that such exclusion cannot constitute an error of law
    because the claimant's representative  agreed  that  the  Tribunal  was
    seised only of the EEA residence document point.

Adjournment

 8. As an alternative, Mr Cheng seeks an  adjournment  of  this  matter  to
    allow his client to garner further evidence  to  demonstrate  that  the
    sponsor is a qualified person. Regretably, Mr Cheng  seems  unaware  of
    the practice direction which provides that  parties  should  appear  at
    these appeal hearings with any further evidence upon which they wish to
    rely in the event that the appeal Tribunal seeks to go on to remake the
    decision. We see no reason why we should not proceed now to dispose  of
    this matter.

 9. We reject his application for  an  adjournment.  There  is  no  further
    evidence before us.



Section  55 of the Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009

10. No question under s.55 in relation to any  relevant  child  was  raised
    before this hearing. The  issue  was  raised  in  Mr  Cheng's  skeleton
    argument served today without notice or supporting evidence.  There  is
    no application to vary to include Section 55 and if there were we would
    have refused it, since the question  was  not  raised  or  relied  upon
    before the First-tier Tribunal, nor did it  form  part  of  either  the
    Secretary of State's grounds of challenge to that  determination  or  a
    Rule 24 Reply thereto. There was  no  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and there is no evidence before us in relation to  the  impact
    of the decision to refuse a permanent residence card  on  any  relevant
    child.

11. To the extent that we are seized of Section 55 at all, we find that the
    claimant's assertion that the respondent erred in law in  her  original
    decision in relation to Section 55 is not made out and we also  dismiss
    that.

12. In these circumstances we make the following orders.  First,  we  allow
    the  appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State.   Second,  we  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision  of  27  August  2013.  If  the
    appellant wishes to make any further applications in due course that is
    a matter for her on the advice of her advisors.




Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Haddon-Cave


