
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
IA/33428/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 11th December 2017                      | On 29th January 2018            |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                Assan Jangum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Nasim, Counsel instructed by the Legal Rights
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of the Gambia  born  on  24th  February
    1973.  He first arrived in the UK in August  2005  when  he  was  given
    leave to enter as a visitor until 23rd February  2006.   The  Appellant
    did not embark but eventually applied for leave to remain on the  basis
    of his marriage to Samantha Jangum.  That application was  refused  for
    the reasons given in the Respondent's Reasons  for  Refusal  dated  9th
    October 2015.  The Appellant appealed, and  his  appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Barber (the Judge) sitting at  Birmingham  on
    14th December 2016.   He  decided  to  dismiss  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds for the reasons given  in
    his Decision dated 29th December 2016.  The Appellant sought  leave  to
    appeal that decision, and on  29th  August  2017  such  permission  was
    granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules  because  he
    found that the Appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    EX.1 of Appendix FM of HC 395  because  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to the Appellant and his wife continuing their family life in
    the Gambia.  The Judge went on to consider the Article 8 ECHR rights of
    the Appellant and his wife outside of the Immigration Rules.  He  found
    the decision of the Respondent to be proportionate, partly  because  he
    was satisfied that it was possible for the Appellant's wife  to  return
    to the Gambia with him for the purpose of applying for entry  clearance
    from there.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Nasim referred to the  grounds  of  application  and
    argued that the Judge had erred in law in coming to these  conclusions.
    The Appellant had  produced,  in  his  Bundle  of  Documents,  all  the
    evidence necessary to show that the Appellant met the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules apart from the issue of his  immigration  status.
    The Judge had considered paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM, but had come to
    the wrong conclusion as to insurmountable obstacles.  For example,  the
    Judge had made a factual error at paragraph 11(iii) of the decision  by
    assuming that the Appellant owned property in the UK.  The  documentary
    evidence was that the Appellant rented his  accommodation.   The  Judge
    had not shown that he had dealt with the contents  of  the  psychiatric
    report of Dr Mishriky starting at page 11 of the Appellant's bundle.

 5. Mr Nasim went on to argue that the Judge had made further errors of law
    in considering the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR  rights  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Judge had found that the Appellant and his wife
    could return to the Gambia to seek entry clearance there.  However, the
    Judge had not taken account of the decision in Chikwamba v SSHD  [2008]
    1 WLR 1420 as explained in the decision in R (Agyarko) v SSHD [2017]  1
    WLR 823.  Instead, the Judge had written that the decision in Chikwamba
    could not apply to this case.  The Judge had been wrong to describe the
    Appellant's immigration history as "appalling".  All he had done was to
    overstay his leave.  Further, the Judge had  given  no  credit  to  the
    Appellant for satisfying the factors mentioned in Section 117(B)(1)  to
    (5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 6. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to the Rule 24 response and argued that
    there had been no such material errors of law.  She  pointed  out  that
    the evidence was that the Appellant's wife had been prepared to  go  to
    the Gambia  with  the  Appellant  in  order  to  marry  there,  thereby
    regularising the Appellant's stay  in  the  UK.   Notwithstanding  that
    marriage, there had been no application for  leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of marriage until late 2015.  The Judge had come  to  a  decision
    open to him on the evidence in respect of paragraph  EX.1  of  Appendix
    FM.  He had fully considered the issue of insurmountable obstacles  and
    had given comprehensive reasons for finding  that  none  such  existed.
    The error concerning the Appellant's accommodation  was  not  material.
    The Judge had fully considered the medical evidence  and  explained  at
    paragraph 11(iv) of the decision why he found  the  Appellant's  mental
    health not to amount to an insurmountable obstacle to his return to the
    Gambia.  The Judge  was  satisfied  that  the  Appellant's  wife  could
    accompany him to the Gambia in order to apply for entry clearance  from
    there.  The Judge was right not to  apply  the  principle  set  out  in
    Chikwamba as it was not a foregone conclusion that the Appellant  would
    satisfy  the  appropriate  Immigration  Rule  and  qualify  for   entry
    clearance.

 7. I find no material error of law in the decision of the  Judge  which  I
    therefore do not set aside.  I find the arguments of Mr  Nasim  not  to
    reveal a material error of  law  but  to  amount  to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the  decision  of  the  Judge.   The  Judge  came  to
    conclusions regarding paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM and Article 8  ECHR
    outside the Immigration Rules which he was entitled  to  reach  on  the
    evidence  before  him  and  which  he  fully  explained.    The   Judge
    demonstrated at paragraph 17 of the Decision that he  had  carried  out
    the balancing exercise necessary for any assessment of proportionality.



 8. The Judge made  a  clear  finding  in  respect  of  any  insurmountable
    obstacles for the purposes of paragraph EX.1 at  paragraph  11  of  the
    Decision.  He fully explained his  decision  in  that  paragraph.   His
    error of fact relating to the Appellant's accommodation  is  of  little
    consequence bearing in mind the other reasons given by the Judge.   The
    Judge considered the Appellant's mental health at paragraph 11(iv)  and
    came to a conclusion in respect of it which was not  incompatible  with
    the evidence contained in the medical report.

 9. Likewise, the Judge fully explained his decision as regards  Article  8
    ECHR rights at paragraph 17 of the Decision.  There is nothing wrong in
    the Judge's decision not to apply the principles set out  in  Chikwamba
    bearing in mind the Judge's opinion that mainly  as  a  result  of  the
    Appellant's immigration history the Judge could not be  sure  that  the
    Appellant would qualify for entry clearance.  That being the case,  the
    explanation  of  Chikwamba  contained  in  Agyarko  is  not   relevant.
    Further, it is trite law that satisfying the factors set out in Section
    117B(1) to (5) of the 2002 Act is in itself a neutral  factor  and  not
    something to be considered favourable to the Appellant.

10. For these reasons I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date  26th January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
