


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal
Numbers: IA/33221/2015 +5

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                  |Decision& Reasons  Promulgated       |
|On: 21 September 2017                 |On: 22 September 2017                |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                   ZA + 5
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Mustafa, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Peterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellants.

 1. I have made an anonymity order because  this  decision  refers  to  the
    circumstances of four minor children.


 2. The first and second appellants are the father and mother of the  third
    to sixth appellants.  The elder two  children,  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants,  Z  and  A,  were  born  in  Pakistan  in  2002  and   2003
    respectively.  They came  to  the  United  Kingdom  ('UK')  with  their
    parents in 2007 and have therefore resided here for over  seven  years.
    The younger two children, the fifth and sixth appellants, M and K  were
    born in the UK in 2011 and 2014 respectively.  All the  appellants  are
    Pakistani citizens.


 3. The appellants have appealed  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dated 4 January 2017 in which it dismissed an  appeal  against
    the decision of the respondent dated 6 October 2015 refusing  leave  on
    Article 8 grounds. The First-tier Tribunal was satisfied that it  would
    be reasonable for Z and A to  leave  the  UK  with  their  parents  and
    siblings as a family unit, and dismissed the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 4. In overly lengthy and  unfocussed  grounds  of  appeal  the  appellants
    challenged the First-tier Tribunal's approach  to  Article  8,  and  in
    particular the approach to reasonableness.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge JM Holmes in a decision  dated  20
    July 2017.


 5. In a rule 24 response dated 4 August 2017 the respondent  submits  that
    the First-tier Tribunal directed itself appropriately.

Hearing

Error of law

 6. Mr Mustafa relied upon the grounds of appeal.


 7. After hearing from Mr Mustafa I indicated two provisional  concerns  to
    Ms Peterson: (i) the First-tier Tribunal failed to direct  itself  that
    significant weight must be attached to Z  and  A's  residence  of  over
    seven years; (ii) the best interests assessment of Z  is  contradictory
    and unclear.


 8. Ms Peterson acknowledged that there were some missing sentences in  the
    decision but the First-tier Tribunal was clearly aware of the length of
    residence of the children and the assessment of reasonableness was made
    in light of this.


 9. After hearing  from  both  representatives,  I  indicated  that  I  was
    satisfied that the decision contains an error of law, for the reasons I
    set out in more detail below.  Mr  Mustafa  invited  me  to  remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. Ms Peterson invited me to remake the
    decision myself given the absence of any factual dispute.   Having  had
    regard  to  para  7.2  of  the  relevant  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement and the nature and extent of the factual  agreement  in  this
    case, I decided that it is appropriate to remake the  decision  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.


Rehearing

10. The representatives helpfully narrowed the issues in dispute, such that
    both agreed that  it  was  only  necessary  to  hear  very  brief  oral
    evidence.  The representatives agreed  that  Z  and  A  are  qualifying
    children and the only remaining disputed issue relates  to  whether  or
    not it would be reasonable to expect them to return  to  Pakistan  with
    their family.  Both representatives also  agreed  that  the  appeal  is
    limited to human rights grounds.


11. Ms Peterson invited me to dismiss the appeal  and  submitted  that  the
    very  lengthy  residence  and  best  interests  of  the  children   are
    outweighed by their parents' adverse immigration history.


12. Mr Mustafa invited  me  to  take  into  account  the  updated  evidence
    relevant to the children.  In a letter of support  dated  19  September
    2017 the Family  Refugee  Support  Project  summarised  the  children's
    circumstances in the UK.  Mr Mustafa invited me to find that to  remove
    Z and A would be unreasonable given the strength of  their  connections
    to the UK, notwithstanding their parents' immigration history.


13. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision, which I  now  provide
    with reasons.

Error of law discussion

Approach to length of residence

14. The correct approach to the reasonableness test in 276ADE  and  section
    117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the  2002
    Act') has been considered in MA (Pakistan) V SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ  705
    (7 July 2016).  The Court of Appeal found that where the child has been
    in  the  UK  for  seven  years  section  117B(6)  together   with   the
    respondent's own policy requires significant weight to be given to  the
    length of residence.  Elias LJ said this (my emphasis is underlined):


           "46.  Even on the approach of the Secretary of State,  the  fact
           that a child has  been  here  for  seven  years  must  be  given
           significant  weight  when  carrying  out   the   proportionality
           exercise. Indeed, the Secretary of State published  guidance  in
           August 2015 in the form of Immigration Directorate  Instructions
           entitled "Family Life (as a partner or parent) and Private Life:
           10 Year Routes" in which it is expressly stated  that  once  the
           seven years' residence requirement is satisfied, there  need  to
           be "strong reasons" for refusing  leave  (para.  11.2.4).  These
           instructions were not in force when the  cases  now  subject  to
           appeal were determined, but in my view they merely confirm  what
           is implicit in adopting a policy of this nature.  After  such  a
           period of time the child will have put down roots and  developed
           social, cultural and educational links in the UK such that it is
           likely to be highly disruptive if the child is required to leave
           the UK. That may be less so when the  children  are  very  young
           because the focus of their lives will be on their families,  but
           the disruption becomes more serious as they get older. Moreover,
           in these cases there must be a very strong expectation that  the
           child's best interests will be to remain  in  the  UK  with  his
           parents as part of a family  unit,  and  that  must  rank  as  a
           primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.
           ...
           49...However, the fact that the child has been  in  the  UK  for
           seven years would need to be given  significant  weight  in  the
           proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because
           of its relevance to determining the nature and strength  of  the
           child's best interests; and second, because it establishes as  a
           starting point that leave should be  granted  unless  there  are
           powerful reasons to the contrary."


15. When the First-tier Tribunal decision is read as a whole, there  is  no
    adequately clear indication that it attached significant  weight  to  Z
    and A's length of residence when considering the reasonableness test or
    carrying out the proportionality exercise.  The First-tier Tribunal was
    clearly mindful of the length of residence and that  lengthy  residence
    is a relevant factor - see  [6],  [21]  and  [25].   However,  that  is
    different to attaching significant weight to it, and the failure to  do
    so constitutes an error of law.

Z's best interests

16. I acknowledge that the  First-tier  Tribunal  considered  the  starting
    point to be that it would be in the children's best interests to remain
    given their length of residence and there needed to be powerful reasons
    to override this at [25].  Indeed the  First-tier  Tribunal  considered
    there to be a "stronger argument" in Z remaining in the UK to  complete
    her  GCSEs  and  "that  being  the  case  there  would   need   to   be
    considerations of substantial moment to override the interests  of  [Z]
    continuing at school in the UK" [21].  However, at [24] the  First-tier
    Tribunal concluded it to be in "the best interests of all four children
    to remain with their family and return  to  Pakistan  where  they  will
    benefit from being educated within their own culture." I  am  satisfied
    that this conclusion contradicts the earlier finding at [21] and in any
    event was not open to the First-tier Tribunal as far as Z is concerned,
    given her particular circumstances: she has resided in the UK from  the
    age of five and was 14 at the date of the First-tier Tribunal  hearing;
    as an older child,  the  disruption  to  her  private  life  should  be
    regarded as particularly serious.  It is  difficult  to  see  how  this
    level  of  disruption  would  be  mitigated   by   the   nebulous   and
    unparticularised "benefit" to be gained  from  "being  educated  within
    [her] own culture".


17. This is a case in which it was patently obvious that it was not in  Z's
    best interests to return to Pakistan and the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
    acted irrationally in reaching the contrary conclusion.


18. The assessment of Z's best interests must  be  distinguished  from  the
    finding as to whether there are powerful reasons, such as the  parents'
    immigration history that nevertheless render her removal reasonable.  A
    proper and lawful consideration of the latter  requires  a  proper  and
    lawful best interests assessment.  As this was absent regarding Z,  the
    conclusion reached on reasonableness is infected by an error of law and
    must be remade.

Remaking the decision

Approach to evidence

19. Both representatives agreed that I should consider all the evidence for
    myself but that many of the First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  could  be
    preserved.  I therefore accept that the first  appellant's  credibility
    has been damaged by the misleading evidence he provided when making his
    asylum claim and in his evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    turn firstly to a consideration of Z's best interests.

Best interests


20. I conclude that the best interests of Z, viewed  through  the  lens  of
    Article 8 private life, would be overwhelmingly served by remaining  in
    the UK. There are six dominant factors:


              i) She has spent nearly 10 years in the UK.
             ii) She came to the UK as a young child and has spent  some  of
                 her most formative years (5 to 15) and  two/thirds  of  her
                 life in the UK.
            iii) Z's ties to Pakistan are limited although I accept she  has
                 links through her parents, ethnicity and ability  to  speak
                 and  understand  basic  Urdu,  and  probably  has  a  clear
                 understanding of Pakistani culture.  However, she was  just
                 a young child when she left and I accept she  sees  himself
                 as thoroughly British with an  identity  based  on  British
                 multi-cultural society.
             iv) Her integration into UK society can be described as  nearly
                 complete.
              v) Z will find it very difficult to return to Pakistan at this
                 particular stage of her education and childhood.   She  has
                 now passed the half way stage of her GCSEs  (which  can  be
                 contrasted with the position before the First-tier Tribunal
                 when she was "not far through that process").
             vi) Z suffers from coeliac disease and has grown accustomed  to
                 living with that condition in the UK and not Pakistan.

Reasonableness / proportionality

21. I am mindful that the best interests assessment is not determinative of
    the question posed section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, namely  whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect Z to leave the UK.  As Elias LJ noted  in
    MA (Pakistan) at  [47] even where the child's  best  interests  are  to
    stay, it may still be not unreasonable to require the child  to  leave.
    That will depend upon a careful analysis of the nature  and  extent  of
    the links in the UK and Pakistan, as well as any other  relevant  wider
    considerations - see [45] of MA (Pakistan), EV (Philippines) v SSHD  at
    [34-37] and PD and Others (Article 8 -  conjoined  family  claims)  Sri
    Lanka [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC).

22. This question cannot  be  answered  without  considering  the  parents'
    appeals, to which I now turn.  Their Article 8  claims  cannot  succeed
    under the Rules.  They  do  not  come  close  to  doing  so.  They  can
    potentially succeed only outside  the  Rules.   The  dismissal  of  the
    parents' appeals would interfere with their right to respect for  their
    private lives. Since the impugned decisions are in accordance with  the
    law and are in furtherance of a legitimate aim, namely the  maintenance
    of immigration control, the next question to be  addressed  is  whether
    they  are  proportionate.  It  is  important   to   acknowledge   their
    immigration history is very poor:  they  entered  the  UK  in  2007  as
    visitors with no real expectation of leaving; the first  appellant  has
    been found to have made an asylum claim that is not well founded and to
    have provided  misleading  evidence;  they  are  longstanding  unlawful
    overstayers from 2011 and it is  only  in  2015  that  they  sought  to
    regularise their position. Although they are  law  abiding,  they  have
    spent most of their lives in their  country  of  origin,  Pakistan  and
    significant weight  must  be  attached  to  their  flagrant  breach  of
    immigration controls in the UK.


23. Proportionality is the "public interest question" within the meaning of
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act. By section 117A(2) I am obliged to have regard
    to the considerations listed in section 117B.  I consider that  section
    117B applies to these appeals in the following way:


    (a) The public interest in the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls  is  engaged.   I  have  already  explained  above   why   the
    immigration history of the first and second appellants  is  very  poor.
    They have shown a blatant disregard for immigration laws.


    (b) There is no material infringement of the "English speaking"  public
    interest.  Having heard very  briefly  from  the  first  appellant  and
    considered the relevant updated evidence, I  accept  that  the  parents
    understand and speak basic English.  I note the  concerns  recorded  by
    the First-tier Tribunal  regarding  this,  but  these  are  based  upon
    evidence that is now out of date.  All  four  children  are  fluent  in
    English.


    (c) The economic interest must be engaged  because  the  children  have
    been, and will continue to be, educated at public expense  and  if  the
    appellants remain in the UK they will have the capacity to access other
    publicly funded services and benefits.  The parents have been surviving
    on NASS support.  On the other hand, the first appellant  is  able  and
    willing to work if he has permission to do so.  As noted by the  First-
    tier Tribunal, both parents are well  educated  and  intelligent.   The
    first appellant was a shop owner and  has  achieved  qualifications  in
    plumbing in the UK.


    (d) The private lives established by the parents during the entirety of
    their time in the UK qualifies for the  attribution  of  little  weight
    only.

24. This brings me back to section 117B(6), which provides:


           "In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
           public interest does not require the person's removal where -
           (a)  the  person  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a qualifying child; and
           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
           United Kingdom."


25. It is not disputed that section 117B(6)(a) is met regarding  Z  and  A.
    In my  consideration  of  Z's  best  interests  above  I  have  already
    highlighted the salient facts and factors.  I must balance  these  with
    the outcome of the forecast,  which  must  necessarily  be  undertaken,
    based on the premise of the entire family returning to Pakistan  -  see
    PD (supra). On the one hand, this would be hugely disruptive for Z  and
    would decimate the friendships, relationships and activities that  form
    the core of her private life. It  would  also  obstruct  her  education
    significantly as she is more than half way  through  her  GCSE  course.
    Importantly it would involve her transfer to a society  whose  culture,
    values, norms and language are less familiar to her.   Emotionally,  it
    would undoubtedly be stressful and damaging.  In  addition,  she  would
    have to cope with the challenges she will face in Pakistan as a  result
    of her coeliac disease, which will inevitably be different  from  those
    she has become accustomed to dealing with in the UK.  Furthermore, this
    fundamental transformation of her life and lifestyle would occur at  an
    age and stage of critical importance to her development - she is 15 and
    in the final year of a two year course, likely to determine her  future
    educational and employment prospects.


26. On the other hand, taking into account Z's age and  the  support  of  a
    stable family unit, she would, foreseeably, adapt over time.  Both  her
    parents were born and raised in  Pakistan  and  maintain  links  there.
    They both have the ability to secure employment  there  and  should  be
    able to re-settle into Pakistan.   There  is  no  suggestion  that  Z's
    health would be detrimentally affected, albeit it may present  more  or
    different challenges.


27. The test to be applied is that of reasonableness.  The  application  of
    the reasonableness test involves a balance of all  material  facts  and
    considerations - see MA (Pakistan) (supra).  The  application  of  this
    test will invariably be intensely fact sensitive,  see  EB  (Kosovo)  v
    SSHD [2008] UKHL 41, at  [7]  -  [12],  per  Lord  Bingham.   I  attach
    significant weight to Z's length  of  residence  in  the  UK  (some  10
    years).  Other factors of particular strength are: her time in  the  UK
    spanned nearly two/thirds of  her  life;  her  deep  immersion  in  all
    aspects of life in this country; the critical stage of her personal and
    educational development which has been reached; the likelihood that she
    will make a useful  contribution  to  UK  society;  she  has  grown  up
    alongside younger siblings who have also spent significant  periods  in
    the UK - her sister, A, has been in the UK for over  seven  years  from
    the age of four and her two younger siblings have never known  life  in
    Pakistan having been born here in 2011 and 2014.  I must weigh N's best
    interests which have the status of a primary consideration.


28. The main countervailing factor is that the first and second  appellants
    have no legal  right  to  remain  in  the  UK  and  have  a  very  poor
    immigration history. This is a factor of undeniable weight. However, it
    has been frequently stated that a child's best interests should not  be
    compromised on account of  the  misdemeanours  of  its  parents  -  see
    Baroness Hale in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4, at  [20]-[21]  and
    [35], and MA (Pakistan) at [52 and 53] and per Elias LJ at [102]:

           "In my judgment, the observation of the judge to the effect that
           people who come on a temporary basis can be  expected  to  leave
           cannot be true of the child. The purpose  underlying  the  seven
           year rule is that this kind of reasoning ought not to be adopted
           in their case. They are not to be blamed for the fact that their
           parents overstayed illegally, and the  starting  point  is  that
           their status should be legitimised unless there is  good  reason
           not to do so.  I  accept  that  the  position  might  have  been
           otherwise without the seven years'  residence,  but  that  is  a
           factor which must weigh heavily in this case. The fact that  the
           parents are overstayers and have no right to remain in their own
           right can thereafter be weighed in the  proportionality  balance
           against allowing the child  to  remain,  but  that  is  after  a
           recognition that the child's  seven  years  of  residence  is  a
           significant factor pointing the other way.

29. I consider that there are strong factors supporting the conclusion that
    it would not be reasonable to expect Z to leave the UK.  There  are  no
    strong reasons that bear upon her  personally  pointing  in  the  other
    direction.  I have taken into account the fact  that  her  parents  are
    overstayers and have weighed that in the balance  but  in  my  judgment
    this does not outweigh the preponderance of factors  in  support  of  Z
    remaining in the UK, as outlined above.  I conclude that  it  would  be
    unreasonable and a disproportionate breach of Article 8  for  Z  to  be
    removed.   Accordingly, her appeal succeeds under Article 8.

Parents and Z's siblings

30. Having thus concluded, the effect of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act is
    that the public interest does not require the removal of either  parent
    or siblings.  The effect of dismissing the parents' appeals would be to
    stultify the decision that Z qualifies for leave - see PD (supra).   In
    short, it would be unreasonable and  disproportionate  (notwithstanding
    their immigration history) to remove the  parents  because  this  would
    inevitably mean that  Z  would  have  to  leave  with  them.   All  the
    appellants' appeals therefore succeed under Article 8.

Decision

31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.


32. I remake the decision by allowing the appeals of all the appellants  on
    Article 8 of the ECHR grounds.


Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 21 September
2017
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
