
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: IA/33955/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |        Decision & Reasons          |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 28 November 2017                      |        On 22 December 2017         |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                    n l o
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr W M Reiss of Counsel instructed by Reiss Edwards
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria  born  on  10  March  1968  who
    appeals the decision of the Secretary of State on 19  October  2015  to
    refuse her leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  She arrived in  this
    country as a visitor on 7 August 2005 and was  subsequently  granted  a
    further visit visa until 25 October 2007.  Her latest arrival was on  2
    November 2007 when she arrived with a visa valid until 22 October 2009.
     She applied for leave to remain on the basis of her private life on 29
    October 2013.  This application was refused on 10 January 2014 with  no
    right of appeal.  The appellant had married a British citizen (Mr P  G)
    on  2  January  2015  and  the  decision  under  appeal   follows   the
    representative's request to grant the appellant an appealable decision.



2.   It was accepted by the respondent  that  the  appellant's  relationship
    with her husband was genuine and subsisting but it was considered  that
    the couple could live together  in  Nigeria  and  the  requirements  of
    EX.1.(b) were not met.  In relation to paragraph 276ADE  the  appellant
    had spent 37 years in Nigeria and did not meet the age  and  length  of
    residence  requirements  nor  was  it  accepted  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  integration  on  return  to
    Nigeria.  In considering exceptional circumstances the respondent noted
    that the appellant and her husband were both HIV positive and suffering
    from depression but the Secretary of  State  considered  that  suitable
    medical care was available in Nigeria.  In the grounds of appeal it was
    noted that the appellant's husband had never been to  Nigeria  and  was
    British born and working in the UK as a scientist for a  pharmaceutical
    company.  His parents were in the UK and his daughter was a witness  at
    the appeal hearing.  He also had other siblings in the UK.

3.   The First-tier Judge, having heard oral evidence from the  parties  and
    the sponsor's daughter, noted the submissions of  the  representatives.
    It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the cases  of  Agyarko
    [2015] EWCA Civ 440 and Chikwamba v Secretary of State [2008]  UKHL  40
    held the  key  to  the  correct  decision.  There  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life in Nigeria.  In paragraphs 23 to 29 the  judge
    referred to the relevant authorities dealing with the correct  approach
    to the Rules and Article 8 issues and reminded herself of the statutory
    changes introduced by the 2014 Act.  The judge accepted that there  was
    no evidence that the sponsor had been to Nigeria nor that  he  had  any
    family connection with Nigeria apart from through  the  appellant.   He
    had suffered personal losses and his second  wife  had  died  in  April
    2013.  She had been found to be HIV positive and the sponsor discovered
    that he too was HIV positive.  He had suffered depression and the  side
    effects of prescribed medication.  He had turned to online  forums  and
    friendship sites through which he had made contact with the  appellant.
    They had begun to date in March 2014 and he had  proposed  marriage  in
    July 2014 and they had got married on 2 January 2015.

4.   The judge noted that the appellant had had medical treatment  following
    an HIV diagnosis in  2012.   The  judge  observed  that  there  was  no
    evidence that any contribution towards the  appellant's  treatment  had
    been given.  The judge commented:

         "In his oral evidence the sponsor appeared  to  consider  that  the
         fact that the appellant's treatment in Nigeria would  be  expensive
         is a compassionate circumstance and an insurmountable obstacle that
         should entitle her to remain although this appears on the  face  of
         it at  odds  with  his  income  and  ability  to  provide  for  the
         appellant."

5.   The judge noted that the only issue raised under the Immigration  Rules
    was the availability  of  relocation  as  a  family  to  Nigeria.   The
    Secretary of State had not  accepted  that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life outside the United Kingdom.  The refusal  left
    it open to the appellant and sponsor to decide if they wish  to  return
    to Nigeria, alternatively the appellant could return to  apply  for  an
    entry clearance.  The  judge  did  not  find  that  the  appellant  was
    estranged from her family as claimed.   The  sponsor  had  married  the
    appellant in the full knowledge that  she  did  not  have  status.   In
    relation to the medical evidence the judge observed there was no up-to-
    date material indicating that the appellant could not obtain in Nigeria
    the treatment she required.  The judge  then  considered  the  case  of
    Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ  440  and  the  reference  to  Jeunesse  v  the
    Netherlands (application number 12738/10).   The  judge  concluded  her
    analysis of  the  appellant's  case  under  the  Immigration  Rules  as
    follows:

         "44. The respondent's submission was  that  there  was  nothing  to
             prevent the appellant from returning to Nigeria to  apply  for
             entry clearance, which given the sponsor's employment,  should
             be a relatively smooth application.  Weight should be attached
             to the fact that the parties had entered into the relationship
             and marriage knowing that the appellant's  immigration  status
             was precarious.  The sponsor has a support network  and  there
             are adequate healthcare available  in  Nigeria.   As  set  out
             above, to counter this the appellant's representative  submits
             that the sponsor is British, does  not  know  Nigeria,  cannot
             speak the local language, cannot find a job commensurate  with
             the one that he has with a commensurate income,  cannot  visit
             the UK very often and  that  removal  to  Nigeria  would  have
             devastating consequences for his health, medical care and  for
             his family in the United Kingdom.

         45.  I find that the fact that the sponsor  would  have  to  change
             jobs and may not  have  the  same  level  of  income  are  not
             insurmountable obstacles.  English is an official language and
             the fact that he cannot speak  a  local  language  is  not  an
             insurmountable obstacle.  There  is  no  independent  evidence
             that the drug regime prescribed for either cannot be  accessed
             in Nigeria.  The presence of the sponsor's adult relatives  in
             the United Kingdom is not an  insurmountable  obstacles.   The
             respondent  accepts  that  there  may   be   some   difficulty
             relocating but there is evidence of family in Nigeria and  the
             appellant  lived  in  Nigeria  and   was   sufficiently   well
             established there to able to  obtain  visits  visas  including
             two, two year multi-visit  visit  visas  valid  2005/2007  and
             2007/2009.  The visas were  granted  on  the  basis  that  the
             appellant intended to return to Nigeria.   The  appellant  did
             not return and instead  remained  unlawfully  for  almost  six
             years before making her first application for leave to remain,


         46.  The appellant is undertaking medical treatment in the  UK  but
             their medical conditions and the medical  treatment  currently
             prescribed is not an insurmountable  obstacle  to  the  couple
             going to Nigeria.  If they choose to do so, it is a matter for
             them.  Nobody can require the  sponsor  to  leave  the  United
             Kingdom but if the sponsor and appellant want to enjoy  family
             life together in the United Kingdom, they are only entitled to
             so if the[y]  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
             Rules, which they do not because  they  have  not  shown  with
             sufficient, satisfactory evidence  that  the  requirements  of
             EX.1.(b) are met namely there are insurmountable obstacles  to
             family life together outside the Immigration Rules.


         47.  Turning to private life  and  the  requirements  in  paragraph
             276ADE of the Immigration Rules, the appellant may  have  some
             initial  difficulty  upon  her  return  to  her   country   of
             nationality but she lived in Nigeria until the age of  thirty-
             nine and is therefore fully familiar with  society,  language,
             customs and life in Nigeria.  Although  the  appellant  claims
             that she may be accepted by family on return, the witness  who
             knows her family makes no mention  of  family  issues  in  his
             letter.  I find that the appellant has not discharged the onus
             of proof and shown with sufficient satisfactory evidence  that
             there would be very significant obstacles to  her  integration
             into Nigeria, the country of return."

6.   The judge then turned to consider Article 8  outside  the  Rules.   She
    noted that since the appellant's family life with the sponsor had  been
    established when she had no right to be in the UK  it  was  precarious.
    The judge referred to SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and Jeunesse v the
    Netherlands and the need in a case involving precarious family life  to
    establish that there were exceptional circumstances.

7.   The judge summarised her findings in the  following  extract  from  her
    decision:

         "50. The medical evidence that I have been provided with  does  not
             provide sufficient evidence of  compelling,  compassionate  or
             exceptional circumstances but does  advocate  the  appellant's
             case.  I do not have medical evidence  from  the  GP  to  show
             medical history or from the hospital to show the frequency  of
             appointments or current viral load.  The last detailed medical
             report on the appellant is dated  08  October  2013  when  her
             viral load was undetectable and she had no sign  of  toxicity.
             A problem was anticipated if  the  appellant  were  unable  to
             obtain antiretroviral therapy but the country information from
             2013 shows that this therapy is available in Nigeria  and  the
             appellant has not shown that her particular treatment  is  not
             available  there  including  for  example  by   ordering   her
             particular therapy from outwith  Nigeria.   The  other  health
             problems referred to generally in the letter of  22  September
             2015  are  the  general  ones  of   hypertension,   persistent
             headaches and iron deficiency anaemia and there  is  certainly
             no satisfactory evidence that these health problems cannot  be
             adequately  treated  in  Nigeria.   There  is  no  psychiatric
             evidence.  It follows that I find that the appellant  has  not
             shown with sufficient satisfactory evidence  that  she  cannot
             access adequate health care in, or from Nigeria.


         51.  The sponsor, a British Citizen cannot be  removed  but  if  he
             chooses to follow the appellant to Nigeria  then  it  has  not
             shown with sufficient, satisfactory evidence that the  sponsor
             cannot similarly access adequate health care when  in  Nigeria
             or by  travelling  to  and  from  Nigeria.   The  health  risk
             identified for him arises if he stops taking  his  medication.
             This would of course be a voluntary action that is within  his
             control and I do not have any risk assessment  or  psychiatric
             history or evidence  for  the  sponsor.   The  fact  that  the
             sponsor  may  elect  to  stop  taking  medication  is  not   a
             compelling, compassionate or exceptional circumstance.


         52.  Weight has to be attached to the fact  that  the  relationship
             was commenced in the full knowledge that the appellant did not
             have status  so  that  return  has  always  been  a  realistic
             possibility as of course has been  the  possibility  that  the
             health of the appellant and/or sponsor may deteriorate whether
             being treated in the UK or in  Nigeria  and  the  sponsor  has
             first hand knowledge of this, his second wife having  died  in
             the UK  from  complications  arising  from  her  HIV  positive
             status.


         53.  The fact that the appellant and sponsor  met  on  an  internet
             site for those who are HIV positive and  both  not  only  knew
             that the appellant did not have status, but they were aware of
             the implications for this for accessing what  I  was  told  is
             costly NHS healthcare free of charge in  the  United  Kingdom.
             The  appellant  was  also  fully  aware  that   her   previous
             application that appears to have been  based  on  a  different
             relationship with a man who was not  HIV  positive,  had  been
             refused so that there was no  legitimate  expectation  that  a
             further application based  on  a  new  relationship  would  be
             granted.  The relationship of the appellant  and  sponsor  was
             therefore clearly  and  admittedly  established  in  the  full
             knowledge that the appellant's status was precarious and  that
             the appellant and sponsor may well have to decide  whether  to
             pursue family life in  Nigeria  or,  by  dividing  their  time
             between Nigeria or by application  for  entry  clearance  from
             Nigeria.  It must also have been clear to both that because of
             her lack of conferred  status  the  appellant  has  not  shown
             entitlement to free NHS health care although this health  care
             appears to have been provided by two NHS Foundation Trusts.


         54.  The appellant is not a settled migrant so that in  striking  a
             fair balance when deciding if to grant leave to enable pursuit
             of a family and private life or if to require the appellant to
             return to Nigeria to make an application for  entry  clearance
             if this is the route that she  chooses  to  take,  the  United
             Kingdom Government has a wider margin  of  appreciation.   The
             refusal of leave will not  necessarily  lead  to  the  rupture
             family life.  There is a background history by  the  appellant
             of breaches of the immigration laws by overstaying  her  visit
             visa.


         55.  The issue of lack of evidence of private life  was  raised  in
             the refusal.  The appellant has  not  responded  to  this  for
             example by providing a chronology to show where she has  lived
             or how she has supported herself or  to  show  any  activities
             carried out in the United Kingdom to demonstrate  added  value
             or  integration  into  the  wider  community.   There   is   a
             testimonial letter from a couple who met her in 2006 but  this
             lacks detail as does the further updated letter from a  couple
             who have known the appellant  for  five  years  and  know  her
             family in Nigeria.


         56.  The issue of threats from family was  raised  in  the  refusal
             along with the availability of relocation  and  the  appellant
             has not provided any additional evidence to support her claims
             and there is countervailing evidence from a witness.   I  find
             that the appellant has not made out any claim that she  is  at
             risk on return or that internal relocation is not available or
             would be unduly harsh  for  this  competent,  resourceful  and
             capable woman who was able to obtain multi-visit visas for the
             UK and has survived in the UK without status since overstaying
             following her arrival in the UK in November 2007.


         57.  As an overstayer who did not comply with the duty of aliens to
             leave and comply with immigration controls, the  appellant  is
             an immigration offender.  In making this finding I  note  that
             the appellant's previous application was  refused  in  January
             2014 yet in the face of this and in the full knowledge of  her
             obligation to comply with immigration law and leave the United
             Kingdom, the appellant commenced a new relationship in the  UK
             via a chatroom forum and on this foundation has made a further
             application for leave on human rights grounds.  The fact  that
             she and the sponsor chose to establish a relationship in  this
             way after the refusal of the appellant's application does  not
             on the fact of it countervail against the public  interest  in
             the maintenance of effective immigration controls.


         58.  Having considered Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules,  I
             have noted and considered all the factors set out  in  section
             117B of the 2002 Act (as amended). I have to  have  regard  to
             the  public  interest  in   the   maintenance   of   effective
             immigration  controls,  noting  the  appellant's   immigration
             history and the public interest.  I have  noted  that  a  fair
             balance has to be  struck  between  the  competing  interests,
             which include the personal  interests  of  the  appellant  and
             sponsor."

8.   The judge then turned to consider the question of temporary  separation
    in the light of the  relevant  authorities  including  Chikwamba.   She
    concluded as follows:

         "61.  Having  balanced  all  relevant  factors,  I  find  that  the
             appellant's case, even when the circumstances of  the  sponsor
             and the appellant are taken fully into account, has  not  been
             shown by sufficient, satisfactory evidence to be a case of the
             kind imagined in SS Congo with reference to Huang.  There  are
             no circumstances that have such force in Article 8 terms so as
             to oblige the Secretary of State  to  grant  LTE  outside  the
             Immigration Rules in the exercise of her  residual  discretion
             particularly when an application can  be  made  from  Nigeria.
             The appellant has not discharged the burden of proof and shown
             that removal pursuant to the refusal  of  leave  would  breach
             Article 8 because the parties have a choice and the sponsor is
             an independent adult who is working, has supportive family and
             friends in the United Kingdom and is in a position to  support
             the appellant in  Nigeria  or  alternatively  support  her  in
             making an application for entry clearance.


         62.  Balancing all relevant factors and noting the findings in  all
             the case law that I was referred  to  including  that  in  the
             skeleton argument, I  find  that  there  is  nothing  that  so
             countervails against the public interest in the maintenance of
             effective immigration controls so as to justify  finding  that
             the public interest  balance  is  tipped  in  the  appellant's
             favour, when taking full account of the circumstances  of  the
             appellant and sponsor.  Having also found that  there  are  no
             insurmountable obstacles to family  life  outside  the  United
             Kingdom,  or  compelling  or  compassionate   or   exceptional
             circumstances, when answering the public interest question  in
             section 117A of the 2002 Act (as amended) in the  affirmative,
             I find that an interference with a person's family and private
             life is justified under Article 8(2) and proportionate."


9.   Accordingly the judge dismissed the  appeal  under  the  Rules  and  on
    Article 8 grounds.

10.  There was an application for permission to appeal which was refused  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.  However the application was renewed  and  the
    Upper Tribunal Judge in granting permission commented that the  grounds
    were poorly drafted.  While it appeared  that  the  decision  had  been
    challenged  on  Article  8  grounds,  the  points  were  difficult   to
    understand  and  did  not  coherently  advance  the  grounds  on  which
    permission was sought.  However it was  arguable  that  the  judge  had
    erred in respect of Article 8 in the light of Chikwamba and the  weight
    to be attached to the public interest - reference was made  to  Agyarko
    [2017] UKSC 11 (judgment had been given shortly after the  promulgation
    of the judge's determination) at paragraph 51.

11.  Mr Reiss adopted the  analysis  of  the  grounds  given  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal Judge when granting permission. He accepted  the  observations
    made about the grounds when permission was granted. Counsel referred to
    the argument based on EX.1. and EX.2. as well as the rejection  of  the
    claim under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  The third argument was  based  on
    Article 8 outside the Rules.

12.  While the judge had referred to a report on  22  September  2015  there
    had been a further report dated 13 October 2016.

13.  There were multiple  health  problems  which  demonstrated  there  were
    exceptional circumstances.  Article 3 was not argued  but  the  medical
    considerations  were  relevant  to   Article   8.    There   would   be
    unjustifiably harsh consequences involved in  removing  the  appellant.
    Reference was made to Beoku-Betts v Secretary of State [2008] UKHL  39.
    Reference had been made in the grounds to Razgar and  Huang.    Counsel
    referred to VW (Uganda) [2009] EWCA Civ 5.

14.  The appellant's case concerned removal rather than being a  deportation
    case.  There were clearly very  significant  obstacles  preventing  the
    return of the sponsor.  On the issue of temporary separation the  judge
    had relied on Chen [2015] UKUT 189 however there  would  be  a  serious
    impact involved in  temporary  separation  and  the  appeal  should  be
    allowed.

15.  Ms Holmes considered that the judge had  put  forward  a  detailed  and
    careful determination and had looked at  the  legal  situation  in  the
    light of the changed statutory framework which postdated  many  of  the
    elderly cases relied on in  the  grounds  of  appeal.   The  judge  had
    plainly given consideration to the case of  Chikwamba  which  had  been
    referred to in paragraph  49  of  the  decision.   Chikwamba  had  been
    referred to in paragraph 51 of Agyarko.  There it was said that  if  an
    applicant, even if residing in the UK unlawfully "was otherwise certain
    to be granted leave to enter, at least if an application were made from
    outside the UK, then there might be no public interest in  his  or  her
    removal."  No guarantees could be given about the outcome of  an  entry
    clearance application.

16.  Reference had been made to the  medical  letter  in  October  2016  but
    there was not much difference between that and  the  proceeding  letter
    and there was nothing  about  treatment  in  Nigeria.   The  judge  had
    carried out a very careful and detailed analysis  and  Ms  Holmes  went
    through the salient paragraphs in  the  determination.   While  another
    judge might have reached a different decision  the  conclusion  of  the
    judge in this case was open to her.  The case of Agyarko  had  taken  a
    hard line and reference was  made  to  paragraph  43  -  insurmountable
    obstacles was a stringent  test.   The  judge  had  carefully  directed
    herself by reference to the issue of exceptional circumstances as dealt
    with in Agyarko.  Ms Holmes referred to paragraph  54:  the  Convention
    was not intended to undermine the right of a state to control the entry
    of non-nationals by enabling non-nationals to evade immigration control
    by establishing  a  family  life  "while  present  in  the  host  state
    unlawfully  or  temporarily,  and  then  presenting  it  with  a   fait
    accompli."  When faced with such a situation "the removal of  the  non-
    family member by the authorities would be incompatible with  Article  8
    only  in  exceptional  circumstances".   There  were   no   exceptional
    circumstances in this case given the careful  analysis  by  the  judge.
    The appellant had family in Nigeria and was an immigration offender and
    the  sponsor  had  married  the  appellant  knowing  that  she  was  an
    overstayer.  There had been substantial cost to the NHS.  The  findings
    were open to the judge.

17.  Counsel again referred to the  question  of  significant  obstacles  as
    defined and the issue of  the  judge  overlooking  the  latest  medical
    evidence.  The couple would face very severe hardship,  the  judge  had
    not applied Chikwamba correctly.  There were compelling,  compassionate
    circumstances - the appellant's husband had never been to  Nigeria  and
    he had an important job in the UK and there was much more than  a  mere
    obstacle involved in this case.  Counsel accepted that there had been a
    statutory change introduced by the 2014 Act but submitted that  "little
    weight" did not mean "no weight".   The  determination  was  materially
    flawed in law.

18.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered all the  material  before  me.   As  the  Tribunal
    commented when granting permission  the  grounds  of  appeal  were  not
    particularly helpful.  The only point that appeared to emerge  was  the
    point based on Chikwamba and the weight to be attached  to  the  public
    interest.

19.  I agree with the points made by Ms Holmes that the determination  is  a
    very careful and thorough one spanning some  sixteen  pages  and  I  am
    conscious that I have not done justice to it in my summary above.   The
    judge considered the last detailed medical report in  paragraph  50  of
    her decision.  I am not satisfied that the absence of  a  reference  to
    the 2016 report indicates an error in the judge's approach  and  indeed
    it was not a matter that was raised in the grounds of appeal.  The 2016
    report appears to follow a similar pattern to the report that the judge
    expressly refers to and like the earlier report it did  not  deal  with
    the issue  of  the  availability  of  treatment  in  Nigeria.   Counsel
    concluded his submissions by making the point that  the  words  "little
    weight" in the statutory test under s 117B did not  mean  "no  weight".
    However the judge expressly reminded herself in  paragraph  26  of  her
    decision of this distinction: "It should be recalled that although  the
    statutory provisions state that little weight is to be given,  it  does
    not state that no weight is to be given to such  factors  even  limited
    weight can tip the balance." I see no evidence of any misdirection.

20.  Ms Holmes makes  the  point  that  Agyarko  sets  out  a  more  testing
    approach  than  that  previously  applied.   Lord  Reid,  referring  to
    Jeunesse stated as follows in 43:

             "...Insurmountable  obstacles"  is,  however,  the  expression
             employed by the Grand Chamber; and the court's application  of
             it indicates that it is a stringent  test.  In Jeunesse, for
             example, there were said to be no insurmountable obstacles  to
             the  relocation  of  the  family  to  Suriname,  although  the
             children, the eldest of whom was  at  secondary  school,  were
             Dutch nationals who had lived there all their lives, had never
             visited Suriname, and would experience a degree of hardship if
             forced to move, and the applicant's partner was  in  full-time
             employment in the Netherlands: see paras 117 and 119."

    Family life was entered into in precarious circumstances and the issues
    of precariousness  and  exceptional  circumstances  are  considered  in
    paragraphs 49ff of Lord Reid's decision.  I do not detect any error  in
    the approach of the First-tier Judge to the issues before her.

21.  In  relation  to  the  Chikwamba  point  I  have  already  referred  to
    paragraph 51 of Agyarko.  As Ms Holmes submitted it cannot be said that
    the appellant "was otherwise certain to be granted leave to  enter"  if
    she applied from overseas.  No guarantees could be  given.  There  were
    various public interest issues in the instant appeal  which  the  judge
    explored very carefully.  I am not satisfied that the judge misdirected
    herself on this aspect in the particular circumstances of this case.

22.  It was properly accepted by Ms Holmes that  another  judge  might  have
    reached a different decision but I do not find that she  erred  in  her
    consideration of the appellant's case under the Rules or in relation to
    Article  8.   The  grounds  which  are  poorly   drafted   as   counsel
    acknowledged in large measure  simply  express  disagreement  with  the
    outcome.

Anonymity Order

The First-tier Judge made an anonymity direction in this  case  and  in  the
circumstances I am satisfied that it is appropriate to continue that order.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.





Signed                                  Date   21 December 2017


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal


