
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/33279/2014
                                                               IA/33282/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 January 2016                   |On 28 January 2016                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                    MRS M BALDIVIEZO MARTINEZ MARIELA (1)
                  MISS MARIA LUISA CASSANOVA BALDIVIEZO (2)
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr P V Thoree of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The first appellant (Mariela) is the mother  of  the  second  appellant
    (Maria Luisa).  The respondent to this appeal is the Secretary of State
    for the Home Department.

2.   Mariella came to the UK in 2002 and met her  present  husband  (Elahie)
    the same year.  They have been living  together  as  husband  and  wife
    since 2012.  Mariela was given limited  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Rules in 2011 but that expired on 5 April  2014.   Mariela's  daughter,
    Maria Luisa, first came to the UK in March 2005.  Maria Luisa was  born
    on 27 February 1998 and is therefore now 17.

3.   On 20 March 2014 the appellants made  their  present  applications  for
    leave to remain  in  the  UK  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   Their
    applications were considered under paragraph 322(1),  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraphs 276ADE (1)-DH of the Immigration Rules but were refused on 6
    August 2014 for reasons set out in a detailed letter of that date.

4.   The appellants appealed the refusal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FTT)
    and the appeal came before Judge of FTT Manuell (the Immigration Judge)
    sitting in Richmond upon Thames Magistrates' Court on  23  March  2015.
    The Immigration Judge, in his decision promulgated  on  2  April  2015,
    decided to dismiss the appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  to
    refuse permission for further leave to remain.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

5.   By a notice of appeal lodged on 9  April  2015  the  appellants  sought
    permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   The  grounds  are  wide-
    ranging  and  include  allegations  that  the  Immigration  Judge   was
    subjective in his determination and that he failed  to  demonstrate  an
    objective approach.  The second appellant was a minor when she  arrived
    in the UK aged 6 and was still only 16 at the date of the hearing.  The
    Immigration Judge had allegedly given insufficient weight to the second
    appellant's private life and the need to continue her studies here.  It
    is alleged that it would be unfair and unsafe to allow the decision  to
    stand and on that basis permission to appeal was sought.

6.   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Archer thought that the  grounds  raised  a
    properly arguable point at paragraphs 21-33 of the decision in relation
    to the best interests of the second appellant.  The reasonableness test
    in Section 117B(6)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 (the 2002 Act) needed to be considered  as  the  appellant  was  a
    qualifying child under Section 117D of that Act.

7.   The respondent submitted a response  under  Rule  24  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (S.I.  2008  no.  2698  (l.  15))
    indicating that the appeal was opposed.  Mariella was an  illegal  over
    stayer and Maria Luisa could relocate with her mother  and  step-father
    to Bolivia.  It was not argued before the FTT that the  best  interests
    of Maria Luisa lay in being separated from her  parents.   However,  it
    was argued that the Immigration Judge was entitled to conclude that the
    appellants had  strong  cultural  ties  to  Bolivia,  that  the  second
    appellant was able to speak the Spanish language  and  the  Immigration
    Judge came to  a  reasoned  conclusion  having  taken  account  of  all
    material considerations.  Mr Nath said that the grounds of appeal raise
    no more than sustained disagreements with the findings.

8.   Directions were made that the parties were to file any  documents  with
    the Tribunal no later than seven days before the hearing and  that  the
    Tribunal would not entertain any new evidence that was not  before  the
    FTT.

The Hearing

9.   At the hearing I heard submissions by both representatives.  Mr  Thoree
    said that the judge had been over-subjective in his approach and failed
    to assess the situation  "objectively."   He  then  identified  certain
    passages in the decision of which he was critical.  These  included  at
    paragraph  18  where  the  Immigration  Judge  pointed  out  that   the
    appellants only had leave pursuant to Section 3C of the Immigration Act
    1971.  This, it was submitted, meant they were in the UK lawfully.   It
    was pointed out, however, that in 2011 the appellants had been given  a
    further three years leave to remain and no indication had been given as
    to why the respondent had granted them further leave. It was  submitted
    that if the respondent had formed the view that the appellants ought to
    be removed she would have said so.  But, it was acknowledged that,  the
    application considered by the respondent on 6th August 2014 could  only
    succeed under Article 8. It  was  submitted  that  if  there  had  been
    "sustained deception", as had been claimed, this would have resulted in
    a refusal to grant even limited leave  to  remain.  If  they  had  used
    deception, it had been largely forgiven by the  respondent.   Secondly,
    the Immigration Judge had unfairly characterised  the  first  appellant
    and the sponsor's work as being "illegal."  Thirdly, as  far  as  Maria
    Luisa was concerned, she had been in the UK most of her  life  and  was
    entitled to be educated here. It appeared to the  appellants  that  the
    Immigration Judge had made an unsupported allegation (in  paragraph  21
    of his decision) that the second appellant's education had been at  the
    expense of the tax  payer.   It  was  accepted  that  the  decision  in
    relation to Maria Luisa stood or fell with that of her mother, Mariela.
     It was also accepted by Mr Thoree that the main point  raised  in  the
    grounds of  appeal  (that  the  public  interest  considerations  under
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act did not require the removal  of  a  person
    where there was a genuine and subsisting relationship with a qualifying
    child in circumstances where it would not be reasonable to  expect  the
    child to leave the UK) was no longer available to him  given  that  the
    younger of his two clients had  reached  the  age  of  17.   Mr  Thoree
    realistically accepted that he was "in  difficulties"  in  relation  to
    this argument. He accepted that the basis on which his client had  been
    given permission to  appeal  no  longer  appeared  relevant  therefore.
    However, he maintained that  the  appellants'  human  rights  would  be
    infringed by their removal.  In the circumstances, I was urged to allow
    the appeal.

10.  Mr Nath did not accept a number of the assertions that  had  been  made
    on behalf of the appellants.  He pointed out that as far  as  he  could
    tell Mariela had not been working lawfully in the UK.   The  fact  that
    the respondent had granted a limited form of leave did not in  any  way
    absolve the appellants from compliance with the Immigration  Rules  and
    the need to regularise their status.  In fact, they had  not  formed  a
    private or family life in the UK such as would be recognised under  the
    relevant Rules.  I was specifically referred to paragraphs 22,  24,  25
    and 26 of the decision.  It was  submitted  that  despite  the  lengthy
    period of residence in the UK by Maria Luisa, she  was  brought  up  in
    Bolivia until the age of 6, would be familiar with  the  culture  there
    and it was incredible that  her  knowledge  of  Spanish  would  not  be
    adequate given her parents both spoke that language at home.  It  would
    not be unduly harsh to require the family to return  to  Bolivia.   The
    second appellant had now reached the age of 17 and many of  the  points
    made before the Immigration Judge were no longer valid therefore.

11.  Mr Thoree briefly replied to say that it was not clear  why  the  leave
    had been granted to his client on a temporary basis.  He  said  it  was
    disproportionate to require them to leave the UK and return to  Bolivia
    in any event.

12.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my  decision  as  to  whether  the
    decision of the FTT contained a material error of  law,  which  I  will
    later give having set out the reasons.

Discussion

13.  I note that according to the  letter  in  support  of  the  application
    dated 8 March 2011, Mariella came to the  UK  as  a  student  for  nine
    months.  She brought her daughter into the  UK  in  March  2005  having
    already established a relationship with Elahie.  The letter claims that
    Maria Luisa suffered a sexual assault from a fellow school mate.  Maria
    Luisa is said to have a poor relationship with her own father, who  was
    violent.  Mariela is said to have experienced domestic violence herself
    and the various observations in the letter support  an  application  on
    the  basis  that  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  operates  to  prevent  the
    respondent's unlawful interference  with  the  significant  family  and
    private life formed in the UK.  The case  is  described  as  "the  most
    exceptional and compassionate" one.

14.  I was referred to the case of Bossadi [2015] UKUT  00042  (IAC).   That
    case was  concerned  with  the  suitability  requirements  set  out  in
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  A "rounded assessment"  had
    to be made as to whether an appellant's familial ties in the country of
    return were sufficiently strong to support the appellant in  the  event
    that he had to return to his own country.    The  failure  to  properly
    consider these issues would be an error of law.

15.  I turn to consider the judge's reasons. The  permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal seems to have solely related  to  the  treatment  of
    Maria Luisa's appeal by  the  Immigration  Judge.   However,  it  seems
    appropriate to consider the case more generally given  the  submissions
    made before me.

16.  The Immigration Judge expressed  himself  in  trenchant  language  but,
    with respect to Mr Thoree, it  cannot  be  said  that  the  Immigration
    Judge's views coloured his judgment.  Ultimately, the decision contains
    a detailed consideration of the facts and an application of  the  facts
    to the law as it was presented to him.  It was open to  the  respondent
    to grant a limited form of leave without thereby waiving any  objection
    to the appellants' long-term settlement in the UK.  The respondent does
    not thereby recognise that the appellants' presence in the UK has  been
    entirely lawful.  The grant of limited leave until 2014 may  well  have
    been stimulated by the fact that Maria Luisa was at a  sensitive  stage
    in her schooling and  it  may  have  been  thought  by  the  respondent
    appropriate to allow her to complete her studies.  In  any  event,  the
    earlier grant of temporary leave appears to be  a  minor  issue,  given
    that it has not been contended that either  appellant  qualifies  under
    the Immigration Rules for long-term leave to remain in the UK.

17.  There are no compelling reasons for considering the claim  outside  the
    Immigration Rules. The argument that the appellants  cannot  reasonably
    continue their family life with Elahie in Bolivia,  where  Mariela  had
    spent the majority of her life and Maria Luisa the first six years, was
    not made out.  In any case where a foreign national forms a private  or
    family  life  in  the  UK  (undisputedly  the  case  here)  significant
    disruption is  likely  to  be  caused  by  his  return.   However,  the
    respondent is entitled to  consider  the  need  to  maintain  effective
    immigration control.  No medical or other evidence was supplied to  the
    respondent to indicate that Maria Luisa was unable to  travel.  Neither
    the respondent, nor the Immigration Judge, accepted that Maria  Luisa's
    Spanish was limited or that she would be handicapped in  settling  back
    into a Latin culture. This is not to say that Maria Luisa will not need
    to improve her written Spanish. It was open to the Immigration Judge to
    find, as he did, that the appellants could return as a family unit with
    their UK-based partner, the sponsor/step father.  There  are  no  "very
    significant obstacles" to their integration into Bolivian society.

18.  It is noteworthy that the respondent did not  place  specific  reliance
    on the conduct of the appellants and it  is  unnecessary  therefore  to
    consider this aspect further. The finding made  by  the  FTT  that  the
    appellants had formed a private or family life in the  UK  precariously
    in circumstances where they could be expected  to  have  to  return  to
    Bolivia could not be seriously argued with. I consider  it  unnecessary
    to consider this aspect further.  The appellants had not satisfied  the
    FTT that this was one of those  exceptional  cases  which  fell  to  be
    decided outside the Immigration Rules.  The Immigration Judge gave full
    and careful consideration to all the evidence in the case  and  reached
    clear and sustainable conclusions which were available to him  on  that
    evidence.  If some of his language was inappropriate it does not damage
    the essential findings.  His conclusion was well within his discretion.

Conclusion

19.  The only point on which the appellants were given permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal (that  the  second  appellant  was  a  minor  and
    therefore Section 117(6)(b) of the  2002  Act  applied)  has  not  been
    effectively pursued before the Upper Tribunal.   The  attack  upon  the
    Immigration Judge in oral submissions before  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    very wide-ranging but, I have concluded, ultimately fails. Accordingly,
    the decision of the FTT stands.

Notice of Decision

The appellants' appeal against the decision of the FTT is dismissed and  the
decision of the respondent to refuse further leave to remain stands.

No fee award or anonymity direction has been made  in  this  case  and  that
decision also stands.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award has been made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

