


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33568/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 25 February 2014                         |On: 4 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              christopher yeba
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Bandegani, instructed by Turpin & Miller
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   against the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  allowing  Mr  Yeba's  appeal
   against a decision of 7  August  2013  to  remove  him  from  the  United
   Kingdom.

2. For the purposes of this decision, I shall  refer  to  the  Secretary  of
   State as the respondent and Mr Yeba as the  appellant,  reflecting  their
   positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

3. The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon, born on 21 May  1979.  He  claims
   to have entered the United Kingdom  in  September  1999  using  a  French
   student identity card. On 20 June 2012 he was arrested  on  suspicion  of
   using a forged instrument, fraud by misrepresentation and  illegal  entry
   and was served with form IS.151A as an illegal entrant. On 29  June  2012
   he was given a custodial sentence of nine months following his conviction
   for using false documents and for pecuniary advantage. On 16 October 2012
   he  submitted  an  Article  8  claim  and  further  representations  were
   subsequently made to support that claim. His sentence ended on 4 November
   2012 and he was released from custody.

4.  The  appellant's  Article  8  claim  was  based   primarily   upon   his
   relationship with Kate Fearon, a British citizen, whom he had  first  met
   in 2007 and with whom he had  started  a  relationship  and  subsequently
   cohabited from 2009. The appellant  was  stated  to  have  been  born  in
   France, although a citizen of the  Cameroon,  and  to  have  returned  to
   Cameroon with his parents until the age of ten years when he returned  to
   live in France with his mother and siblings. He claimed to have  returned
   to Cameroon on only one occasion to attend his father's funeral in  1992.
   He came to the United Kingdom  in  September  1999  and  had  established
   strong ties here. His partner, Ms Fearon, had been diagnosed with thyroid
   cancer in November 2009 and he was her main  carer.  He  had  worked  for
   seven years in a psychiatric hospital and his partner also worked in  the
   mental health field. His partner was born in the United Kingdom  but  had
   moved to Zambia with her parents as a  child,  returning  to  the  United
   Kingdom in 1999 and had remained here since then. Her  parents  had  been
   living in Mexico for three years. She could not relocate to Cameroon.

5. The appellant's claim was refused by the respondent on 7 August 2013.  It
   was accepted that  his  relationship  with  Ms  Fearon  was  genuine  and
   subsisting and that they had lived together in  a  relationship  akin  to
   marriage for at least two years. Accordingly he  was  able  to  meet  the
   requirements of GEN 1.2 as a partner. However the  respondent  considered
   that his claim fell for refusal under section S-LTR 1.6 of Appendix FM of
   the immigration rules on the basis that his  continued  presence  in  the
   United Kingdom was considered undesirable as a result of his  conviction.
   The respondent considered that the appellant was in any event  unable  to
   meet the Eligibility requirements in E-LTRP as  he  fell  to  be  refused
   under E-LTRP.2.1(c) and 2.2. on the basis that he had  never  held  valid
   leave to remain in the United Kingdom. It  was  considered  that  section
   EX.1. did not apply to him since there were no  insurmountable  obstacles
   to his family life  continuing  in  Cameroon.  The  respondent  concluded
   further that he was unable to meet the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE
   since he had retained ties to Cameroon and that his removal would not  be
   in breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.

6. The appellant's appeal was  heard  on  24  December  2013  by  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Maciel. The judge heard from the  appellant  and  from  Ms
   Fearon, who gave evidence that she had always assumed the appellant to be
   a French national until she found out otherwise when he was arrested.  In
   regard to the  category  of  Suitability,  she  did  not  find  that  the
   respondent had shown adequate reasons for concluding  that  it  would  be
   undesirable to allow the appellant to remain in the  United  Kingdom  for
   the purposes of section S-LTR 1.6 of Appendix  FM.  With  regard  to  the
   category of Eligibility, she found that he was not eligible for leave  to
   remain under E-LTRP 2.2. As for EX.1 she considered  that  the  appellant
   was unable to show that there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
   life continuing in Cameroon and accordingly the exception did  not  apply
   to  him.  Neither,  she  found,  was  the  appellant  able  to  meet  the
   requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE.  Accordingly  she  found  that   the
   appellant was unable to meet the requirements of  the  immigration  rules
   relating to family and private life and she dismissed the appeal on those
   grounds. However, she went on to allow the  appeal  on  Article  8  human
   rights grounds, concluding that it was wholly unreasonable to  expect  Ms
   Fearon to relocate to Cameroon and that the interference to  family  life
   would thus be disproportionate.

7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  respondent
   on the grounds that the reasons given by the judge  for  considering  the
   appellant's removal to be disproportionate did not establish  that  there
   were exceptional or compelling circumstances such as to justify departure
   from the immigration rules.

8. Permission to appeal was granted  on  27  January  2014  on  the  grounds
   raised.

Appeal hearing and submissions

9. The appeal came before me on 25 February  2014.  The  appellant  and  his
   partner were in attendance but were not required to give oral evidence.

10. Before hearing submissions on the error of law I indicated to  Mr  Avery
   my preliminary view that on the findings made by the judge she  ought  to
   have allowed the appeal under the immigration rules rather than on  human
   rights grounds and that her reasons for not having  done  so  were  based
   simply  upon  a  misunderstanding  of  the  concept  of   "insurmountable
   obstacles" under EX.1. Mr Bandegani advised me that  that  was  precisely
   the case he was intending to put forward for the appellant. I rose for  a
   short period of time in order to give Mr Avery an opportunity to consider
   that point.

11. Upon consideration, Mr Avery advised me that he had  no  submissions  to
   make in regard to that point but would simply  rely  on  the  grounds  of
   appeal. However he submitted that the judge  had  erred  in  law  in  her
   findings on Suitability under section S-LTR 1.6 of Appendix FM by failing
   to give adequate weight to the public interest. She had erred by  relying
   upon the appellant's good employment record to undermine  the  weight  of
   the public interest and in so doing had failed to take into  account  the
   fact that he had had been  working  illegally  on  the  basis  of  forged
   documentation.

12. Mr Bandegani agreed that if the judge had erred in her consideration  of
   section S-LTR 1.6, the appellant could not benefit from EX.1. However  he
   submitted that there had been no error in her consideration of section S-
   LTR since she had had full regard to the Secretary  of  State's  position
   and had  considered  all  relevant  factors  as  a  whole  as  S-LTR.1.6.
   required. With regard to her consideration of EX.1, any error made by the
   judge in her understanding of "insurmountable obstacles" was not material
   and her overall decision to allow the appeal ought not to be set aside.

Consideration and findings

13. The basis of the respondent's challenge, in the grounds  of  appeal,  to
   Judge Maciel's decision was, in essence, that  she  had  failed  to  give
   adequate reasons for finding there to  be  exceptional  circumstances  to
   justify allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds when the requirements of
   the immigration rules had not been met. However, as I  indicated  at  the
   hearing, that did not appear to be the correct approach to  her  findings
   and to any error that had arisen in those findings.  The  starting  point
   has instead to be the apparent inconsistency between her findings on  the
   reasonableness of relocation in the context of Article 8 and  those  made
   in regard to "insurmountable obstacles" in the context of  section  EX.1.
   of Appendix FM of the immigration rules.

14. At paragraph  28  of  her  determination,  when  considering  Article  8
   outside the immigration rules, the judge considered whether it  would  be
   reasonable to expect Ms Fearon to  relocate  to  Cameroon  in  order  for
   family life to  be  maintained.  She  found  that  it  would  be  "wholly
   unreasonable" to expect her to do so and she gave  detailed  reasons  for
   reaching that conclusion. Yet at paragraph 15, when considering the  same
   evidence in the context of EX.1 of Appendix FM, she concluded that  there
   were no insurmountable obstacles to the appellant and Ms Fearon having  a
   family life in Cameroon. Clearly, in reaching the latter conclusion,  she
   considered that the test  to  be  met  for  establishing  "insurmountable
   obstacles" in EX.1 was a higher one than the "reasonableness" test in the
   established Article 8 jurisprudence (as set out at  paragraph  17  of  Mr
   Bandegani's skeleton argument).

15. Since the introduction of the new immigration rules relating  to  family
   life in Appendix FM, mention has been made by the higher  courts  of  the
   attempt  to  re-introduce  the  concept  of  "insurmountable   obstacles"
   disapproved of in the earlier jurisprudence, but no  conclusive  findings
   have been made in that regard. However, in  MF (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 the  Court  of  Appeal
   made the following observation:

  47. "Before we come to the decision that was made on  the  facts  of  this
      case, we need to say something about "insurmountable  obstacles".   It
      will be recalled that one of the situations in which para 399  applies
      is where the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a
      partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen, settled in  the  UK
      or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian  protection,  and  the
      partner satisfies the condition stated in para  399(b)(i)  and  "there
      are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with  that   partner
      continuing outside the UK".


  48. At para 38 of their determination, the UT said that they were bound by
      authority to hold that the proper  test  for  article  8  purposes  is
      "reasonableness".   It is not in dispute that MF  has  a  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship with SB and that SB  satisfies  the  condition
      stated in para 399(b)(i).  As already noted, it was conceded on behalf
      of the Secretary of State before the  UT  that  it  would  not  be  "a
      reasonable option" for SB and F to be relocated with MF to Nigeria and
      that there were "insurmountable obstacles" to family life with SB  and
      F continuing outside the United Kingdom


  49. In view of the concession made before the  UT,  the  question  of  the
      meaning  of  "insurmountable  obstacles"  does  not  arise.   We  did,
      however, hear argument on  the  point.   We  would  observe  that,  if
      "insurmountable"  obstacles  are  literally  obstacles  which  it   is
      impossible to surmount, their scope is very limited indeed.  We  shall
      confine ourselves to saying that we incline to the view that, for  the
      reasons stated in detail by the UT in Izuazu at paras 53 to 59, such a
      stringent approach would be contrary to article 8. "

16. In the light of those observations, and of the  findings  of  the  Upper
   Tribunal in Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules)  Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT  45  at
   paragraphs 53 to 59 as referred to by the Court of Appeal in MF, it seems
   to me that Judge Maciel  misunderstood  the  meaning  of  "insurmountable
   obstacles" in EX.1 and applied too high a test. Had she applied the  test
   of "reasonableness", as she was required to do, she ought to have  found,
   on the basis of the findings that she made at paragraph 28, that  section
   EX.1(b) of Appendix FM applied to the appellant such that he was able  to
   meet the requirements of the immigration rules. Accordingly she ought  to
   have allowed the appeal on that basis.

17. That is not the end of the matter, as it is the  respondent's  case,  at
   paragraph d) of the grounds of appeal, that the judge's finding  that  it
   would be unreasonable to require  Ms  Fearon  to  live  in  Cameroon  was
   misguided. However, in my view,  that  amounts  to  little  more  than  a
   disagreement with her findings. The judge gave full and detailed reasons,
   at paragraph 28, for reaching the conclusion that she did. She was  fully
   aware of the  availability  of  medical  treatment  for  the  sponsor  in
   Cameroon and took that into account. She was also  fully  aware  of,  and
   took into account the appellant's past behaviour. She was perfectly aware
   that the appellant had been living in  the  United  Kingdom  without  any
   lawful basis, that he had obtained his employment by misrepresenting  his
   nationality and immigration status, that he had used a false document  to
   retain his employment and that he had been deceitful in failing to inform
   Ms Fearon of his true status. Those were factors to which she  repeatedly
   made reference, both in the recording of the evidence and in her findings
   at paragraphs 14, 26 and 27 and it is clear that she had those very  much
   in mind when reaching her conclusions. She nevertheless concluded that Ms
   Fearon remained committed to the relationship and that  the  relationship
   was a genuine and subsisting one for both parties, that Ms Fearon had  no
   knowledge of the appellant's immigration  position,  and  she  found,  at
   paragraphs 27 to 29, that the negative factors  were  outweighed  by  the
   positive ones. She reached  that  conclusion  upon  a  full  and  careful
   assessment of the evidence,  giving  full  and  cogent  reasons  for  her
   findings and was accordingly entitled to conclude as she did.

18. Mr Avery did not seek to make further submissions on that aspect of  the
   decision  but  sought  instead  to  challenge  the  judge's  findings  on
   Suitability. However the  grounds  of  appeal  did  not  challenge  those
   findings and that  was  not  the  basis  for  the  grant  of  permission.
   Nevertheless, I have considered his submissions in that  regard.  It  was
   his case that the judge had failed to give adequate weight to the  public
   interest and had instead erroneously placed  weight  on  the  appellant's
   good employment record without considering that he was  not  entitled  to
   work and that he had obtained  his  employment  on  the  basis  of  false
   representations and forged documentation. However it seems to me that she
   took all of those factors  into  account  and  was  fully  aware  of  the
   Secretary of State's position and of the numerous concerns  she  had,  as
   she recorded at paragraph 4 of her determination and in her  findings  at
   paragraphs 14 and 27. As Mr  Bandegani  submitted  in  responding  to  Mr
   Avery's challenge, section S-LTR.1.6 involved a consideration of  various
   factors which, taken as  a  whole,  led  to  a  conclusion  that  it  was
   undesirable to allow an applicant to remain in the United Kingdom. Having
   considered all the factors in the appellant's favour and  those  weighing
   against him, the judge concluded that the appellant's offence was not  so
   serious as to amount to  a  suitability  bar  on  its  own.  That  was  a
   conclusion that she was entitled to reach. It seems to me that Mr Avery's
   challenge amounted to a disagreement with the weight she attached to  the
   negative factors rather than a basis upon which to conclude that she  had
   erred in law in her findings on Suitability.

19. The question therefore remains  as  to  whether  the  judge's  error  in
   relation to her findings on EX.1 is such that her decision has to be  set
   aside, when in fact the end result would be that the appeal is  still  to
   be allowed, albeit on a different basis. That was  the  subject  of  some
   discussion upon which neither party had any particular opinion. Mr  Avery
   advised me that in the event I decided to set aside the determination  on
   that basis, he had no further submissions to  make  as  regards  the  re-
   making of the decision and agreed that if I found no other error of  law,
   there was nothing further to be said.

20. It seems  to  me  that  the  judge's  error  in  her  interpretation  of
   "insurmountable obstacles" is a fundamental one, given that it led to her
   dismissing the appeal under the immigration rules. As I have found above,
   had she applied the proper test in considering "insurmountable obstacles"
   she ought, on the findings that she made at paragraph 28, to have allowed
   the appeal under the immigration rules on the  basis  that  section  EX.1
   applied to the appellant. Accordingly, I set aside her decision  and  re-
   make it by allowing the appeal under the immigration rules.

DECISION

21. The making of the decision  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. I set aside that decision  and  re-
   make it  by  substituting  a  decision  allowing  the  appeal  under  the
   immigration rules.














                               Signed                                  Date


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
