

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33754/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 1st August 2016                           |On: 3rd August 2016          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           Kehinde Kolawole Jegede
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Isherwood , Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Adewoye, Prime Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Nigeria date of birth 12th April  1975.
     On the 30th November 2015 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  NJ  Bennett)
    allowed his appeal, on human rights  grounds,  against  a  decision  to
    refuse to grant him leave to remain and to remove him from  the  United
    Kingdom pursuant to s47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act
    2006.  The Secretary of State now has permission to appeal against that
    decision.
 2. The matter in dispute between the parties was  whether  the  Respondent
    should be granted leave to remain on Article 8  grounds  on  the  basis
    that his removal would be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  his
    family life with his wife and children.  The  Secretary  of  State  had
    refused his application under the 'five-year route  to  settlement'  in
    Appendix FM of the Rules because the Respondent had failed  to  provide
    the 'specified evidence' relating to family income,  had  not  produced
    the requisite English  language  certificate.  Consideration  had  been
    given to whether the Respondent could, in the alternative, qualify  for
    the 'ten-year route to settlement'  by  showing  one  or  more  of  the
    exceptions in  EX.1  to  apply.  Although  it  was  accepted  that  the
    Respondent has children in the UK they were  neither  British  nor  had
    they lived in the UK for seven years or more.  Finding there to  be  no
    exceptional circumstances such that leave should be granted outside  of
    the framework set down in Appendix FM, leave was refused.


 3. When the matter came before the First-tier  Tribunal  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer conceded that the requirements as  to  the  'minimum
    income threshold' and the specified evidence required to prove it  were
    all met. The only live issue was whether the  Respondent  had  a  valid
    English language test certificate issued  by  an  accredited  body.  He
    didn't. He had submitted a certificate issued by the 'English  Speaking
    Board' but this was not an organisation listed in  Appendix  O  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  He could not therefore qualify for leave under  the
    'five-year route to settlement'. The Tribunal went on to  consider  the
    'exceptions' at EX.1.  It found that his two children were then aged  6
    and 4. Neither were British (although an application  had  been  made).
    Neither had lived in the UK for seven years. They  were  not  therefore
    considered to be "qualifying" within the meaning  of  the  Rules.   The
    Tribunal did not in any event consider that it could be shown  that  it
    would be unreasonable to expect either  child  to  leave  the  UK.   In
    respect of the Respondent's wife the Tribunal found that  as  a  native
    Yoruba speaker  who  had  grown  up  in  Nigeria  there  would  not  be
    insurmountable obstacles  to  her  integration  there.  The  Respondent
    therefore  failed  under  the  two  alternative  limbs  of  EX.1.   The
    determination then reads:


         "I therefore  turn  to  Article  8  outside  the  confines  of  the
         Immigration Rules. I accept that the Appellant  has  a  family  and
         private life in this country and that the real question is  whether
         removal in the interests of enforcing immigration control would  be
         a proportionate interference with his family and private life. I am
         required to have regard to the interests of all parties affected by
         the decision including, therefore, the interests of  the  wife  and
         children. The children's interests  are  a  primary  consideration,
         because they are minors, but  their  interests  are  not  the  only
         consideration.  Their  interests  therefore  have  to  be  balanced
         against the other competing considerations"

    The Tribunal then gives consideration to the factors listed in s117B of
    the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  paying  particular
    attention to the fact that it is in the public interest that applicants
    can speak English.  Having done so  it  allowed  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.


 4. The Secretary of State now appeals on the grounds that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  has failed to identify good reasons why this was a case which
    merited consideration 'outside of the Rules'. The failure to  meet  the
    requirements in respect of  the  English  language  was  a  substantial
    omission and one which attracted a good deal of weight in terms of  the
    public interest:  R (on the application of Ali and Bibi) v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2015] UKSC 68.  It is submitted that the
    determination fails to adequately explain why this appellant should  be
    granted permission to remain over and above others in the same class of
    applicants: SS (Congo) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  I find all of these submissions to be well  made.
    The fact that there might be some inconvenience to  the  Respondent  in
    having to take a new  test  and  apply  again,  from  this  country  or
    Nigeria, was not a sufficient basis to find there to a disproportionate
    interference with his Article 8 rights, as this  determination  appears
    to do.


 5. I therefore set the decision aside and remake it.  The  parties  agreed
    that as an in-country appeal the relevant date for my  enquiry  is  the
    date of hearing. It was further agreed that under the  Rules  the  only
    matter in issue was the English language requirement set out at  S-LTRP
    4.1 of Appendix FM. The Respondent must demonstrate that he has  passed
    a test in speaking and listening at level A1  of  the  Common  European
    Framework of Reference for Languages.

 6. Before me the Respondent produced three original documents.  The  first
    was a degree certificate awarded by the Ladoke Akintola  University  of
    Technology in Nigeria. It was awarded in 2005 and shows the  Respondent
    to be a  Master  of  Business  Administration.  The  second  and  third
    documents are both issued by NARIC. There is a 'academic  qualification
    level statement' issued on the 14th July 2016 which states  that  NARIC
    have carefully evaluated his degree  certificate  and  found  it  to  a
    qualification comparable with a British Masters degree. There  is  also
    an 'English language proficiency statement' which explains  that  NARIC
    consider the Respondent's degree to meet the requirements  of  CEFR  at
    level 1.

 7. The Respondent's explanation for the late production of  that  evidence
    was firstly that he had believed his  original  English  language  test
    certificate to have complied with the Rules. Having discovered that  it
    did not, he was unable to take a new test because the Home Office would
    not return his passport to him. They had sent him a certified copy  but
    he had been unsuccessful at trying to persuade any  accredited  English
    language  school  to  let  him  take  the  test  without  an   original
    identification document.  Finally he had resorted  to  relying  on  his
    original Nigerian degree, taught entirely in English,  but  because  of
    the "bureaucracy over there" it had taken some  time  for  this  to  be
    provided, and it then had to be "converted" by UK NARIC.

 8. Ms Isherwood very helpfully took instructions on the original documents
    provided and having done so agreed that these were sufficient  to  meet
    the requirements of the Rules.  That being the only  matter  in  issue,
    the appeal is allowed.


      Decisions


 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.


10. The decision in the appeal is re-made as follows:


    "The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules"


11. I was not asked to make a direction for anonymity and on  the  facts  I
    see no reason to do so.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                     1st
                                 August 2016
