
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/33035/2013
                                                               IA/33043/2013
                                                               IA/33049/2013
                                                               IA/33055/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On : 8 July 2015                     |On 13 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              bibi aissa nazir
                             mohamed ally nazir
                         muhammad faizaar-ally nazir
                         muhammad farhaan-ally nazir
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr M Harris, instructed by Raj Law Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appeals  of  Ms  Nazir
and  her  family  against  the  respondent's  decision   to   refuse   their
applications for leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

For the purposes of  this  decision,  we  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
Secretary of State as the respondent and Ms Nazir  and  her  family  as  the
appellants, reflecting their positions as they were  in  the  appeal  before
the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellants are wife, husband and their two  sons  and  are  citizens  of
Mauritius. They were born on 16 February 1974, 11 March  1965,  18  November
1995 and 4 December 2001 respectively. They came to the  United  Kingdom  in
April 2005 as visitors. The  first  appellant  was  then  granted  leave  to
remain as a student and her husband and children were granted leave  as  her
dependants. Their leave expired on 4 June  2012.  The  first  appellant  was
unable to complete her studies as her college closed and she and her  family
made an application for leave to remain outside the  immigration  rules,  on
family and private life grounds, on 24 May 2012.

The applications were refused by the respondent  on  22  July  2013  on  the
grounds that they did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM or  paragraph
276ADE in relation to their family and private life and that there  were  no
exceptional circumstances justifying a grant  of  leave  outside  the  rules
under Article 8 of the ECHR.

The appeals came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Trevaskis  on  6  March
2014. The judge heard oral evidence from all four appellants. He found  that
the appellants could not meet the requirements of Appendix  FM  but  allowed
the appeals under paragraph 276ADE on the basis  that  the  parents  had  no
ties to Mauritius and that it would be unreasonable to expect  the  children
to leave the United Kingdom.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the  respondent  on
the grounds that the judge had misinterpreted the test to assess  "no  ties"
and was wrong to find that the family had no ties  to  Mauritius;  and  that
the judge had erred by finding that it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect
the children to relocate to Mauritius.

Permission to appeal was granted on 8 April 2014.

The respondent's appeal came before the  Upper  Tribunal  on  15  May  2014,
where Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes  found  that  Judge  Trevaskis  had
erred in law in finding that the family had no  ties  to  Mauritius  and  by
considering the cases under the immigration rules rather than under  Article
8, contrary to the guidance in Edgehill & Anor v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  402.
Judge Grimes set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  re-made
the decision under Article 8,  finding  that  the  decision  to  refuse  the
appellants' applications was proportionate and not in breach of their  human
rights.

DUTJ Grimes' decision was, however, quashed by the Court of  Appeal,  in  an
Order dated 23 April 2015 whereby the appeals were remitted  by  consent  to
the Upper Tribunal to be considered afresh, with no findings preserved.  The
basis for that order was that, further to the clarification provided in  the
case of Singh v The Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]  EWCA
Civ 74, the respondent had properly applied the new  immigration  rules  and
the grounds of  appeal  in  relation  to  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal had therefore to be considered in that context.

Thus the appeals came before us.

Appeal Hearing

We heard submissions from both parties on the error of law  and  found  that
the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  erred  in  law  in  his  findings  under
paragraph 276ADE. The judge was not entitled, on the  evidence  before  him,
to conclude that the first two appellants had lost  ties  to  Mauritius  and
indeed  Mr  Harris  accepted  that  it  was  difficult  to  justify  such  a
conclusion.  As  regards  the  third  and  fourth  appellants,  the  judge's
findings, as to whether it was  reasonable  to  expect  them  to  leave  the
United Kingdom, was inextricably linked to his findings in relation  to  the
first two appellants.  Accordingly  we  set  aside  the  decision  of  Judge
Trevaskis.

Mr Harris agreed that there was no reason for the decision  not  to  be  re-
made  before  us  and  that  the  only  additional  evidence  consisted   of
clarification by  the  first  appellant  of  an  amendment  to  her  witness
statement of 12 February 2014. Furthermore, whilst it was pointed  out  that
the respondent's reasons for  refusal  letters  for  the  third  and  fourth
appellants did  not  address  their  private  lives  or  make  any  explicit
reference to their best interests, we noted that consideration was given  to
exceptional circumstances and that in any event that was a  matter  that  we
could consider ourselves without there being  any  necessity  to  refer  the
matter back to the Secretary of State.

The first appellant then gave oral evidence and confirmed  that  she  wished
the second sentence of paragraph 9 of her statement  of  12  February  2014,
referring to the inability of her children to speak Creole or French, to  be
deleted. She said that she and her husband spoke Creole at home. Their  boys
spoke to each other in English and to her mostly in  English  but  sometimes
with a bit of Creole. They understood Creole but could not speak  it  to  so
well.  When  cross-examined,  the  appellant  was   asked   how   her   sons
communicated with their father if he did not speak English and  she  replied
that her husband spoke a bit of English but otherwise she  would  translate.
If she was not there they  would  communicate  with  a  bit  of  Creole  and
English.

We heard submissions from both parties.

Mr Whitwell submitted that,  contrary  to  Mr  Harris'  earlier  submission,
there was nothing wrong with the position of the  parents  being  considered
first and that the  family  must  be  considered  as  a  unit.  It  was  not
unreasonable for the children to follow their  parents  back  to  Mauritius.
The first two appellants could not succeed under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  as
they  had  family  members  in  Mauritius  and  spoke  the  language.   Even
considering the children first,  they  could  not  succeed  under  paragraph
276ADE(1)(iv) as they would be able to integrate  into  life  in  Mauritius.
With regard  to  the  break  in  their  education,  Mr  Whitwell  relied  on
paragraph 39 of AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT  0260.  With  regard  to  the
question  of  their  best  interests,  he  relied  on  the  guidance  in  EV
(Philippines) & Ors v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2014]
EWCA Civ 874.

Mr Harris accepted that the first and second appellants could not  meet  the
requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the rules, but  he  submitted  that  the
children had to be considered first. He relied  upon  EV  (Philippines)  and
Azimi-Moayed   and   others   (decisions    affecting    children;    onward
appeals)[2013]  UKUT  00197  in  submitting  that  the  disruption  to   the
children's significant private life ties in  the  United  Kingdom  was  such
that it was in their best interests to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
that there were no countervailing factors outweighing those best  interests.
They  therefore  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph   276ADE(1)(iv)   and
succeeded in their appeals, as there was no  need  to  look  at  the  public
interest separately. There  were  therefore  compelling  reasons  for  their
parents to be granted leave outside the immigration rules.

Consideration and Findings

Whilst we appreciate the ingenuity in Mr  Harris'  argument  in  considering
the children's position first, we do not  accept  that  their  circumstances
can be considered in isolation of their parents. Neither do  we  agree  that
the ability to meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) involves  no
specific consideration of the public interest, since that must  surely  play
a part in considering the question of reasonableness. In  any  event  we  do
not agree with the conclusion that it would be unreasonable  to  expect  the
children to leave the United Kingdom. They will be  returning  to  Mauritius
with their parents who, as Mr Harris properly accepted, could not  meet  the
requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  Whilst  the  children's  links  to
Mauritius may be more tenuous than that of their  parents,  having  spent  a
larger proportion of their lives in the United Kingdom than  their  parents,
the family as a whole plainly retains ties to that country.

We consider that the first appellant  has  been  less  than  honest  in  her
evidence as to the family's links to Mauritius and has  sought  to  downplay
the ties they have to that country. The tenor  of  her  statement  was  that
there were no remaining ties and she stated initially that  her  sons  could
not speak the language. However her husband's evidence in his statement  was
that they had some family in  Mauritius.  Their  passports  show  that  they
returned to Mauritius for two weeks in April 2008 and the  second  appellant
travelled there from December 2008 to January 2009, whereas paragraph 39  of
Judge Travaskis' decision records her evidence that they  had  not  been  to
Mauritius for nine years. The first appellant amended her  statement  before
us to delete the reference to her sons speaking no  Creole  and  French  and
indeed her evidence before us was  that  her  sons  used  some  Creole  when
speaking to her and their father. Given  that  their  father  speaks  little
English they clearly  are  able  to  communicate  in  Creole.  We  therefore
conclude that the family retain ties to  Mauritius,  in  terms  of  culture,
family and language, and we find there  to  be  no  evidence  before  us  to
suggest that there would be any significant obstacles  to  them  integrating
into life in that country.

Whilst it is the case that the third and fourth appellants  are  settled  in
the United Kingdom in the sense that they  have  built  up  a  private  life
through their education, friends and other such ties over their  nine  years
of residence here and are  more  comfortable  speaking  in  English,  it  is
nevertheless the case that their best interests lie in remaining with  their
parents, whether that be in Mauritius or in the United Kingdom.  Other  than
their length of residence there is in fact nothing significant  about  their
private lives in the United Kingdom and, with reference to the  guidance  in
EV at paragraphs 35 to 37, it cannot emphatically be said  that  their  best
interests lie in remaining in this  country.  However  even  if  their  best
interests were to remain here, those interests, albeit  paramount,  are  not
determinative and have to be considered in the light of  the  countervailing
factors such as the  fact  that  their  leave  to  remain  has  always  been
temporary and that there was never any expectation that they would  be  able
to remain here on a permanent basis. The significance of the  disruption  to
their education is properly addressed by the findings  at  paragraph  39  of
AM, and there is no reason why they would not  be  able  to  continue  their
education in Mauritius. It is also open to the eldest son, who is  now  over
18 years of age, to apply for  leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
Kingdom as a student should he wish to continue his  education  here.  There
is no reason why their parents  cannot  find  employment  in  Mauritius  and
support them there.

Mr Harris relied upon the  case  of  Azimi-Moayed  in  submitting  that  the
disruption to the children's lives in the United Kingdom would  be  such  as
to make an enforced return to Mauritius unreasonable, given their length  of
residence here and in particular considering that they have lived  here  for
more than the significant seven year period. However,  for  the  reasons  we
have given, and in light of the guidance  in  EV  (Philippines)  we  do  not
agree and we consider that it would not be unreasonable to expect the  third
and fourth appellants to leave the United  Kingdom  and  return  with  their
parents to Mauritius. Accordingly, whether the children or the  parents  are
considered first, we do not accept that any of the appellants  are  able  to
meet the requirements of paragraph 276(1)ADE.

Having so concluded, there is nothing further to consider by way of a  wider
Article  8  assessment  and  we  find  no   evidence   of   any   compelling
circumstances justifying a grant of leave outside the immigration rules.  We
therefore dismiss the appeals on all grounds.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly  allowed  and
the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  We  re-make  the
decision by dismissing Ms Nazir's appeal and the appeals of her husband  and
two sons.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order but we find  no  reason
    to continue that order and therefore lift it, pursuant to  rule  14  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

Signed:  Dated:
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
