

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33642/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 28 April 2015                              |On 1 May 2015                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                            noman iqbal siddiqui
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs S Ahmad, Ahmad & Williams Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 28 August 1982 and is a citizen of  Pakistan.
    He arrived in the UK on 19 November 2011 and held entry clearance  that
    acted as leave to enter as a tier 4 (general) student migrant.

 2. On 24 May 2013 he applied to extend that leave.   His  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State on 6 August 2014 on the  ground  that
    his CAS had been withdrawn by his sponsoring  college.   The  appellant
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  as  he  was  entitled  to  do.
    However, his appeal was dismissed on  22  January  2015  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kershaw on the basis that the appellant had no valid CAS
    at the date of decision.  I mention that Judge Kershaw  determined  the
    appeal without a hearing.   The  appellant  sought  to  challenge  that
    appeal outcome and permission to do so was granted on 16 March 2015.

 3. Whilst  preparing  for  the  hearing,  I  realised  that  there  was  a
    significant discrepancy between the version of events provided  by  the
    Secretary of State and that given by the appellant.  The  Secretary  of
    State said that the appellant's CAS was  withdrawn  by  his  sponsoring
    college.  The appellant said that the Secretary of State  withdrew  the
    college's sponsorship licence.  The appellant argued that as  a  result
    of the college's licence being revoked, he was entitled to benefit from
    the published policy that  he  would  be  given  60  days  to  find  an
    alternate provider.  The appellant produced evidence that he had  found
    such a provider but that a CAS could not be issued by that new  sponsor
    without confirmation that his leave had been extended for 60 days.

 4. Having examined the appeal file, I realised there was  no  evidence  to
    identify which of the two positions was accurate.  I undertook  my  own
    research and identified the  news  section  of  the  Metro  College  of
    Management Science's website.  It provided  the  following  chronology.
    On 24 December 2013, the college was  temporarily  suspended  from  the
    tier 4 register.  The college confirmed it was working  with  the  Home
    Office to address the concerns and advised  all  students  to  continue
    attending courses as normal.  On 28 January 2014, the college confirmed
    it has met with Home Office compliance and suspension  staff  and  they
    were working to resolve the compliance issues  regarding  two  courses.
    The college expected all students to continue attending courses.  On  8
    February 2014, the college confirmed it was continuing its negotiations
    with the Home Office and  again  informed  students  that  they  should
    continue attending courses.   On  this  occasion  the  college  advised
    students that should they fail to attend then their  sponsorship  would
    be withdrawn.  On 14 February 2014,  the  college  announced  that  its
    sponsorship licence had  been  revoked  and  that  it  was  seeking  to
    challenge that decision through the Courts.  On 20 February  2014,  the
    college posted news that its licence had been reinstated.  The  college
    advised students that those who missed their classes would be  reported
    to the Home Office.

 5. At the start of the hearing I disclosed the above  information  to  Mrs
    Ahmad and Mr Smart.  Both agreed that the information was  relevant  to
    the appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  both  acknowledged  that  the
    information had not been provided by either side.   They  were  content
    with the information I disclosed and neither sought an adjournment.

 6. The chronology of events led to a  discussion  as  to  the  appellant's
    position.  Mr Smart acknowledged that there was no  information  as  to
    when the College withdrew  the  CAS.   Mrs  Ahmad  confirmed  with  the
    appellant (who  was  present  at  the  hearing)  that  he  had  stopped
    attending classes when the college was  first  suspended.   He  stopped
    because he lost confidence in the college.  During  our  discussion,  I
    indicated that I was of the view that the appellant could  not  benefit
    from the 60  day  policy  until  the  college's  licence  was  actually
    revoked.  I also noted that  it  was  reasonable  to  assume  that  the
    college was assiduous in complying with its sponsorship duties once its
    licence had been suspended.  This is evident  from  its  commitment  to
    resolve the compliance issues with the Home Office.  This is not a case
    where the college closed down following the  suspension.   It  is  also
    clear from the fact the college advised  its  students,  including  the
    appellant, to continue attending courses.

 7. Before hearing submissions, I gave Mr  Smart  and  Mrs  Ahmad  time  to
    gather their thoughts.  When we resumed, both indicated their readiness
    to make submissions.  Mrs Ahmad relied on the appellant's own evidence,
    that he lost confidence in his sponsoring college when its licence  was
    suspended,  that  he  ceased  to  attend  at  that  time  and  that  he
    subsequently found another college that would  sponsor  him  (Kimberley
    College) but which was unable to issue a CAS  because  the  appellant's
    immigration status was unclear at that time.  Mrs Ahmad  also  reminded
    me that on 4 March 2014 the appellant had sought confirmation from  the
    Home Office that he had 60 days to apply  for  a  new  course  provider
    following  the  revocation  of  his  sponsor's  licence  but  that   no
    confirmation had been given.

 8. Given the earlier discussion that I have recorded above I did not  need
    to hear from Mr Smart.  Despite the compassionate circumstances, it  is
    clear  from  the  chronology  of  events  that  the  Metro  College  of
    Management Science withdrew its sponsorship of the  appellant  when  he
    stopped attending his course.  They had warned students that they would
    do so and it was in the college's  own  interest  to  be  assiduous  in
    complying with its sponsorship duties  given  the  circumstances.   The
    appellant has admitted that he stopped attending his  course  when  the
    college's licence was first suspended.  Given these facts, it  is  more
    likely than not that the CAS was withdrawn as stated by  the  Secretary
    of State and that it was that decision that resulted in  the  variation
    application  being  refused.   This  was  not  a  situation  where  the
    appellant had been left without a sponsor as a result of revocation  of
    a college's licence.

 9. Mrs Ahmad also submitted  that  common  law  fairness  meant  that  the
    appellant should have benefited from the policy in any event because he
    responded to the suspension of the licence.   The  appellant's  actions
    had been reasonable.  Given the Court of Appeal's guidance in EK (Ivory
    Coast) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1517 and Sukhjeet Kaur v SSHD [2015] EWCA
    Civ 13, it is clear that the  appellant  could  not  benefit  from  any
    application of common law fairness.  In simple terms, there was no duty
    on the Secretary of State to investigate the reasons why  the  CAS  had
    been withdrawn.

10. In this roundabout way, I come at last to the question of whether Judge
    Kershaw's decision and reasons statement is infected  by  an  error  of
    law.  The reasons for his decision are contained in  paragraphs  16  to
    21.  Judge Kershaw focused on the fact that  the  appellant's  CAS  had
    been withdrawn and that there was no  evidence  to  the  contrary.   He
    identified the grounds of  appeal,  which  included  the  compassionate
    factors discussed above.  But it was the absence of a  valid  CAS  that
    informed his decision.  As can be seen from the above, there is nothing
    wrong in law with that decision.  It is clear that  Judge  Kershaw  was
    not provided with all relevant evidence but nevertheless he came to the
    only lawful decision possible.

11. As a result, I find there  is  no  error  of  law  in  Judge  Kershaw's
    decision and it is upheld.

Decision

The decision and reasons statement  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kershaw
does not contain an error of law and is upheld.






                               Signed   Date 1 May 2015


                               John McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
