
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/33433/2015
                                                               IA/33436/2015
                                                               IA/33438/2015
                                                               IA/33437/2015
                                                               IA/34017/2014
                                                               IA/34019/2014
                                                               IA/34025/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 31st May 2017                      |On 12th June 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             (1) Mr MUNIR AHMAD
                             (2) MRS SAIMA MUNIR
                                 (3) [M HA]
                                 (4) [M HF]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Z Malik (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin (Senior HOPO)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge N M Paul, promulgated on 1st November 2016, following  a  hearing
    at Taylor House on 13th October 2016.  In the determination, the  judge
    dismissed the appeals of the Appellants,  whereupon  they  subsequently
    applied for, and were  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are all citizens of Pakistan.  They comprise  a  family.
    They consist of a husband and wife and their two children.  Their dates
    of birth are as follows.  The principal  Appellant,  the  husband,  was
    born on 12th March 1973.  The second Appellant, his wife, was  born  on
    20th June 1976.  Their two children were respectively born on [ ]  2010
    and on [ ] 2005, and are both male.

 3. The issue in this appeal arises on account of an application dated 28th
    February 2013, by the principal Appellant, whereby he had  submitted  a
    TOEIC certificate from the Educational  Testing  Service  (ETS),  which
    contained a record of the Appellant's speaking test,  and  using  voice
    verification software tests, it had been concluded that  the  test  was
    taken by a proxy test taker.  In a decision dated 12th October 2015, it
    had been decided that the Appellants' applications to remain in the  UK
    on the basis of their  family  and  private  life  should  be  rejected
    because of the specified fraudulent activity.   There  was  an  earlier
    decision of 22nd August 2014 to similar effect.

The Judge's Findings

 4. At the hearing before him on 13th October 2016,  Judge  N  M  Paul  had
    expressly asked the principal Appellant the circumstances in  which  he
    had taken the test.  The principal Appellant had replied that there was
    no legal requirement to take it in 2012, but he had  done  it  just  in
    order "to improve his English" and that, "he said he was  free  at  the
    time, and he was not engaged in any other college" (paragraph 20).  The
    judge also asked the Appellant why it was that at the age of 43 he  was
    still seeking to engage in full-time education, having originally  come
    to the UK as a student in 2008, and the Appellant answered that "he had
    decided that future career possibilities in Pakistan  involved  tourism
    and development, and he did not  want  to  return  to  a  career  as  a
    pharmaceutical salesman" (paragraph 20).

 5. Second, the judge had regard to both generic  evidence  before  him  as
    well as specific evidence in relation to the circumstances in which the
    principal Appellant sat the test on 5th  December  2012,  because  this
    showed a high level  of  fraudulent  activity  on  that  day.   It  was
    concluded that the Appellant  had  not  been  able  to  put  forward  a
    satisfactory explanation as to the circumstances in which  he  sat  the
    test and that the Respondent  Secretary  of  State  had  been  able  to
    demonstrate that the test had been taken by a proxy test taker.

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge erroneously  failed  to
    consider the Appellant's Article 8 rights, taking the view  that  these
    had been withdrawn in the appeal before him, even though  there  was  a
    family here in issue with young children, which made  consideration  of
    Article 8 issues to be plainly obvious.  Second, that  he  had  applied
    the wrong burden of proof.  This was set out in  SM  and  Qadir  [2016]
    UKUT  00229.   Third,  a  letter  from  Synergy  Business  College  was
    overlooked by the judge providing an explanation for the test taken  on
    5th December 2012.

 8. On 8th April 2017 permission to appeal was  granted,  although  it  was
    stated that there did not appear to be the letter of 10th December from
    Synergy Business College on the file as was now being maintained.

 9. A Rule 24 response dated 30th May 2017 makes it clear  that  the  judge
    (at paragraph 22) accepted that there was generic evidence put  forward
    on behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, and that the  principal
    issue before him was, "whether or not he  (the  Appellant)  engaged  in
    dishonest activity in relation to ETS" and this was the correct test to
    apply by the Tribunal.  Second, the reasons  given  by  the  judge  for
    finding dishonesty are expressly set out at paragraphs 23 to 27 of  the
    determination.  These include:

      a) a total inaction by the  Appellant  to  approach  Synergy  Business
         College with a view to them verifying the results and rejection  by
         the judge of the reason given by the Appellant;

      b) the high level of fraudulent activity, as set down in the objective
         evidence, such that it was not credible that the Appellant did  not
         on that day notice such fraudulent activity when he sat  the  test;
         and

      c) the rejection, as unreliable, of the Appellant's own evidence as to
         why he needed to take the TOEIC test in 2012 when there was no need
         for him to do so.

    Finally, there was also the fact that the Appellant took a test at  the
    cheapest college available.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 31st  May  2017,  Mr  Malik,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellants, made the following three submissions.  First,
    that the judge had erred with respect to where the burden of proof lay.
     Second, that the judge had failed to make a decision on Article 8 ECHR
    grounds.  Third, that there was a failure to apply the  strictures  set
    out by the Court of Appeal in Shehzad [2016] EWCA Civ 615.

11. Mr Malik made good his submissions in the following way.  First, as far
    as the burden of proof was concerned, the judge was clear (at paragraph
    21) that, "the burden is on the Appellant to  show,  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities, that his  application  meets  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules".  This was plainly wrong because there is no legal burden on the
    Appellant at all.  He simply has to  provide  an  explanation  that  is
    reasonable as to his having taken the test.  Second, in  SM  and  Qadir
    [2016] EWCA Civ 1167, the Court of Appeal sets out the approach  to  be
    followed in such cases.  This is that, in considering an allegation  of
    dishonesty, the relevant factors that need to  be  taken  into  account
    include, what the person accused had to gain from being dishonest; what
    he had to lose; what is known about  his  character;  the  culture  and
    environment in which he operated; how the  individual  accused  of  the
    dishonesty  performed  under   cross-examination;   and   whether   the
    Tribunal's assessment of that person's English language proficiency  is
    commensurate with his or her TOEIC scores (see paragraph 18).

12. In the instant case,  Judge  Paul  did  not  take  these  matters  into
    account.  Furthermore, the fact that the Appellant  did  not  take  any
    action to pursue Synergy College, either for a refund, or  to  issue  a
    letter of complaint, was irrelevant, as there was  no  such  obligation
    upon him to so do.  The burden of  proof  was  upon  the  Secretary  of
    State.  It was not on the Appellant.  In the same way, if there  was  a
    high score generated in respect of all the tests, this  should  not  be
    surprising because the standard of English is not particularly high  in
    these tests.  Third, as far as Article 8 is concerned, the judge states
    (at paragraph 2) that, at the  outset  of  the  appeal  Mr  O'Callaghan
    stated that, "the appeal in respect of the Article 8 matters was  being
    withdrawn.

13. The appeal was to proceed only in relation to the refusal for leave  to
    remain based on the decision in  respect  of  the  Educational  Testing
    Service procedure".   However,  it  was  simply  not  plausible  for  a
    reputable Counsel to be withdrawing his appeal in relation  to  Article
    8, given that there was in this case a "qualifying child" who had  come
    to the UK on 9th June 2009, and by 9th June 2016, had  completed  seven
    years in this country.  In fact, paragraph 9 of the Grounds  of  Appeal
    explains that what the Appellants had done was  to  confirm  that  they
    were not proceeding with a challenge under paragraph 276ADE.

14. The First-tier Tribunal Judge appears to have erred in determining that
    the withdrawal of this element of the appeal was based on  there  being
    no Article 8 claim.  This did not make sense because if the  Article  8
    appeal was withdrawn then there would have  been  no  statutory  appeal
    before the Tribunal.

15. For his part, Mr Melvin referred to the Rule 24 response.  He submitted
    that the determination had to be read  as  a  whole,  with  a  view  to
    determining where the judge held the burden of proof to  lie.   Whereas
    it was true that in paragraph 21 the judge had stated that "the  burden
    is on the Appellant", this was  immediately  followed  thereafter  with
    paragraph 22 where the judge states that,  "I  am  satisfied  that  the
    prima facie case has been established,  by  reference  to  the  generic
    evidence that has been adduced, and also the specific evidence relating
    to the circumstances of the test on 5th December 2012 ... "  (paragraph
    22).

16. This clearly demonstrates that the judge had proceeded on the basis  of
    the burden of proof being upon the Respondent Secretary of State.  That
    burden, the judge felt, had been satisfied with regard to  the  generic
    evidence and to the specific evidence on the day.  He had then gone  on
    to say that, "I evaluate the Appellant's evidence with care  and  I  am
    satisfied that it is unreliable  in  a  number  of  material  respects"
    (paragraph 22).  He then goes on to set out why it is unreliable in the
    ensuing paragraphs.  That was the correct approach.

17. Second, as far as the case of  SM  and  Qadir  [2016]  UKUT  00229  was
    concerned, what is said at paragraph 18 is not an  exhaustive  list  of
    factors to be taken into account, and, given the allegation against the
    Appellant, it simply was not credible that he would  not  have  pursued
    Synergy College for either a refund, or a letter of  complaint  with  a
    view to having the college independently check and verify his  results,
    and the judge was correct in having regard to this matter at  paragraph
    23.  In the same way, one of the factors set out at paragraph 18 of  SM
    and  Qadir,  is  as  to  how  the  Appellant  performed  under   cross-
    examination, and the judge's view here was that the Appellant  did  not
    perform well, and so regard had  properly  been  had  to  the  relevant
    factors in this case.  The judge could not be criticised for that.

18. Finally, as far as Article 8 was concerned,  this  was  an  experienced
    judge, and it was simply not credible for  the  judge  to  specifically
    have said that the Article 8 appeal was withdrawn, if it had not indeed
    been withdrawn by Counsel appearing before him.  First,  there  was  no
    witness statement  from  Counsel  from  the  hearing  below  explaining
    exactly how he had withdrawn the paragraph 276ADE aspect of the appeal,
    if that was the case, rather than the Article 8  appeal.   Second,  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer's notes of that day are quite clear (and
    Mr Melvin handed these up to the Tribunal) that  "rep  advised  at  the
    start of the appeal that they were formally withdrawing the  Article  8
    limb of the appeal, as the child now exceeded the seven years and has a
    right to claim on their  own.   The  appeal  would  proceed  purely  in
    respect of the ETS element".

19. In reply, Mr Malik made the following submissions.   First,  whilst  it
    was true that at paragraph 22 the judge appears to be stating that  the
    burden of proof is upon the Respondent and that the  prima  facie  case
    has been established, this could not overcome the fact that  the  judge
    at the outset had said at paragraph 21 that,  "the  burden  is  on  the
    Appellant".  This is entirely contrary to what the Court of  Appeal  in
    Shehzad [2016] EWCA Civ 615.

20. Second, whereas paragraph 18 of SM and Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167  does
    not indeed specify an exhaustive list  of  factors  to  be  taken  into
    account, they are nevertheless relevant factors, and a failure to  take
    these into account is in error.  The judge concludes his  determination
    (at paragraph 28) by stating that the high scores generated in  respect
    of the tests were inconsistent "with the  lack  of  other  evidence  to
    suggest that he spoke, wrote or  understood  English  to  a  very  high
    standard" because the judge had not set out what  this  other  evidence
    was.  Nor had he explained how it was inconsistent with the  high  test
    scores achieved.

21. Third, as far as Article 8 was concerned, he could take the  matter  no
    further, but to say that the Grounds of Appeal do suggest,  as  drafted
    by reputable Counsel, that the Tribunal  had  misinterpreted  the  fact
    that only the paragraph 276ADE appeal was being withdrawn.

22. Finally, as far  as  the  letter  from  Synergy  Business  College  was
    concerned, this was before the judge, because it is on  file,  and  the
    judge does indeed refer to it (at paragraph 10), and it does appear  at
    page 285 of the bundle.

No Error of Law

23. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law, such  that  I  should
    set aside the decision (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) and re-make the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

24. First, despite Mr Malik's laudable efforts to  persuade  me  otherwise,
    the determination has to be read as a whole, and when this is done,  it
    is clear that the judge has not applied  the  wrong  burden  of  proof.
    When read as a whole, it is clear that what the determination  exhibits
    is a proofreading error because the standard statement  in  immigration
    cases, of the burden of proof being on a balance of  probabilities,  on
    the Appellant, is inserted at paragraph 21,  but  this  is  immediately
    followed with the correct burden being applied at  paragraph  22,  with
    the judge stating that, "I am satisfied that the prima facie  case  has
    been established" by the Respondent Secretary of State.

25. Second, I do not find that this error is material in any way because it
    does not infect the subsequent  findings  that  the  judge  makes  from
    paragraphs 23 to 28 of the determination, where it is  made  abundantly
    plain that the judge is approaching the appeal  on  the  basis  of  the
    burden having been satisfied by the Respondent Secretary of State, with
    an unsatisfactory explanation being given by the Appellant  as  to  the
    manner and method by which he took his test.

26. Third, I do not find that the factors set out at paragraph 18 of SM and
    Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167 have been ignored by  the  judge.   In  fact
    they are at the forefront of his mind.  The judge does not  accept  the
    explanation that the Appellant, when it came to his test, "had done  it
    just to improve his English", and that "he was free at  the  time"  and
    that "he was not engaged in any other college" (paragraph 20).  He  was
    not satisfied as to why at the age of 43 the Appellant would be seeking
    to engage in full-time education, having already come as a  student  to
    this country in 2008.  He was not satisfied why the Appellant  had  not
    sought to approach Synergy College for a refund, or to even ask them to
    independently check out and verify his  results  (paragraph  23).   The
    judge expressly rejected the explanation that there was a  gap  between
    the application and the decision and that is why the Appellant  had  no
    reason to go back to the college (paragraph 24).

27. In addition to all of this, there had been a high level  of  fraudulent
    activity at Synergy Business College, and especially  on  5th  December
    when the Appellant took the test, and it was simply  not  credible  for
    him to say that he could see no such activity going on (paragraph  25).
    Furthermore, the Appellant was "hunting around for colleges which could
    do the test cheaply" and at lower cost, and he yet then  found  Synergy
    Business College.  It was  also  significant  that  the  Appellant  had
    scored the highest score of 200 in his speaking test, and this  maximum
    score on that day was consistent with "the  high  scores  generated  in
    respect of all tests" on the day.  The reasons that the judge gave  are
    to be read cumulatively  and  so  do  make  it  quite  clear  that  the
    explanation given by the Appellant was not found by the judge to  be  a
    credible one.

28. Finally, as far as Article 8 is concerned, Mr  Malik  is  wise  not  to
    press the point any further, but to simply  refer  to  the  grounds  of
    application which state (at paragraph 9) that what was being  withdrawn
    was the paragraph 276ADE appeal, but not the Article 8 appeal, but this
    is inconsistent  both  with  the  Presenting  Officer's  notes  of  the
    hearing, where he makes it  clear  that  the  Appellant  was  "formally
    withdrawing the Article 8 limb of the appeal, as the child now exceeded
    the seven years and has  a  right  to  claim  on  their  own",  and  is
    consistent with the judge's own recording of this fact at  paragraph  2
    of the  determination.   It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  a  strategic
    decision was taken on the day of the hearing not to  proceed  with  the
    Article 8 claim because one of  the  children  was  now  a  "qualifying
    child".  That being so, there was simply no Article 8  appeal  for  the
    judge to determine.  All in all, therefore, this appeal fails  for  the
    reasons that I have given.

Notice of Decision

29. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

30. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th June 2017

