
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
                                IA/33605/2013

                                                  IA/33609/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Field House                      |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 1 September 2014                       |On 17 September 2014        |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between
                         NURY PIEDAD MERCHAN CABRERA
                        ANTHONY RONALDO AYALA MERCHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr R Subramanian of Lambeth solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr C Avery Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not deem it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. This is a resumed hearing of an appeal after I found material  errors  of
   law in the decision allowing the appeal of  the  Appellants  against  the
   refusal of an application made on 12 December 2012 for residence cards as
   conformation of a right of residence as extended family members of an EEA
   national exercising treaty rights in the UK.
3. The Appellants are a mother and son, citizens of Ecuador born on 21  July
   1964 and 1 July 1995 respectively .The Appellants are  appealing  against
   the decision of the Respondent made on 22 July 2013 to refuse to grant an
   application made on 12 December 2012 for an  EEA  Residence  Card  as  an
   extended family member of an EEA  national  namely  Mario  Italo  Cabrera
   Merchan.  The  refusal  was  on  the  basis  that  the  requirements   of
   Regulations 8 of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
   2006('The Regulations') were not met.


4. Regulation 17(4) of the Regulations provides the Secretary of State  with
   a discretion to grant a residence card to extended family member
   "(4) The Secretary of State may issue a residence  card  to  an  extended
   family member not falling within  regulation  7(3)  who  is  not  an  EEA
   national on application if-
   (a) the relevant EEA national in relation to the extended  family  member
   is a qualified person
   or an EEA national with a permanent right of residence  under  regulation
   15; and
   (b) in all the  circumstances  it  appears  to  the  Secretary  of  State
   appropriate to issue the
   residence card.
   (5) Where the Secretary of State receives an application under paragraph
   (4) he shall undertake an extensive examination of the personal
   circumstances of the applicant and if he refuses the application shall
   give reasons justifying the refusal unless this is contrary to the
   interests of national security."

Preliminary Issue
5. Mr Avery indicated that since the  last  date  of  hearing  it  had  been
   realised that the Appellants sponsor  became  a  British  citizen  on  28
   February 2012 before the  application  made  for  a  residence  card.  In
   accordance  therefore  with  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
   (Amendment) Regulations 2012 Regulation 1(d) the  definition  of  an  EEA
   national  excludes  someone  who  is  also  a  United  Kingdom  national.
   Therefore these Appellants could not succeed under the EEA Regulations.
6. Mr Subramanian conceded that this  was  correct  but  indicated  that  he
   intended to argue  that  the  Appellants  could  meet  the  private  life
   requirements  of  the  Rules  specifically  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  as  he
   conceded that they could not meet any of the other requirements .

The Law


7. The burden of proof in this case is upon the Appellant and  the  standard
   of proof is upon the balance of probability. As the Appellants are in the
   United Kingdom I can take into account evidence which concerns  a  matter
   arising after the date of the decision in accordance with  Section  85(4)
   of the 2002 Act.
8. The application made by the Appellant on the  basis  of  private  life  I
   deal with on the basis of the Rules at the time of hearing  as  that  the
   date of the application. Paragraph 276ADE(vi) reads as follows:
   "(vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has lived
   continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting any period of
   imprisonment) but there would
   be very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into the
   country to
   which he would have to go if required to leave the UK."

Evidence

9. On the file I had the Respondents bundle. I had a copy of the reason  for
   refusal letter. The Appellant put in a bundle of documents1-135.  I  have
   taken those into account.
10. I heard evidence from the Appellants and the first  Appellant's  brother
   Mario Merchan and his son Merchan Rodriguez. There  is  a  full  note  of
   their evidence in the record of proceedings.

Findings

11. On balance and taking the evidence  as  a  whole,  I  have  reached  the
   following findings
12. The Appellants are a mother and  son  who  made  applications  dated  12
   December 2012 for a residence cards by virtue of European  Community  Law
   as extended family members of a European  Economic  Area  national  Mario
   Merchan the brother of the  first  Appellant  and  uncle  of  the  second
   Appellant.
13. I am satisfied that at the time of that application Mr  Merchan  was  in
   fact a British Citizen and had been since February of  2012.  I  find  it
   troubling that neither he nor the first Appellant told their  instructing
   solicitor this important fact and while  other  family  members  who  had
   provided statements stated that they  were  British  citizens  he  simply
   described him as a  Spanish  national  in  the  application  and  witness
   statement provided in support of the application. I find that the failure
   to disclose what was a material fact in this application  undermines  the
   general credibility of Mr Merchan and the first Appellant .
14. I am satisfied that as Mr Merchan was a British national at the time  of
   the application the Appellants cannot benefit from the EEA regulations as
   the definition of EEA national is someone  who  'is  not  also  a  United
   Kingdom national' as Mr Avery argued.
15. The Appellants come to the United  Kingdom  in  November  2001  and  the
   first Appellant accepts that she believed that she was here with leave as
   she came to the United Kingdom with her spouse who she believed had  made
   the necessary arrangements. The Appellant states that it was  only  after
   the breakdown of her marriage that she realised that  she  had  no  leave
   although it is not entirely clear to me in what circumstances  that  fact
   emerged and why she did not know prior to the breakdown of her  marriage.
   The fact is however that the Appellants have been in the  United  Kingdom
   without leave since 2001.
16. The Appellants now argue that they cannot  return  to  Ecuador  as  they
   meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi) which is  set  out  above.I
   have considered the Appellants cases separately as they are  both  adults
   and their cases are not so inextricably linked that they  must  stand  or
   fall together.


First Appellant
17. The first Appellant is 50 years old and came to the UK  in  2001  having
   spent the majority of her adult life in Ecuador.
18. I find  that  the  first  Appellant  could  not  be  described  as  well
   integrated into UK society given that she accepts that she speaks  little
   English, all of her connections  appear  to  be  with  Ecuadorean  family
   members in the UK and there is little evidence  of  engagement  with  the
   community other than Church attendance. There is no  evidence  before  me
   that she worked  in  the  UK  which  given  her  illegal  status  is  not
   surprising. The only supporting statement from someone not of  Ecuadorean
   background  other than the Church(page 26 of the bundle) is one to  which
   I attach no weight given that  they  suggest  the  Appellant  is  a  hard
   working tax payer which must be wrong, and suggests they  are  active  in
   the community but there is no evidence of this.
19. The first Appellant when asked why she  could  not  return  to  live  in
   Ecuador focused I find on her son's circumstances, the fact that he spoke
   little Spanish and had spent the majority of his life in the UK. She gave
   no reason for why she would be unable to integrate into  Ecuadorian  life
   to pursue her private life. I remind myself that this  is  the  issue  in
   this case as the Appellant does not meet the family life requirements  of
   the Rules.
20. I accept of course that she has a large family in the UK  but  she  also
   gave evidence that she has her mother, sister and brothers in Ecuador and
   that she is in contact with them  albeit  she  suggested  that  this  was
   'every now and then'. I am satisfied therefore that given her  family  in
   Ecuador she would have some support for what I accept would be  a  period
   of adjustment. She is otherwise a fit and healthy adult and  no  argument
   was placed before me as to why she could not work on  her  return.  Given
   all of these facts I am satisfied that there would no  serious  obstacles
   to the first Appellant integrating back into the Ecuadorean community  if
   returned.
Second Appellant
21. The second Appellant is 19 years old and came to the UK when  he  was  6
   years old. He has therefore spent most of his life  in  the  UK  although
   insufficient purely on the basis of time to meet the requirements of  the
   Rules. I accept that having left Ecuador at that age it is likely that he
   was focused on his family life at home and would have integrated to  only
   a very limited extent in the wider community.
22. The Appellants mother and Mr  Subramanian's  argument  that  the  second
   Appellant would face  very  significant  obstacles  to  integrating  into
   Ecuadorean life if returned appeared to be underpinned  by  an  assertion
   that he could not speak Spanish fluently. Before me he gave  evidence  in
   English and also suggested that in fact he spoke little Spanish which his
   mother confirmed. I am satisfied  however  that  the  Appellant  and  his
   mother exaggerated his lack of fluency in Spanish as I  do  not  find  it
   credible that  given  his  mother  and  uncle  both  accepted  that  they
   conversed at home in Spanish he was not able to understand them.  I  also
   noted that he accepted that he  studied  Spanish  for  GCSE  although  he
   asserted that he did not take the examination which again I do  not  find
   credible.
23. I note however that the provision in issue now  requires  the  Appellant
   to  establish  that  he  faces  '  very  significant  obstacles  to   the
   applicant's integration into the country to which he would have to go  if
   required to leave the United Kingdom' (my bold). This is a high burden. I
   have found that the first Appellant would be  returning  to  Ecuador  and
   therefore if returned the second Appellant would not  be  alone.  He  has
   family there. He is not unfamiliar with Ecuadorean life as  he  has  been
   brought up in a large close knit family all  originating  there.  I  have
   found as a fact that he speaks Spanish. He is fit and healthy  and  would
   return with the benefit of  a  good  education  acquired  in  the  United
   Kingdom. While accepting that there would be a challenging adjustment  to
   relocating I am not satisfied  that  there  would  be  'very  significant
   obstacles' to his integration into Ecuadorean life if returned.
24. Application of the Rules and guidance ordinarily  mean  that  article  8
   considerations have been catered for. In Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules -
   correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal stated:


    "after applying the requirements of the Rules, only  if  there  may  be
    arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside them  is  it
    necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether there are
    compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them: R  (on
    the application of) Nagre v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin);"
25. In this case Mr Subramanaian suggested that there  were  good  arguable
   grounds that there were factors particular to the Appellants  that  were
   incapable of being assessed from within the existing framework of  rules
   and guidance. When asked to articulate what these reasons were he simply
   said that the Appellants had not returned to Ecuador since  2001.  I  do
   not find that this is an arguable ground for granting leave outside  the
   Rules as the period they lived in the United Kingdom  is  the  basis  of
   their claim and has been taken into account. Examining the  Respondent's
   decision as a whole , she took into account  all  relevant  factors  and
   matters.
26. I have considered the  issue  of  anonymity  in  the  present  instance.
   Neither party has sought a direction. The Appellant is an adult and not a
   vulnerable person. I see no reason to make any direction in this regard.
Conclusion
27. I find that the Appellants have failed to discharge the burden of  proof
on them to show that the terms of paragraph 276ADE(vi)of the Rules are  met.
I therefore find that the decision of the Respondent appealed against is  in
accordance with the law and the applicable Immigration Rules.
Decision
28. The appeals are dismissed .

Signed                                                                  Date
14.9.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

























