


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33934/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 22 January 2015                          |On: 27 January 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ata ur rahman
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Bassiri-Dezfouli, instructed by Primarc
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Mr Rahman's appeal  against
the respondent's decision to refuse his application for leave to  remain  as
a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

For the purposes  of  this  decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
Secretary of State as  the  respondent  and  Mr  Rahman  as  the  appellant,
reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the  First-tier
Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 23  March  1982.  He  entered
the United Kingdom on 29 July 2011. He was granted leave to enter as a  Tier
4 General student until 3 January 2015.

According to the respondent, the appellant's sponsor's licence  was  revoked
on 12 June 2013 and a decision was  therefore  made,  on  10  October  2013,
curtailing his leave to remain so as to expire  on  9  December  2013,  thus
giving him 60 days in  which  to  find  a  new  sponsor  and  make  a  fresh
application.

According to the appellant,  however,  he  never  received  any  curtailment
decision. What he claims occurred is that his college  was  closed  down  in
November 2013 and that he then contacted the Home Office on  two  occasions,
through his solicitors, on 1 December 2013 and 26 February 2014  to  enquire
about his status, but received  no  response.  He  therefore  found  another
college and made a new application for leave to remain as a Tier  4  Student
Migrant on 3 March 2014.

 The appellant's application was refused on 17 August 2014,  with  no  right
of appeal. The basis for the refusal was that he was not in possession of  a
valid CAS since his sponsoring college was not listed as a  Tier  4  sponsor
as at that date; that he  had  been  unable  to  show  the  level  of  funds
required to satisfy the maintenance requirements of the rules; and  that  he
was an overstayer. The refusal letter stated that  his  previous  leave  had
expired on 9  December  2013.  Since  he  had  no  leave  at  the  time  his
application was made, there was no right of appeal.

The appellant, however, lodged  an  appeal  against  that  decision  on  the
grounds, inter alia, that the respondent ought to have granted him  60  days
in which to make a fresh application.

The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor on 27 October  2014.
There was no appearance for the respondent at the hearing  and  neither  was
there a respondent's appeal bundle.  The  judge  noted  that  there  was  no
evidence that the appellant's previous leave had been curtailed.  There  was
no curtailment letter and the decision of 17 August 2014 made  no  reference
to curtailment. Accordingly he found that the refusal decision  contained  a
fundamental error of fact in asserting that the  appellant's  leave  expired
on 9 December 2013, when in fact he  had  existing  leave  until  3  January
2015. He found that the appellant should have been given a "60  day  letter"
granting him a period of time in which to find a  new  college  and  make  a
fresh application. He allowed the appeal on that limited basis.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the  respondent  on
the grounds that the appellant's leave had  been  curtailed  to  9  December
2013. Reference was made to the curtailment letter being produced  with  the
grounds (although it does not appear to have  been  attached).  The  grounds
asserted that if it was accepted that the appellant had been unaware of  the
curtailment, then he would still be in possession of leave until  3  January
2015.

Permission to appeal was granted on 16 December 2014 on the basis  that  the
Tribunal had no jurisdiction to entertain an appeal against the decision  of
17 August 2014, whether the appellant's leave had been curtailed or not.

Appeal Hearing

At the hearing Mr Nath produced the curtailment letter  but  was  unable  to
produce any evidence or information to show that it had  been  sent  to  the
appellant. His submission was  that,  regardless  of  the  curtailment,  the
Tribunal had no jurisdiction to entertain the appeal.

Ms Bassiri-Dezfouli relied on the case  of  Syed  (curtailment  of  leave  -
notice) India [2013] UKUT 144 in submitting that the appellant's  leave  had
not been validly curtailed in  October  2013  as  the  appellant  had  never
received a curtailment decision and the respondent had failed to prove  that
the decision had been served upon  him.  In  response  to  the  question  of
jurisdiction in view of the extant leave at the  time  the  17  August  2014
decision was taken, it was her submission  that  that  decision  effectively
terminated the appellant's leave and thus gave rise to a  right  of  appeal.
She submitted that the respondent ought to have given the appellant 60  days
in which to make a fresh application, in line with the relevant  policy  and
that the failure to do so was unfair and unlawful. The  appellant  had  been
unfairly penalised when he had made every attempt to inform the Home  Office
of his circumstances but had received no response to his letters.  That  was
what the First-tier Tribunal Judge had concluded and there was no  error  of
law in his decision.

Consideration and Findings

It seems to me that Judge Taylor had no legal basis  to  make  the  decision
that he did and that he  in  fact  had  no  jurisdiction  to  entertain  the
appellant's appeal. There  was  no  valid  appeal  before  him.  If  it  was
accepted that the appellant's leave had  been  effectively  curtailed  on  9
December 2013, then the application of 3 March 2014 was made at a time  when
he had no extant leave and he therefore had  no  right  of  appeal,  as  the
refusal letter explicitly stated. Alternatively,  if  it  was  not  accepted
that his leave was curtailed as stated by the respondent, then he  continued
to have existing leave to  remain  until  3  January  2015  and  such  leave
remained extant at the time  of  the  respondent's  decision,  so  that  the
decision of 17 August 2014 was not an immigration decision giving rise to  a
right of appeal for the purposes of s82(2)(d) of the 2002 Act.

On the basis of the evidence now before me, my view is that the  appellant's
leave was not curtailed in December 2013. There  is  no  evidence  that  the
curtailment letter of 10 October 2013 was ever served on the  appellant  and
accordingly the principles in Syed apply such  that  the  appellant's  leave
cannot be taken  as  having  been  validly  terminated  at  that  time.  The
amendments to the Immigration (Leave to Enter and  Remain)  Order  2000,  as
made by the Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) (Amendment) Order  2013,
in paragraphs 8ZA and 8ZB, do not, in my view, take the matter  any  further
as there is simply no  evidence  that  the  letter  was  ever  sent  to  the
appellant or that an attempt was made to serve it on him.

It remains the case, therefore, that when the  appellant's  application  for
further leave was refused on 17 August 2014, he still  had  valid  leave  to
remain, such that that refusal did not constitute  an  immigration  decision
giving rise to a right of appeal. I  do  not  accept  Ms  Bassiri-Dezfouli's
argument, that the letter of  17  August  2014  effectively  terminated  the
appellant's extant leave, since there is no legal  or  other  basis  for  so
concluding.

As regards the question of fairness, I accept that the apparent failings  on
the part of the respondent in responding to the  appellant's  communications
and in seeking to make a curtailment decision have left him in an  invidious
position whereby he has,  through  no  apparent  fault  of  his  own,  found
himself without leave and without a right to appeal  the  decision  refusing
him leave. However,  it  is  the  case  that  the  Tribunal  simply  has  no
jurisdiction in the matter and it is for the appellant to seek  an  exercise
of discretion in his favour by the respondent or alternatively to  challenge
the respondent's apparent failings through other channels.

For the purposes of the appeal before me, however,  the  appropriate  course
is to set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  re-make  the
decision by dismissing the appeal on the basis of a lack of jurisdiction.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly  allowed  and
the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  I  re-make  the
decision by dismissing Mr Rahman's appeal for lack of jurisdiction.






                               Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede


                               27 January 2015
