
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33841/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 27 March 2015                              |On 15 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               MR MAOHUA CHEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Counsel instructed by Buckingham Legal Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing on the papers  his  appeal  against  the
    decision by the Secretary of State to cancel his leave to remain  as  a
    student on the ground that he  had  obtained  fraudulently  an  English
    language test  certificate  dated  27  October  2012.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do  not  consider
    that the appellant should be accorded anonymity for  these  proceedings
    in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. On 26 August 2014 the  appellant  was  served  with  an  IS.82C  notice
    informing him that his existing leave to remain as a student  had  been
    cancelled.  The reasoning of the Immigration  Officer  was  that  false
    representations were employed or material facts were not disclosed  for
    the purpose of obtaining leave to remain as a student which was  issued
    to the appellant on 19 February 2013 until 12  April  2015.   This  was
    because Home Office records indicated that the  English  language  test
    certificate  which  he  obtained  on  27  October  2012  was   obtained
    fraudulently.  He was also being refused entry under paragraph  320(7B)
    of the Rules,  and  any  future  applications  would  automatically  be
    refused under this provision until one year from the date that he  left
    the United Kingdom.

 3. It was noted that when interviewed again, the appellant  admitted  that
    he had booked two English tests but actually  sat  only  one  and  that
    another person had sat the second test.  He said he had never used  the
    test result of the second test to gain admittance to university  or  to
    obtain leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 4. The appellant asked for his appeal to be determined on the papers.   He
    submitted a letter dated 28 August 2014 which he signed in  support  of
    his appeal.  The test which he had relied upon in  order  to  obtain  a
    place at the University of Buckingham, and subsequently  to  apply  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student Migrant, was an IELTS test. He  had
    not supported his  visa  application  with  an  English  language  test
    supplied by ETS, which was currently under investigation  by  the  Home
    Office due to being found  to  provide  English  language  tests  in  a
    fraudulent manner.  The tests provided by the ETS were TOEFL and TOEIC.
     These tests had been removed from the  secure  English  language  test
    lists and were no longer valid for Tier 4 visa purposes.

 5. He possessed a TOEIC test  result,  in  respect  of  a  test  dated  20
    September 2012.  But he had not used this TOEIC test result provided by
    ETS to obtain a place of study at his current university.  He had  come
    into possession of the TOEIC test while he was looking to  transferring
    into another educational institution from the University of  Manchester
    where he studied from September 2010 to June 2012.  He used  an  agency
    by the name of Han Dynasty Education in Manchester to help him transfer
    from this university to a new university  where  his  previous  studies
    would be credited towards the new course.  However they did not provide
    him with an honest  and  satisfactory  service.   It  was  Han  Dynasty
    Education which had enrolled him to take the  TOEIC  test.   Once  this
    happened, he had terminated the contract with them  and  made  his  own
    arrangements.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Blair sitting  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal at Glasgow on 18 November 2014.  At paragraph [12] of his
    decision, Judge Blair said:

         Although the appellant set out an explanation of  his  position  in
         that letter what was striking was  that  there  was  absolutely  no
         attempt to engage with the point made by the respondent in relation
         to his decision but at interview the appellant had admitted that he
         had booked two tests, that he only sat one and another  person  sat
         the second test.  He maintained that he had taken the IELTS test to
         support his visa application and the respondent had  confused  this
         with another test from the ETS organisation.

 7. The judge continued in paragraph [13]:

         However, it seems to me the position of the  respondent  was  quite
         clear.  She makes specific reference to the IELTS qualification and
         this is the one the appellant maintains is genuine.   Although  the
         appellant said the genuine nature of  his  qualification  could  be
         verified on line it is not for this  Tribunal  to  carry  out  such
         verification.  It is for  the  appellant  to  provide  evidence  to
         support his position.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 8. The appellant applied for permission to appeal, advancing three grounds
    of appeal.  Ground 1 was that the judge erred by ignoring his  evidence
    showing that his IELTS test had been verified on line by the University
    of Buckingham, his educational institute.  Ground 2 was the  judge  had
    failed to give reasons as to why the appellant  would  be  required  to
    disclose his booking of the TOEIC test with ETS,  when  he  never  used
    this test to support his visa application.   Ground  3  was  the  judge
    failed to identify what evidence the respondent  had  provided  to  the
    Tribunal to prove that the IELTS test certificate of  27  October  2012
    was obtained by the appellant fraudulently.  The judge should have been
    slow to make a finding of deception/dishonesty without hearing evidence
    on the point from the appellant  or  the  respondent.   The  judge  had
    failed to identify what evidence had been provided by the respondent to
    discharge the burden of proof.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 9. On 27 January 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley granted permission
    to appeal as he was of  the  view  that  all  three  grounds  disclosed
    arguable errors of law that might have made a  material  difference  to
    the outcome of the appeal.

The Rule 24 Response

10. On 4 February 2015  John  Parkinson  of  the  Specialist  Appeals  Team
    settled a Rule 24 response opposing the appeal.  The appellant  claimed
    to have booked two tests but sat only one.  The second test  was  taken
    by a proxy.  The appellant further claimed the test using a proxy  took
    place without his knowledge or consent.  This  explanation  was  simply
    ludicrous.  If the appellant were to book a test he would naturally  be
    expecting to attend.  If the appellant did not attend, then  his  place
    would be vacant.  It was absurd to suggest that in some way for no good
    reason the test centre would have had a proxy  standing  by  ready  and
    willing to impersonate the appellant.  It was clear on  any  reasonable
    interpretation of the facts the appellant was a fully active  party  to
    deliberate deception.  This deception could not  have  been  undertaken
    for any other purpose than  to  meet  the  requirements  of  having  an
    English  language  competency  of  sufficient  level  as  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Rule.  The appellant  had  been  a  deliberate  and
    knowing party to a major fraud in respect of English  language  testing
    for the purposes of meeting the Immigration Rules.  This was a material
    fact  which,  if  disclosed,  would   have   materially   changed   the
    respondent's consideration of his application.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

11. At the hearing before me, Mr Jarvis took a  completely  different  line
    from that taken by his colleague Mr Parkinson.  Not only did he readily
    concede that the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contained  a
    material error of law, but he also invited me to re-make  the  decision
    in favour of the appellant.  His reasoning was that any fraud that  the
    appellant might have committed in respect of the TOEIC English language
    test result was irrelevant, as he had not relied  on  that  TOEIC  test
    result in support of his  student  visa  application.   He  had  relied
    instead on a valid IELTS certificate, in respect of which there were no
    fraud or validity concerns.  In the light of the  stance  taken  by  Mr
    Jarvis, it is  not  necessary  for  me  to  call  on  Counsel  for  the
    appellant.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

12. The First-tier Tribunal judge erred  in  law  as  he  did  not  clearly
    differentiate between the IELTS certificate and the TOEIC  certificate.
    It was not part of the respondent's case that the IELTS certificate was
    fraudulent.  But the implication of the judge's line of  reasoning  was
    that the burden of proof rested with the appellant to  prove  that  the
    IELTS certificate was genuine, and he apparently dismissed  the  appeal
    on the ground that the appellant had failed to  prove  that  the  IELTS
    certificate was genuine.

13. As to the TOEIC certificate, it was open to the judge to find that  the
    appellant had taken up an unsatisfactory position at the  interview  in
    terms of explaining how the TOEIC certificate came into existence  when
    he admitted not actually having sat the test.  But the judge failed  to
    make a clear finding as to  whether  the  appellant  had  thereby  been
    guilty of deception within the ambit of paragraph 320(7B) or  paragraph
    321A.

The Re-Making of the Decision

14. Paragraph 321A sets out the grounds for the cancellation of a  person's
    leave to enter or remain which is in force on his arrival in the United
    Kingdom.  The grounds include:

         2.   False  representations  were  made  or  false  documents  were
             submitted (whether or not material  to  the  application,  and
             whether or not to the holder's knowledge), or  material  facts
             were not disclosed, in relation to the application for  leave;
             or in order to obtain documents from the Secretary of State or
             a third party required in support of the application ...

15. Paragraph 320(7B) applies where the applicant has  previously  breached
    the UK's immigration laws by:

         (d)  Using deception in an application for entry  clearance,  leave
             to enter or remain, in order  to  obtain  documents  from  the
             Secretary of State or a third party required in support of the
             application (whether successful or not) ...

16. Mr Jarvis agrees with the appellant that the respondent  has  not  made
    out a case under 320(7B) and/or 321A because the TOEIC certificate  was
    not relied on in support of the application for leave  to  remain.   No
    false document was submitted  by  the  appellant  in  relation  to  the
    application for leave.

17. However, Mr Jarvis's construction of  the  two  potentially  applicable
    Rules is arguably too narrow.  In addition to a  false  document  being
    submitted in relation to  an  application  for  leave,  paragraph  321A
    contemplates another possibility, which is making false representations
    or the submission of false documents in order to obtain documents  from
    a third party which are required in support of  the  application.   The
    implication of the appellant's evidence is that Han  Dynasty  Education
    used a proxy (and so made a false  representation)  to  obtain  from  a
    third party (ETS) a language test result which was required to  support
    his application for leave to remain as a student, even if it was not in
    the event deployed by him for that purpose.

18. Accordingly,  I  find  that  I  cannot  re-make  the  decision  in  the
    appellant's favour on the  basis  that  the  alleged  misconduct  falls
    outside the ambit of the potentially applicable Rules.

19. Instead, I re-make it in the appellant's favour on another basis, which
    is that Mr Jarvis has not sought to maintain the respondent's case that
    the appellant procured the TOEIC certificate by fraud, or that he  used
    deception in his application for leave to remain by failing to disclose
    his previous fraud in respect of the TOEIC certificate.  The  appellant
    was present at the hearing before me, and had put  in  further  written
    evidence of an exculpatory nature.  In essence,  although  he  accepted
    another person must have sat the TOEIC test,  this  was  not  with  his
    knowledge or approval.  He was not a party to the fraud which had  been
    perpetrated for his benefit by Han Dynasty Education.   Mr  Jarvis  did
    not seek to cross-examine the appellant on this  evidence,  and  so  it
    stands unchallenged.

Notice of Decision

11.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law,  and
    accordingly the decision is set aside and  the  following  decision  is
    substituted: the appellant's appeal against the decision to cancel  his
    existing leave to remain as a student is allowed under the  Immigration
    Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 15 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

