
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33920/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 20 May 2015                           |On 27 May 2015                      |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                              ABDULLAH AL MAMUN
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 10 May  1992.   On  16
    April 2014 he applied for further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)
    Student.

The Decision and Original Appeal

 2. On 5 August 2014 the Respondent refused to grant the Appellant  further
    leave under paragraph 245ZX(a) of the  Immigration  Rules  because  his
    application fell for refusal under one  of  the  grounds  contained  in
    paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules because as Proof of Finances
    to meet the points requirement for Maintenance (Funds) under Appendix C
    of the Immigration Rules the Appellant had submitted bank documentation
    which the Respondent found to be false. The Respondent also decided  to
    remove him by way of directions under Section 47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 3. On 27 August 2014 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal  under  Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the
    2002 Act). The grounds of appeal are lengthy and appear to  incorporate
    a skeleton argument and submissions or both.  In essence,  the  grounds
    are that the  Respondent  is  put  to  proof  to  show  that  the  bank
    documentation is false.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 4. The appeal had been set for hearing on 17 November 2014.   Neither  the
    Appellant nor his then representatives, A1 Law Chambers,  attended  the
    hearing.  The record shows the representatives were telephoned  in  the
    mid-afternoon but there was no response to  the  telephone  call.   The
    Respondent agreed the appeal might proceed without the Respondent being
    represented. Consequently, the appeal was determined on the papers  and
    by a decision promulgated on 22 December 2014 Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Shamash dismissed the appeal.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal in his own name  although  it
    would appear he may have  had  the  benefit  of  legal  advice  in  the
    preparation of the application.  In the  application  he  asserts  that
    prior to the hearing he had instructed his  then  representatives  that
    the appeal should be determined without a hearing.

 6. On 16  February  2015  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Macdonald granted permission to appeal  because  it  was  arguable  the
    Judge had applied the wrong standard of proof and there was a  lack  of
    both written evidence to justify the refusal and reasoning  to  justify
    the decision.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. The Appellant attended the hearing at which he  was  unrepresented.   A
    previous hearing in the Upper Tribunal had been adjourned  because  the
    Judge had considered the Appellant  had  insufficient  English  and  no
    interpreter had been requested.  In the event there was an  interpreter
    present but the Appellant managed, with what appeared to be comparative
    ease, to put his case in English.

 8. The Appellant confirmed he no longer had any representation and he  had
    seen the document verification report (DVR) prepared by the  Respondent
    together with the e-mails of 16 and 17 July forming the basis  for  the
    DVR.  I noted in the Tribunal file that such evidence had been included
    in the original bundle prepared by the Respondent.

 9. I explained the  nature  and  purpose  of  the  hearing  and  with  the
    assistance of Ms Kenny the Appellant  was  informed  of  the  relevant
    issues and given an opportunity to  read  the  relevant  parts  of  the
    documents, such as the original decision and the grant of permission to
    appeal and the Rule 24 response.

10. I asked Ms Kenny to put the Respondent's case first so as to  give  the
    Appellant further time and information to enable him best  to  put  his
    case.  Ms Kenny pointed out that the Appellant had  failed  to  provide
    the originals of the documents from Eastern Bank upon which  he  relied
    and which were identified at paras.5(viii), 6 and 8 of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  The supply of the originals was a requirement  of
    the Immigration Rules.

11. The Judge at para.9 of her decision had set out the general  provisions
    as to burden of proof  in  immigration  appeals  which  did  not  cover
    circumstances in which fraud or deceit was alleged.  Nevertheless,  the
    Judge  had  at  para.5  of  her  decision  immediately  prior  to   her
    consideration of  the  allegation  of  fraud  made  by  the  Respondent
    correctly set out the burden of proof.  She had referred to the DVR and
    the exchange of e-mails of 16/17 July 2014. At para.16  she  had  given
    adequate reasons to support her conclusion that the bank  documentation
    was not genuine.  The appeal before the Upper Tribunal  was  simply  an
    attempt by the Appellant to re-argue his case.

12. The Appellant asserted several times that all  the  bank  documentation
    was genuine.  He referred to an additional letter of  28  October  2014
    from the  bank  re-asserting  the  genuineness  of  the  original  bank
    documentation.  Additionally, the names of the individuals concerned in
    the DVR and e-mail exchange had been redacted.

Findings and Consideration

13. I explained to the  Appellant  that  the  redaction  of  names  in  the
    Respondent's enquiries to ascertain the authenticity of  documents  was
    an invariable practice, adopted to protect the individuals concerned in
    work of this nature.

14. I find that the Judge did apply the appropriate standard of proof  when
    considering the Respondent's allegation  of  fraud.   She  clearly  and
    correctly set it out at para.15 of her decision.  I remark  that  there
    was no challenge to the fact she had imposed "the higher  standard"  to
    that proof when in fact there is only one relevant standard of proof in
    cases of this nature, the civil standard: see Re  B  (Children)  [2008]
    UKHL 35.

15. The Judge was satisfied on the basis of the DVR and exchange of e-mails
    that the bank documentation was not genuine and at paras.6  and  8  she
    had taken into account the subsequent letters of 6 April  2014  and  28
    October 2014.  She noted the Appellant had failed to  provide  original
    documentation well  in  advance  of  the  hearing  or  to  explain  the
    situation "in a meaningful manner".

16. I am satisfied the Judge gave adequate reasons for her conclusions that
    the Respondent had adequately supported the  allegation  of  fraud  and
    that the Appellant had subsequently failed to discharge the  burden  of
    proof to show that the bank documents were genuine.

17. The Appellant was unrepresented and so I explained to him  further  why
    the documentation relating to the bank account was found in the DVR not
    to be genuine and why the letter of 28 October 2014 did not assist.

18. The Appellant's account was said to be held at a branch in  Chittagong.
    The relevant department of the bank for checking documentation  was  in
    the bank's head office in Dhaka.  The letters of 6 April and 28 October
    2014 came from a Relationship Manager at the Banani branch of the Bank.
     There was no explanation how the Relationship Manager at  that  branch
    would be in a position to state  whether  the  bank  documentation  was
    genuine.  Of particular note is  that  thecomment  "we  would  like  to
    confirm that we have not received any written or oral request from  any
    authority regarding  our  issued  letter  and  bank  statement  of  the
    aforesaid customer" was at best disingenuous when issued by  the  Banai
    branch because the relevant department that dealt with the Respondent's
    request leading to the DVR was head office: see the e-mail exchange.

19. I announced my decision at the hearing and suggested to  the  Appellant
    he promptly seek legal advice from his previous representatives or some
    other firm or a pro bono organisation like the Citizens' Advice Bureau.

20. It follows for the reasons given that the First-tier Tribunal  decision
    did not contain a material error of law such  that  it  should  be  set
    aside and therefore it shall stand.

Anonymity

21. There was no request for an anonymity direction or  order  and  I  find
    none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law and shall stand.



Signed/Official Crest                                              Date  22.
v. 2015



Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

