
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: Ia/33733/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination Promulgated.           |
|on 31 March 2015                     |on 22 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MUNTAZIR ABBAS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    No legal representative


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The SSHD appeals against a determination by FtT Judge David  C  Clapham
    SSC, promulgated on 13 November 2014, allowing  under  the  Immigration
    Rules the appellant's appeal against refusal of a variation of leave to
    remain in the UK on the basis of his marriage to a UK citizen.

 3. The application to the respondent was refused because of non-production
    of the evidence specified in the Rules - in  particular,  paragraph  E-
    LTRP.3.2 in respect of income.

 4. It is not in dispute that the  specified  evidence  was  not  produced,
    either with the  application  or  at  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appellant sought to make his case good by evidence  that
    his wife's wages were not paid into the bank but in  cash.   The  judge
    accepted that evidence and allowed the appeal.

 5. The SSHD's first ground of appeal is that the Rules  require  specified
    evidence of a particular nature, and in the absence of such evidence it
    was not open to the judge to allow the appeal.  Mrs O'Brien  relied  on
    that ground, and pointed out a further difficulty.  Even if  the  judge
    had been entitled to take account of wages  paid  in  cash,  the  Rules
    require that such sums are taken at net not gross  value.   The  result
    would have been that the sum shown was under the minimum threshold.

 6. Mr Abbas said that he understood that the requirement was to show wages
    paid into a bank and to  produce  the  corresponding  bank  statements.
    However, in his time in the UK he had come to know many people who work
    and are paid weekly in cash.  They commonly spend the money  on  living
    requirements and to pay their bills, and do not lodge it in  the  bank.
    There had been evidence from his wife explaining their position.   They
    had  been  staying  with  his  mother-in-law  and  his  wife  had  been
    contributing directly to the household expenses.  Her  earnings  needed
    to be spent and they had not understood there was  any  requirement  to
    put them into the bank.  They had provided forms P60 and other evidence
    to show that the income did in fact  come  to  more  than  the  minimum
    income threshold.  If they had known what they needed to do to  comply,
    they would have done it.  His wife had also been  reluctant  to  use  a
    bank account because her account had been misused in the past,  through
    no fault of her own.  The tribunal could write to  the  bank  to  check
    that such was the position.

 7. I reserved my determination.

 8. The SSHD's first ground  of  appeal  is  well  founded.   To  meet  the
    requirements  of  the  Rules  requires  production  of  the   specified
    evidence.  This is stated at Appendix FM-SE paragraph A  and  is  built
    into the whole structure of the Rules.  The judge did not  explain  why
    he considered himself entitled to find that  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules were met by alternative evidence, such as the  oral  evidence  of
    the appellant and his wife.  There is  no  provision  which  enables  a
    judge to do so.

 9. The appellant's position on  this  point  may  be  genuine  and  easily
    understandable, but it did not enable him to succeed  as  a  matter  of
    law.  As the SSHD observes in  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, his recourse would be to arrange matters so that he can  make
    an application based on the specified evidence required by the Rules.

10. The SSHD also has what Mrs O'Brien described as a secondary  ground  of
    appeal.  The appellant and the sponsor gave  evidence  at  the  hearing
    which  the  Presenting  Officer   criticised   as   contradictory   and
    unsatisfactory.  Those discrepancies are recorded in the determination.
     The judge found the sponsor an unimpressive witness.  The ground  says
    that the judge failed to give adequate reasons for finding nevertheless
    that the relationship was a genuine one, pointing  out  that  the  only
    reason given (paragraph 22) is that "the parties appear to  be  staying
    with the sponsor's mother."

11.  This  ground  I  think  is  also  made  out.   The  judge  states  the
    difficulties with  the  evidence  but  gives  no  adequate  reason  for
    resolving them in the  appellant's  favour.    However,  on  the  first
    ground alone the determination has to be reversed.

12. The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.    The
    appeal, as originally  brought  by  the  appellant  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, is dismissed.



           [pic]


           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
           31 March 2015

