
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33673/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17 October 2017                       |On 27 October 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                              mr rizwan sarfraz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Daykin, Counsel, instructed by Rashid & Rashid
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Henderson (the judge), promulgated on 2  December  2016,
    in which she dismissed the Appellant's appeal  on  all  grounds.   That
    appeal had been against the Respondent's decision of 23  October  2015,
    refusing a human rights claim.  The claim had  essentially  been  based
    upon domestic violence said to have been inflicted upon  the  Appellant
    by  his  now  ex-spouse.   In  refusing  the  human  rights  claim  the
    Respondent had noted that the Appellant arrived in  this  country  with
    entry clearance as a  student  and  not  as  a  spouse.  Therefore  the
    relevant domestic violence provisions of Appendix FM to the Rules could
    not be met.




The judge's decision

 2. Although the judge accepted that the Appellant's relationship with  his
    ex-wife may have been "turbulent" and that she may have been "prone  to
    aggression  and  temper  tantrums",  it  was  concluded  that  domestic
    violence had not occurred in the context of a definition  suggested  by
    the Presenting Officer (paragraph 34).  The judge did  not  regard  the
    Appellant's evidence on certain matters  relating  to  his  family  and
    educational background in Pakistan and how he had supported himself  in
    this country as being plausible (paragraph 33).  The judge went  on  to
    conclude that  the  Appellant  could  not  satisfy  the  provisions  of
    paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Rules,  and  having  regard  to  the
    Appellant's mental health difficulties there were no compelling reasons
    why he could succeed outside of the context of the  Article  8  related
    Rules.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 3. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge erred in  her  approach  to
    the meaning and contents of domestic violence  with  reference  to  the
    evidence in the case.  It is also said that the judge was wrong to have
    rejected the case under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  Finally, it  is
    said that the judge misdirected herself with  regard  to  the  evidence
    upon the Appellant's mental health.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by a First-tier Tribunal Judge  Andrew
    on 18 August 2017.




The hearing before me

 5. Ms Daykin relied upon the grounds of appeal.   She  submitted  that  in
    light of the  evidence  and  the  judge's  findings,  she  should  have
    concluded that the Appellant had  suffered  domestic  violence  at  the
    hands of his ex-wife.  The judge had failed  to  factor  this  in  when
    assessing the Appellant's Article 8 claim outside the  context  of  the
    Rules.  She submitted that the Appellant had only failed  to  meet  the
    provisions of Appendix FM (assuming that he had in fact been  subjected
    to domestic violence) by virtue of the fact that he entered the  United
    Kingdom as a student and not as a spouse.  This was a relevant  factor.
    She acknowledged that it would have been difficult to have  shown  that
    the  Appellant  could  have  satisfied  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).    In
    relation to paragraph 38, the judge was wrong to have  found  that  the
    Appellant's separation from his  ex-wife  should  have  alleviated  his
    depression.  Cumulatively, Ms Daykin submitted  the  individual  errors
    amounted to material flaws in the decision as a whole.

 6. Ms Ahmad asked me to note that the Appellant simply could  not  succeed
    under either Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). In light of mental
    health evidence, section 117B of the 2002 Act, and  on  the  assumption
    that the Appellant had experienced domestic violence, it was  difficult
    to see how the judge could have reached any other  conclusion  than  to
    have dismissed the appeal.

 7. I reserved my decision on error of law.




Decision on error of law

 8. After careful consideration I have concluded that there are no material
    errors of law.  I emphasise the word "material" because there do appear
    to be certain errors in the decision, but having  regard  to  it  as  a
    whole, the evidence before the judge, and the state of the law  on  the
    material issues, I conclude  that  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  would
    inevitably have been the same; namely  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    succeed on human rights grounds.  My reasons for this conclusion are as
    follows.

 9. In respect of the domestic violence issue I am prepared to accept  that
    the judge erred in failing to conclude that on the evidence before  her
    and the findings made in paragraph 34 (such as  they  are)  she  should
    have gone on to conclude that domestic violence had in  fact  occurred.
    It is however perhaps  fair  to  say  (with  all  due  respect  to  the
    Appellant) that the domestic violence was not, on the  evidence  before
    the judge, of a particularly serious nature.

10. The judge was of course correct to have concluded  that  the  Appellant
    could not satisfy Appendix FM because of the  nature  of  his  entrance
    into the United Kingdom as a student and not as  a  spouse.   This  may
    have been a somewhat technical point, but nonetheless a clear provision
    of the Rules was not met.

11. I would accept that the judge  has  perhaps  failed  to  provide  clear
    reasons for regarding some aspects of the Appellant's evidence as being
    implausible, with  particular  reference  to  paragraph  33.   I  would
    proceed to evaluate the decision as  a  whole  in  light  of  what  the
    Appellant said in his evidence, namely that he had studied in  Pakistan
    up to O-level standard, was not in contact with his family  because  of
    the breakdown in his marriage, and that he had undertaken some computer
    work in the past.  The apparent error by the judge does not seem to  be
    of any real significance to the overall picture.

12. The judge was  clearly  entitled  in  my  view  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant  could  not  satisfy  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).   The   "very
    significant obstacles" test is a stringent one and this, combined  with
    the meaning of "integration" as clarified by the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 and more recently AS [2017] EWCA  Civ  1284,
    pointed only in one direction, even when the Appellant's case  is  seen
    at its highest. Indeed, Ms Daykin recognised the difficulties faced  by
    the Appellant in this  regard.   The  inability  to  satisfy  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi), whilst not expressly referred to again by the judge, was
    clearly a relevant factor in the Appellant's ability to succeed outside
    the context of the Rules.  It would always be very much more  difficult
    for him to  succeed  if  he  could  not  show  that  there  were  "very
    significant obstacles" to him reintegrating into Pakistani society.

13. Turning to the issue of the Appellant's mental health, it was wrong  of
    the judge to have stated that his separation from his ex-wife  "should"
    have alleviated his mental health condition. The judge was not  in  the
    position of being an expert and the simple fact of  separation  is  not
    said to have been something which would necessarily have alleviated his
    difficulties, at least as far as I can see from  the  medical  evidence
    itself.  Having said that, the evidence from the community  psychiatric
    nurse at 70 to 73 of  the  Appellant's  bundle,  the  letter  from  the
    Croydon MAP lead community practitioner at  75  to  76,  and  the  GP's
    report at 78 to 83, do not disclose particularly serious mental  health
    difficulties on the Appellant's part.  They certainly do  not  describe
    the Appellant's conditions  as  being  "extreme  or  life-threatening",
    something correctly recognised by the judge in paragraph 38. The  judge
    was entitled to find that the reports did not show  that  the  relevant
    medication was ineffective, and she was  also  entitled  to  find  that
    there was a lack of evidence to show that any relevant treatment  could
    not be continued on return to Pakistan.  Medical evidence  fell  to  be
    assessed in the context of the demanding tests imposed even in  Article
    8 cases (see for example GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40).  Even  if  the
    past domestic violence was combined with the continuing  mental  health
    problems,  I  cannot  see  that  these  combined  factors  could   have
    constituted very strong or compelling reasons on which  to  justifiably
    base success outside the context  of  the  Rules  (applying  the  "fair
    balance" test in light of paragraphs 56-60 of Agyarko [2017] UKSC  11).



14. My conclusion on  materiality  is  reinforced  by  the  application  of
    mandatory factors under section 117B of the  2002  Act.  As  the  judge
    correctly notes, the Appellant was  not  studying  or  working  in  the
    United Kingdom, his basis in this country had always  been  precarious,
    and the public interest  was  clearly  powerful,  particularly  as  the
    Appellant was unable to meet not only Appendix FM  but  also  paragraph
    276ADE.  He was not  financially  independent,  and  his  private  life
    (which would have included of course his mental health problems as well
    as any friendships with people  in  the  United  Kingdom  such  as  the
    witness Mr Kashif) was justifiably accorded little weight.

15. In all the circumstances the  end  result  was  inevitable.   Whilst  I
    certainly have sympathy  with  the  Appellant,  his  challenge  to  the
    judge's decision  fails  and  his  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    therefore dismissed.







Notice of Decision

There are no material errors of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal therefore stands.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]         Date: 23 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor










