
IAC-AH-pc-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33986/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 23 April 2015                              |On 1 May 2015                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Akhyar Ahmad Khan Durrani
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr O Manley of Counsel instructed by AMR Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as the Applicant is a  citizen  of
    Pakistan whose date of birth is given as 25 December 1988.  On 22 April
    2011 he entered the United Kingdom with leave as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant.  He obtained  further  leave  in  the  same  capacity,
    expiring on 14 August 2014.  On 13 August 2014 (in time) he applied for
    further leave to remain on the basis of his private and family life  in
    the United Kingdom.

 2. On 15 March 2013 at a friend's wedding he had met Aksa Akram a  British
    citizen born on 10 June 1975.  She has two  children  by  her  previous
    marriage born in 2005 and 2009. The children are UK citizens.  She  and
    the Applicant entered into a religious marriage on 13 July 2014.   They
    attempted to enter into a civil marriage on  19  August  2014  but  the
    Applicant was arrested.  He was subsequently released and they  married
    according to English law on 14 November 2014.

The Respondent's Decision

 3. On 20 August 2014 the Respondent refused the Applicant's application in
    respect of his family life by way of reference  to  paragraph  284  and
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and with  regard  to  his  private
    life  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the  Immigration   Rules.    The
    Respondent considered there were  no  exceptional  circumstances  which
    warranted consideration of the Applicant's claim under Article 8 of the
    European Convention outside the Immigration Rules.

 4. On 1 September 2014 the Applicant lodged notice of appeal under Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The  grounds  are  brief.   They  assert  the  SSHD  having
    acknowledged that the Applicant had a genuine and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with his two step-children had  failed  to  give  adequate
    consideration to the negative impact his removal would have on his wife
    and step-children,  had  failed  to  consider  that  his  circumstances
    satisfied  the  requirements  of   paragraph   276ADE(1)(vi)   of   the
    Immigration Rules and had failed to consider the best interests of  his
    step-children as required under Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009.  Finally, there was no evidence  to  show  it
    was reasonable for the family of the Applicant's wife to look after her
    and her children in the event of the Applicant's removal to Pakistan.

The First-tier Tribunal Decision

 5. By a determination promulgated on 2 January 2015 Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal C Sweeney allowed the appeal of the Applicant by  way  of
    reference to Article 8 outside the Rules.  The SSHD  sought  permission
    to appeal on the grounds that the Judge had failed to take into account
    the public interest considerations contained in Sections  117A-117D  of
    the 2002 Act and on two other grounds  which  in  the  event  were  not
    pursued as Ms Fijiwala properly conceded they were of little  relevance
    since the Respondent had in her decision accepted  that  the  Applicant
    was in a genuine and subsisting marriage and parental relationship with
    his wife's children.

 6. On 16 January 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Scott-Baker granted
    permission to appeal on the basis that it was arguable  the  Judge  had
    failed to have regard to Sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act.

 7. The Applicant filed a response under Rule 24 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as amended.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 8. The Applicant and his wife were not present at the start of the hearing
    and in fact arrived after submissions had been made and I was about  to
    give my decision  whether  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contained a material error of law.  Before so doing, I  explained  what
    had happened to the Applicant and noted that he had sufficient  English
    to understand me which he confirmed and  which  neither  representative
    sought to gainsay.

 9. Addressing the error of law issue, Ms Fijiwala for the  SSHD  submitted
    the decision contained no reference to Section 117B of the 2002 Act and
    did not consider either in substance or in form the factors outlined in
    the Section which the Tribunal was required to take into  account.   In
    particular, the Judge had made no finding  whether  the  Applicant  was
    financially self-supporting.  The Judge had not considered the  private
    life of the Applicant and that he had temporary leave so that it  might
    be said that his status in the United Kingdom was precarious.   In  his
    consideration of the factors referred to  in  Section  117B(6)  he  had
    failed to take into account that the  SSHD  would  not  be  seeking  to
    remove the Applicant's stepchildren. She concluded that  this  amounted
    to a material error of law.

10. In response Mr Manley for the Applicant relied on his skeleton argument
    which, unsurprisingly, was very similar to the Rule 24  response  which
    he had also drafted.  He accepted, rightly, that the Judge  had  failed
    expressly to refer to Sections 117A-117D  or  any  part  of  them.   He
    referred me to the decision in Dube (ss.117A-117D)  [2015]  UKUT  00090
    (IAC).  The Judge had dealt with the various factors identified in  the
    Sections at paragraph 60 of his decision when he had  referred  to  the
    public interest being the key issue in the appeal.  The Judge  had  had
    in mind the factors of financial  independence  and  ability  to  speak
    English.   The  English  requirement  the  Applicant  had   effectively
    satisfied because he had fulfilled it in order to  obtain  leave  as  a
    student.  At the time of the application leading to the decision  under
    appeal the Applicant had  limited  leave  to  remain.   This  might  be
    temporary leave but it was not precarious.

11. The Judge had extensively considered the position of  the  children  in
    his decision and found it would be unreasonable for them to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  He had considered at length in his decision the likely
    impact on them in the event the  Applicant  had  to  leave  which  were
    matters required to be considered in Section 117B(6).  Consequently  to
    show the Judge had not considered the factors listed in Sections  117A-
    117D it was incumbent on the SSHD to show that his treatment  of  these
    factors was irrational or perverse.

12. Mr Manley also sought to rely on the  unreported  decision  in  SSHD  v
    Asamoah & Obeng promulgated in the Upper Tribunal on 10  December  2014
    in which Upper Tribunal Judge Martin had found at paragraph 10 that :-

         ... In conducting the balancing exercise therefore, when the public
         interest is removed from the SSHD's side of the  balance  there  is
         nothing left ... in short his unchallenged finding that it would be
         unreasonable to expect the children to return to  Ghana  inevitably
         led to his allowing the appeal.

13. In response Ms Fijiwala re-iterated the SSHD's view that the Judge  had
    failed to look at all the factors listed in Section 117B  of  the  2002
    Act  and  had  not  considered  the  financial  circumstances  of   the
    Applicant.  There were  no  documents  which  gave  details  of  these.
    Further, the Judge had failed to  take  into  account  the  Applicant's
    temporary immigration status in his assessment of  the  proportionality
    of the decision  to  the  legitimate  public  objectives  described  in
    Article 8(2) of the European Convention.

Findings and Consideration

14. The sole issue arising on the question  whether  there  is  a  material
    error of law in the Judge's decision is whether he has adequately taken
    into account the factors outlined in Section 117B of the  2002  Act  as
    representing the Secretary of State's view of the public interest.   He
    mentioned public interest generically at paragraph 60 of  his  decision
    which disposes of the requirement of sub-paragraph (i) of Section 117B.
    Sub-paragraph (ii) is the English language requirement. Mr  Manley  has
    pointed out  that  the  Applicant  would  have  satisfied  the  student
    requirement for facility in English language. He has now  appeared  and
    he and I have had brief conversation. While I might not be prepared  to
    say he was completely fluently I am satisfied that  he  has  sufficient
    grasp that he can probably manage in most situations and I accept  that
    being in the Tribunal is a very anxiety making situation.

15. Financial independence is referred to in sub-paragraph (iii) the  Judge
    noted that the family was effectively dependent on  the  wife's  income
    and dealt with this at paragraph 62 and elsewhere to be  found  in  his
    Record of Proceedings.  Sub-paragraph (iv)  is  not  applicable.   Sub-
    paragraph  (v)  addresses  a  private  life  formed  when   status   is
    precarious.  The issue here is actually family life and it is  accepted
    that throughout the relevant period the Appellant had temporary status.
    Precarious status has not  yet  been  judicially  defined.  It  is  not
    defined in the legislation.  I  heard  no  argument  about  how  having
    temporary leave should be construed as precarious status  because,  for
    instance it showed features which were the same  as  or  comparable  to
    those to be found in the case of a person whose  leave,  for  instance,
    has been extended by virtue of Section 3C of the 1971  Act  which  were
    more relevant than any features it  shared  with  indefinite  or  other
    forms of leave.  For the purposes of  this  appeal,  I  do  not  equate
    temporary status with precarious status.  The Judge dealt with this  at
    paragraphs 58 and 59 of the decision.

16. In respect of the final sub-paragraph (vi) the Respondent conceded  the
    Appellant had a parental relationship with his wife's children and  the
    Judge extensively dealt with  it  in  his  decision  that  it  was  not
    reasonable for the children to go to  Pakistan  and  indeed  there  are
    factors which were  not  considered  but  which  were  not  essentially
    relevant to the decision, such as that the children are UK citizens and
    they could not be forced to go outside the EU.  I accept that with  the
    benefit of hindsight the Judge's decision has weak elements.  It  would
    have been better if the Judge had specifically  addressed  the  section
    117B factors in order. Nevertheless the  decision's  treatment  of  the
    section 117B factors is adequate in the light  of  Dube.  Although  the
    Secretary of State has not pleaded it, the approach to  the  Article  8
    assessment is also weak. There is no reference to  R  (Razgar)  v  SSHD
    [2004] UKHL 27 or  even  an  attempt  to  go  through  the  five  steps
    described in Razgar.

17. If there is any error of law I do not find it sufficiently material  to
    justify setting aside this decision.  Therefore the decision  of  Judge
    Sweeney shall stand.

Anonymity

18.  There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  heard  the
    appeal I find none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law sufficient that it  should  be  set  aside  and  it  shall
    therefore stand.  The effect  is  that  the  appeal  of  the  Applicant
    against refusal of further leave is allowed.

    No anonymity direction is made.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 28. iv. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

