
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number: IA/33540/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision promulgated                 |
|on 10 July 2017                       |on 12 July 2017                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     IUH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms A Patyna instructed by Middlesex Law Chambers.
For the Respondent: Mr Singh Senior Home Office Presenting Officer .


                      ERROR OF LAW FINIDNG AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Moore ('the Judge') promulgated on 17 November 2016  in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.





Error of law


     2. The Judge considered an adjournment request at the beginning of the
        hearing before the First-tier Tribunal which was  refused.  One  of
        the reasons the adjournment was sought was because it was submitted
        the appellant's solicitors had only received a  recent  ETS  report
        the day before the hearing. The Judge noted at [4] "


             "Mr Sued-Ali on behalf  of  the  Respondent  objected  to  the
             adjournment. He stated that the Respondent's bundle was issued
             on 18 July 2016 and that the bundle included full  details  as
             to the ETS report and therefore that  issue  had  been  raised
             prior to today and the  appellant  had  ample  opportunity  to
             raise it with his legal representatives."


     3. In putting weight upon such a submission and  concluding  that  the
        appellant had had ample opportunity to instruct his solicitors with
        specific regard to the ETS report on  deception  issue,  the  Judge
        appears to have misdirected himself in fact and in law. The factual
        element is that the latest report was in  the  form  of  a  witness
        statement from Hillary Rackstraw dated 25 October  2016  which  was
        not in existence on  18  July  2016.  It  is  plausible  that  that
        document would only have been disclosed the day before the  hearing
        giving very little time for  the  appellant's  instructions  to  be
        sought upon the same.
     4. The misdirection  in  law  is  the  need  for  the  Judge  to  have
        considered the fairness of the decision. The Judge found  that  the
        interests  of  justice  required  the  matter  to  proceed  as  the
        appellant was not prejudiced, but it cannot  be  seen  how  such  a
        judgment could be made if the facts are  not  properly  understood.
        The Judge was clearly of the view that more time was  not  required
        which is not adequately reasoned in the decision.
     5. A more fundamental error appears in the Judge's assessment  of  the
        merits of the article 8 claim. The Judge found the appellant was in
        a subsisting relationship  with  his  partner  [24].  In  the  same
        paragraph the Judge notes  that  the  partner  is  a  refugee  from
        Pakistan. Notwithstanding this fact, the Judge concludes at [33]:


         "33. I do not accept that there are very significant  obstacles  to
             the appellant's return to Pakistan. The  relationship  between
             himself and the partner started in the full knowledge that  he
             had no leave to remain in the UK. I accept that there has been
             a short family life between the appellant and his partner  and
             young son  in  the  UK.  However,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
             appellant could enjoy family life in Pakistan if he was to  be
             joined by his  partner  and  his  child  and  the  appellant's
             stepson......."


     6. Although the Judge finds there was little evidence  made  available
        surrounding the partner's circumstances and  reason  for  grant  of
        refugee status, it is not disputed that such a grant was made.  The
        Judge fails to adequately analyse how a person who appears  on  the
        face of it to have been granted refugee status as a  result  of  an
        inability to return to Pakistan could  be  reasonably  expected  to
        travel to Pakistan to settle with the appellant to enable  them  to
        continue their family life there.
     7. The adjournment request also sought  a  period  to  obtain  medical
        evidence in relation to the child who was  diagnosed  as  suffering
        from Downs Syndrome  at  birth.   More  recent  reports  have  been
        provided in relation to  this  aspect.  The  Judge  did  not  allow
        additional time but then  found  there  will  be  adequate  medical
        services available in Pakistan.
     8. It was accepted by both advocates that the errors of law identified
        above and in the grounds, are material to the extent there  can  be
        no preserved findings of the First-tier Tribunal.
     9. As extensive fact-finding is required based on the proper  analysis
        of the factual matrix of this case the only option,  in  accordance
        with the Presidential Practice Direction, is for the appeal  to  be
        remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor House  to  be
        determined afresh by a judge of  that  tribunal  other  than  Judge
        Moore.

Decision

    10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remit the appeal to the First-
        tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor House to be determined  on  a  date
        and by a judge of that Tribunal, other than Judge Moore,  appointed
        by  the  Resident  Judge  in  accordance   with   the   operational
        requirements of that centre.


   Anonymity.


    11. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make that order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 10th of July 2017












