
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33028/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 6th October 2014                           |On 12th November 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                              ADEDOYIN OGEBULE
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Walsh instructed by Graceland Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 14th April  1959  and  he
    appeals against a decision made by the respondent dated 22nd July  2013
    to refuse him a permanent residence card under Regulation 10(5) and  15
    (1)(f) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. He appealed under Regulation 26 of the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.

 3. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Eban dismissed his appeal on 7th  July
    2014 concluding that he could not meet  Regulation  10(6)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations. She found that he met Regulation 10(5)(a), (b) and (d)(i).
      She found that the EEA national was  a  worker  as  at  the  date  of
    divorce as she was working for Eddenham High School in August 2012  and
    there were payslips for the month of September  and  a  P60  indicating
    that she had earned a salary from her work from April 2012.

 4. However the judge found there was  no  independent  evidence  that  the
    appellant himself was a  worker,  a  self-employed  person  or  a  self
    sufficient person under Regulation 10(6) at the date of termination  of
    the marriage and therefore he could not succeed  in  his  claim  for  a
    permanent right of residence..

 5. An application for permission to appeal was  made.   It  was  submitted
    that  there  was  no  requirement  for  independent  evidence  of   the
    appellant's working as referred to in paragraph 8 of the determination.
    The appellant adduced  some  evidence  showing  self-employment,  self-
    assessment returns and NI contributions of  work  at  other  dates  and
    although there was no documentary evidence showing he was a  worker  at
    the date  of  divorce,  his  appeal  statements  dated  3rd  June  2014
    confirmed he was engaged  in  self-employment  throughout  the  divorce
    proceedings.  The judge was required to decide what rights of residence
    the appellant had built up by the date of divorce  and  then  determine
    only then if those rights were retained.   The  structure  and  legally
    necessary approach was required for proper disposal.

 6. The application for permission to appeal was refused by Judge Levin  of
    the First-tier Tribunal. However the renewed application was  submitted
    to the Upper Tribunal and permission  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Pitt.

 7. At the hearing Mr Walsh submitted that the judge had found at paragraph
    9 that the EEA national was a worker at the date of  divorce  and  that
    the appellant therefore had a right in existence at the date of divorce
    in August 2012.  However the appellant has to demonstrate in  order  to
    obtain a permanent right of residence under 15(i)(f) that he can comply
    with the relevant Regulation  10.   In  particular  the  condition  was
    Regulation 10(6) that the person A is not an EEA national but would, if
    he were an EEA national, be a worker,  self-employed  person  or  self-
    sufficient person under Regulation 6.

 8. Mr Walsh submitted that  the  judge  did  not  take  into  account  the
    appellant's oral evidence which  was  before  her  and  instead  merely
    stated that there was no  independent  evidence  but  that  was  not  a
    requirement.

 9. In reply, Mr Walker stated that the self-assessment  information  which
    was now attempted to be placed before the Upper Tribunal was not before
    the First-tier Tribunal and the judge had directed  herself  correctly.
    There was no independent evidence.

10. Mr Walker placed before me, with the consent of Mr  Walsh,  an  earlier
    determination from Immigration Judge Knowles dated  10th  October  2011
    which confirmed that the appellant's EEA national wife was not  working
    in 2011 and thus the appellant  had  to  leave  Tesco's  where  he  was
    employed.

11. Regulation 10 (6) of the EEA Regulations reads as follows:
         'The condition in this paragraph is that the person-
         (a) is not an EEA national but would, if he were an EEA national,
    be a worker, a
         self-employed person or a self-sufficient person  under  regulation
         6'

12. I find that the judge clearly took into account the evidence  from  the
    appellant and it is noted at paragraph 3 that she  heard  his  evidence
    together with submissions from Counsel. I have checked  the  record  of
    proceedings which record that the appellant made an assertion  that  he
    was self employed.  The judge identified that it was for the  appellant
    to demonstrate that he met the requirements of the EEA Regulations  and
    she  noted  correctly  that  she  could  take  into  account   evidence
    concerning a matter which was raised after the date  of  decision.  She
    correctly identified that he would have to  meet  Regulation  10(6)  to
    show that he was a  worker,  self-employed  person  or  self-sufficient
    further to Regulation 6, as at the  date  of  the  termination  of  his
    marriage.  She stated "In the circumstances I find the appellant is not
    a family member who has retained the right of residence".

13. Nonetheless as stated at  paragraph  9(7)  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant's wife was working at the  date  of  divorce  but  she  added
    "There is no independent evidence that the appellant was  a  worker  at
    the  of  termination  of  his  marriage"  and  further  "There  was  no
    independent evidence that the appellant was a worker at the date of the
    hearing".

14. Clearly the judge took  into  account  the  appellant's  oral  evidence
    because it is recorded in the determination but placed little weight on
    this in view of the lack of  independent  evidence,  that  is  evidence
    apart from the appellant's oral evidence. Indeed, the evidence enclosed
    within the  bundle  only  related  to  2011  which  was  prior  to  the
    termination of his marriage. There were hand completed self  assessment
    tax calculations to April 2011 but  without  any  confirmation  of  tax
    assessment from the HMRC and bank statements to January  2011  and  the
    appellant divorced in August 2012. It is a  matter  for  the  judge  to
    determine her assessment of the evidence. On a reading of the whole  of
    the determination it is clear the judge considered in  this  particular
    case that evidence independent of the  appellant's  own  testimony  was
    required.  The grounds of appeal accepted that there  was  to  date  no
    documentary evidence going to show that the appellant was a  worker  at
    the date of divorce.  The judge considered the evidence in the  context
    of the appeal, that is someone claiming to be a worker and  though  her
    reasons are very short,  I  find  that  they  are  sufficient.  A  mere
    assertion of the appellant in his statement  and  orally  that  he  was
    working at the said date, the judge found to be insufficient as it  was
    not independent of the appellant.

15. Further criticism was made of the judge in respect of Amos [2011]  EWCA
    Civ 552 that the judge did not establish what rights of  residence  the
    appellant had built up to the date of divorce.  It was  contested  that
    the judge had stated that she considered whether the EEA national was a
    qualified person in every year of the appellant's marriage and this was
    not a requirement. However the judge did  not  reject  the  appellant's
    appeal on this basis. The appellant  had  made  an  application  for  a
    permanent right of residence and thus he needed to  establish  that  he
    had achieved five years continuous residence in accordance with the EEA
    Regulations.   However,  the  judge  clearly  found  that   there   was
    insufficient evidence to show that the  EEA  national,  upon  whom  the
    appellant's rights depended, had resided in the  UK  for  a  continuous
    period of five years in accordance with EEA Regulations at the date  of
    divorce and thus the appellant could not show this.  Indeed  the  judge
    set out the table of evidence at paragraph 7.  No challenge was made to
    the findings of the judge in respect of the EEA national.  Subsequently
    and after 2008  the  appellant  did  not  have  five  years  continuous
    residence until the date of termination of his marriage at  which  time
    he could not show that he complied with Regulation 10(6).

16. Even though the EEA national was found by the judge to  be  working  at
    the date of the divorce,  the  appellant  could  not  comply  with  the
    Regulations and thus any retained rights of residence (bearing in  mind
    he could not show 5 years continuous rights of  residence  because  the
    EEA national could not) would not assist him.  As stated in  Amos  only
    if that person had acquired a right of residence did  the  question  of
    retention arise. The judge set out effectively that the appellant could
    not have built up the necessary five years residence

17. In the face of the mere assertion of the appellant that  the  appellant
    was working and in the absence of documentary  evidence  which  it  was
    open to the appellant to produce, I am not persuaded that even if there
    was an error by the judge it was  an  error  which  is  material.   The
    witness statement produced by the appellant and which stood in evidence
    in chief gave no dates as to his working and merely stated at paragraph
    27 'I have worked and have contributed to the economic  well  being  of
    this country '.  This gives no specifics  about  his  working  at  all.
    There was no documentary  evidence  from  HMRC  with  tax  receipts  in
    relation to 2012 to show that the appellant  was  working  and  a  mere
    assertion in his oral evidence (as in the Record of  Proceedings)  that
    he was self-employed.   I therefore find that  there  was  no  material
    error of law in the determination and the determination shall stand.


Signed                                  Date 5th November 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

