
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33523/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th March 2014                              |On 28th March 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR
                       Upper TRIBUNAL JUDGE cLIVE lane


                                   Between

                             Sony Goud Boyapally
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision made on the  papers
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Deavin on 2nd January 2014.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on 7th August 1986.  She  came
    to the UK on 23rd January  2011  to  study  for  a  Masters  degree  as
    Sheffield Hallam University, intending in due course  to  apply  for  a
    Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant visa. However this scheme  had  closed
    by the time she had finished her degree.  On 20th June 2013,  she  made
    an in time application for leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  outside  the
    Immigration Rules by submitting a form FLR(O) on the grounds  that  her
    removal would violate the Appellant's rights under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.  Her application was refused on 22nd July 2013.

 3. The Appellant appealed against the refusal and elected to have her case
    dealt with on  the  papers  without  an  oral  hearing.   Judge  Deavin
    concluded that she could not meet the requirements of  the  Rules  with
    respect to the enjoyment of private life in the UK. She had  family  to
    return to in India, where she had spent 24 years before coming here  to
    study, and  he concluded that the appeal should be dismissed.

 4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to apply the correct test as set out in the case of  Razgar.
    Permission was granted for that reason by Judge Wellesley-Cole on  29th
    January 2014.

 5. There was no appearance by the Appellant at the hearing.

 6. Mr Diwnycz submitted that there was no error of law in the decision and
    relied on the case of Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640 for the proposition that,
    after applying the requirements of the Rules,  only  if  there  may  be
    arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside them  is  it
    necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether there are
    compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them.

Findings and Conclusions

 7. There is no legal error in this determination.   The  judge,  in  these
    circumstances, was not obliged to go through the formality of  deciding
    whether each of the Razgar tests were met since on any  view  this  was
    not an application which could possibly have succeeded.  The  Appellant
    came to the UK for a temporary purpose,  put  forward  no  evidence  to
    establish her claim to enjoy a private life here and  never  sought  to
    argue that she had lost her ties with her country of  nationality.  The
    fact that the particular scheme, which she hoped  would  allow  her  to
    work here, had closed by the time she had completed her degree, is  not
    a basis for establishing  that  the  UK  would  be  in  breach  of  its
    obligations under the ECHR by removing her.

Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                              Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
