
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration               and                Asylum                Chamber)
  Appeal Number: IA/33630/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
Heard             at             Field             House,             London
          Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On the 16th September 2015
             On the 6th October 2015


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL MCGINTY
                                   Between

                              MR MUHAMMAD WAQAR
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr I. Khan (Lincolns Solicitors)
For the Respondent:   Ms Brocklesby-Weller (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. This is the Appellant Mr Waqar's appeal against the decision of  Judge
      of the First-Tier Tribunal Hussain which was dated the  30th  December
      2014.

Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan. He was born on the  19th  May
      1979 and is therefore now aged 36 years old.  He  entered  the  United
      Kingdom on the 29th January 2010 as  a  Tier  4  student  migrant.  He
      applied for further Leave to Remain as a student, but this was refused
      on the 30th April 2011. He appealed that decision as a result of which
      his Immigration status was reconsidered by the Secretary of  State  on
      the 12th March 2012, resulting in him being granted  leave  until  the
      13th April 2012.  On  the  13th  April  2012  the  Appellant  made  an
      application for further leave on the basis  that  the  period  of  one
      month leave granted by the Respondent outside of the Immigration Rules
      was very short and that he would not be able to arrange admission to a
      new College for study in such a short period of time. That application
      was refused on the 25th July 2013, which gave rise to  the  appeal  to
      the First-Tier Tribunal which was heard by  Judge  of  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal Hussain on the 28th November 2014.


   3. In that decision Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Hussein  found  that
      the grant  of  discretionary  leave  was  at  the  discretion  of  the
      Secretary of State and that the Tribunal had no  power  to  substitute
      the Secretary of State's discretion  with  its  own.  The  appeal  was
      therefore dismissed.


   4. The Appellant sought to appeal that decision to the Upper Tribunal  on
      two grounds. Firstly, that the Judge failed to make  findings  or  his
      findings were inconclusive on the matters as to  whether  or  not  the
      Secretary of State exercised her discretion; whether the Secretary  of
      State had failed to pay any regard to the discretion vested in her and
      whether she had failed to exercise discretion, such that the Secretary
      of State's decision was not in accordance with the law  following  the
      case of Ukus (discretion: when reviewable) [2012] UKUT  00307.  It  is
      further argued as the second ground of appeal that the Judge failed to
      make any findings on Article 8 despite  referring  to  the  fact  that
      Article 8 had been dealt with in the refusal letter.



   5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-Tier Tribunal Judge White on
      the 5th May 2015. He found that there was no merit in the  Ukus  point
      raised in the grounds seeking permission as the  Appellant  had  asked
      the Respondent to exercise her discretion outside of  the  Immigration
      Rules and the  Respondent  had  done  so.  The  exercise  of  residual
      discretion which did not appear within the Rules and was a matter  for
      the Secretary of State and not the Tribunal. However, Judge White  did
      find that the original Grounds of Appeal raised the issue of Article 8
      and that the Judge made no findings thereon, either within or  outside
      of the Immigration Rules, which he found was arguably a material error
      of law.



   6. In the Respondent's Section 120 notice, it is argued that  whilst  the
      Judge erred in law in not  resolving  the  issue  of  disproportionate
      breach of Article 8, such error was not material and that no  properly
      directed Tribunal could have found a disproportionate  breach  in  the
      Appellant's favour on the facts before it, as there  was  no  adequate
      evidence to establish a breach.



   7. It was on the basis of this background that the case proceeded to  the
      full appeal hearing before me in the Upper Tribunal.



   8. In his submissions on behalf of the  Appellant  Mr  Khan  argued  that
      there was a material error in  the  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
      Judge Hussain in failing to deal with the Article 8 issue,  which  had
      been raised in the Grounds of Appeal. However, he conceded that  other
      than the statement from the Appellant there was  in  fact  no  further
      evidence regarding Article 8 before the First-Tier  Tribunal,  but  he
      sought to argue that the Appellant was in a relationship and did  have
      friends in the UK having entered some time ago  on  the  29th  January
      2010. He asked me to find that there was a material  error  and  remit
      the case back to the First-Tier Tribunal for rehearing.



   9. Ms Brocklesby-Weller on behalf of the Respondent argued that the First-
      Tier Tribunal Judge was in fact entitled to treat the Article 8  point
      as having been abandoned, the matter not having been dealt with in the
      Appellant's statement or in submissions before the First-Tier Tribunal
      Judge. However, she argued that in any event, there was no  evidential
      basis made out for a breach of Article 8, and that therefore any error
      on the part of the Judge was not material.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

  10. In respect of the argument as to whether or  not  the  Respondent  had
      failed to exercise  her  discretion  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
      application for further Leave to Remain  outside  of  the  Immigration
      Rules, it does not appear from the wording of the grant of  permission
      for leave to appeal by First-Tier Tribunal Judge White that permission
      to appeal was actually granted on that ground. The Judge  specifically
      referred to the fact that "there would appear to be no  merit  in  the
      Ukus point raised by the Crown seeking permission". However, even if I
      am wrong in this regard  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the  case  of  Ukus
      (discretion: when reviewable) [2012] UKUT 00307 (IAC)  made  it  clear
      that "if a decision maker in the purported exercise  of  a  discretion
      vested in him noted his function and what was required to be done when
      fulfilling it and then proceeded to reach a decision  on  that  basis,
      the decision is a lawful one and the Tribunal cannot intervene in  the
      absence of a statutory power to decide that the discretion should have
      been exercised differently" and that where the  decision-maker  failed
      to exercise discretion vested in him, the Tribunal's  jurisdiction  is
      limited to a decision that the failure renders  the  decision  not  in
      accordance with the law. However, this case  relates  specifically  to
      the statutory power under Section  84  (1)  (f)  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that "the person taking  the  decision
      should have  exercised  differently  a  discretion  conferred  by  the
      Immigration Rules". The case therefore dealt with the situation  where
      the decision maker had a discretion which was vested in him under  the
      Immigration Rules, rather than as in the present case a  consideration
      of  the  application  under  a  residual  discretion  outside  of  the
      Immigration Rules.


  11. The Court of Appeal case of Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148  is  authority  for
      the proposition that exercise of any residual  discretion  which  does
      not appear in the Rules itself is a matter for the Secretary of  State
      and the Tribunal may not impose its own decision. It is clear that the
      Secretary of State in the refusal on the 22nd July 2013 had considered
      the Appellant's application, but had refused it.  The  discretion  had
      therefore been exercised, although exercised  against  the  Appellant.
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain was therefore perfectly  correct  in
      determining that such exercise of discretion  was  a  matter  for  the
      Secretary of State and not for him.


  12. However, in respect of the main Grounds of Appeal, in respect of which
      permission to  appeal  was  clearly  granted,  namely  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge's failure to deal with the question of Article 8, it is
      clear that the Appellant did raise the argument within his Grounds  of
      Appeal that the removal of the Appellant would violate  Article  8  of
      the ECHR 1998. Although this argument does not  appear  to  have  been
      pursued in oral submissions by Mr Khan representing the  Appellant  at
      the First-Tier Tribunal, and although there was no direct evidence  in
      respect of Article 8 in the Appellant's witness statement, having been
      raised in the Grounds of Appeal, I do  not  consider  that  the  Judge
      should be simply taken to have  considered  this  argument  was  being
      abandoned. He does not appear to have considered  the  point  at  all.
      Clearly, in my judgement, he should have a least considered the issue,
      even if he were going to go on to state that the ground had  not  been
      pursued before him and he took it as being abandoned. However, he  has
      not done so. He has not referred to this Ground of Appeal at  all.  In
      my judgement, this does amount to an error of law.


  13. However, it is not simply sufficient to find that there  has  been  an
      error of law in the determination of the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge.
      Such error of law has to be material. In  considering  that  issue,  I
      have to determine whether or not such error was  material  based  upon
      the evidence before the First-Tier Tribunal. Until that issue has been
      determined, I am not in a position to set aside the decision  or  hear
      further evidence in respect of the Article 8 issue.  When  considering
      the evidence that was before the First-Tier Tribunal  Judge,  although
      it would have been apparent to him that the Appellant had been in  the
      United Kingdom since the 29th January 2010, as he had  specially  made
      this finding at [1] of his decision, there was no evidence before  the
      First-Tier Tribunal Judge of the Appellant having  any  family  within
      the United Kingdom and no evidence as to the  extent  of  any  private
      life he may have. The Appellant did not specifically have a  right  to
      study in the United Kingdom as opposed to elsewhere under  Article  8,
      but any friendships, relationships  or  other  private  life  that  he
      developed whilst studying, would clearly be relevant.  However,  there
      was no evidence thereof before the First-Tier Tribunal Judge.


  14. The Appellant within his witness statement  had  not  dealt  with  any
      facts relevant for the  purposes  of  Article  8,  and  had  not  even
      mentioned within his witness statement  any  reasons  why  his  appeal
      should  be  allowed  on  Article  8  grounds.   The   Respondent   had
      specifically originally considered the application under paragraph 276
      ADE, and found that the Appellant did not meet any of the requirements
      of that paragraph. It was not argued before  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      Judge that  in  fact  the  Appellant  did  meet  the  requirements  of
      paragraph 276 ADE, and there is no evidence  before  me  that  on  the
      evidence before the Judge,  that  any  of  the  requirements  of  that
      paragraph were met.



  15. Nor was there any evidence before the First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  that
      the Appellant met  the  requirements  for  a  family  life  under  the
      Immigration Rules. Nor is there  any  evidence  or  any  argument  put
      before the First-Tier Tribunal Judge that there  were  any  compelling
      circumstances in the  case  such  as  to  mean  that  the  Appellant's
      application should have been considered  outside  of  the  Immigration
      Rules applying the 5 stage Razgar test. The  Respondent  had  extended
      the Appellant's leave to beyond the end date of his course, so that he
      could complete the same, and there was in fact then no evidence before
      the First-Tier Tribunal Judge which would have justified  any  finding
      that her failure to extend his leave beyond that point, amounted to  a
      breach of his Human Rights under Article 8, whether inside or  outside
      the Rules.



  16.  It is not a breach of Human Rights  to  require  an  Appellant  whose
      course had finished to return him to make a further application if  he
      wished to continue his studies in the UK,  as  there  is  no  separate
      right to study in the UK as opposed to elsewhere, for the purposes  of
      Article 8. The fact that the Appellant having being in  the  UK  since
      2010, a period of just 5 years, was on the present  case  insufficient
      to justify any finding of a breach of Article 8.



  17. The decision reached by First-Tier Tribunal Judge Hussain,  therefore,
      although containing an error of law in terms of his  failure  to  deal
      with the Article 8 point, was not material, as there was  insufficient
      evidence before the First-Tier Tribunal Judge to justify  any  finding
      that the Appellant should have succeed on Article 8  grounds,  whether
      inside or outside of the Immigration Rules. No material error  of  law
      having been found, the decision of First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  Hussain
      is maintained and the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hussain,  not  containing  any
material error of law, is maintained and the appeal is dismissed.

The First-Tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-Tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014 and no application for an anonymity order was made before me.  No
such order is made.

Signed                                                                 Dated
16th September 2015

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
