
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33291/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 July 2014                               |On 24 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                        Mydudu Ascentia Thandiwe gaven
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hussain, instructed by Imperium Group


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Miss Mydudu Ascentia Thandiwe Gaven,  was  born  on  12
    June 1982 and is a female citizen of South Africa.  I  shall  hereafter
    refer to the respondent as the  appellant  and  the  appellant  as  the
    respondent  (as  they  appeared  respectively  before  the   First-tier
    Tribunal).   The  appellant  appealed  against  the  decision  of   the
    respondent dated 25 July 2013 refusing to grant her leave on the  basis
    of her human rights (Article 8 ECHR).  On the same date,  the  decision
    was made to remove the appellant by way of directions under Section  10
    of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The appellant appealed against
    that decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Phillips QC) which,  in
    a determination promulgated on 20 March 2014,  allowed  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds but dismissed it under  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The respondent now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal.   First,  the  grounds  challenge  the
    judge's determination on the basis that he allegedly failed to consider
    whether there was an arguable case under  Article  8  before  embarking
    upon an Article  8  analysis  (see  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)).
    Secondly,  the  judge  is  criticised  for  having  embarked   upon   a
    "freewheeling" analysis "unencumbered by the Rules" of Article  8  ECHR
    contrary to the principals in Gulshan (CNL insert reference).  Granting
    permission, Judge Ford acknowledged that Judge Phillips QC had given  a
    "very full consideration to Article 8 factors" but found  that  it  was
    arguable that he neglected  to  make  a  finding  as  required  by  the
    guidance in Nagre and Gulshan before embarking on his consideration  of
    Article 8 human rights outside the Rules.

 3. Judge Phillips QC did, indeed, give a thorough examination of Article 8
    outside the Rules.  Both parties agreed that the  appellant  could  not
    succeed under the  Immigration  Rules.   It  is  significant  that  the
    grounds of appeal do not seek to challenge the judge's actual  analysis
    of Article 8 or his application  of  the  relevant  jurisprudence  (for
    example, Huang [2007] UKHL 11;  EB  (Kosovo)  [2008]  UKHL  41;  Razgar
    [2004]  UKHL  27).   The  judge  was  also  mindful  of   more   recent
    jurisprudence including MF (Nigeria) [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  and  also
    Nagre  (see  above).   It  is  true  that  the  judge  moved  from  his
    consideration of the Immigration Rules to  Article  8  recording  that,
    "there can  be  no  presumption  [that]  the  Rules  will  normally  be
    conclusive of the Article 8 assessment."  To that extent,  he  did  not
    seek to cross any Gulshan "hurdle" or to apply a two stage test  before
    moving on to Article 8; it is that failure which the grounds assert led
    the judge into legal error.  However, any such error is, in my opinion,
    illusory in the light of the most recent jurisprudence  in  particular,
    MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ  985  (in  particular,  [134])  and,  most
    recently,  Singh  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74.   Addressing  the  "two  stage
    approach" in Singh, Underhill LJ concluded at [64]:

    In my view that is a mis-reading of Aikens LJ's observation. He was not
    questioning the substantial point made by Sales J. He was simply saying
    that it was unnecessary for  the  decision-maker,  in  approaching  the
    "second stage", to have to decide first whether it  was  arguable  that
    there was a good article 8 claim outside the Rules - that being what he
    calls "the intermediary test" - and then, if he  decided  that  it  was
    arguable, to go on to  assess  that  claim:  he  should  simply  decide
    whether there was a good claim outside the Rules or not. I am not  sure
    that I would myself have read Sales J as intending to impose  any  such
    intermediary requirement, though I agree with Aikens LJ that if he  was
    it represents an unnecessary refinement. But what matters is that there
    is nothing in Aikens LJ's comment which casts doubt on Sales J's  basic
    point that there is no need to conduct a full separate  examination  of
    article 8 outside the Rules where, in the circumstances of a particular
    case, all the issues have been addressed in the consideration under the
    Rules.

 4. In the light of this jurisprudence, there can be no argument that Judge
    Phillips QC did not err in law by concluding that there  was  a  strong
    (indeed, successful)  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds  in  the  present
    instance.  His Article 8 analysis is not vitiated  by  any  failure  to
    satisfy a "two stage test"  or  to  surmount  any  "hurdle"  supposedly
    imposed by Gulshan or Nagre.  There was, to use the language of  Singh,
    no "intermediary test".  Having properly embarked upon  his  Article  8
    assessment outside the Rules, I can find no fault (nor is  any  alleged
    in the grounds) of the judge's actual  analysis.   He  has  had  proper
    regard to all relevant evidence and has not  considered  matters  which
    were not material whilst his application of the relevant  jurisprudence
    has led him to an outcome which was clearly available  to  him  on  the
    evidence.  In the circumstances, I find that the grounds of  appeal  of
    the respondent fail to establish that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
    law and consequently the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                              Date 28 February 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane





