
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33426/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11 June 2014                                 |On 11 June 2014            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                                   Between

                                Fahad Gaffar
                        [No anonymity direction made]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     No attendance
For the respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Fahad Gaffar, date of birth 13.4.91,  is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan.

 2. This is his appeal against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Foudy, who dismissed his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent, dated  23.7.13,  to  refuse  his  application  for  an  EEA
    residence card. The judge dealt  with  the  appeal  on  the  papers  on
    21.1.14.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth granted permission to appeal  on
    8.4.14.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 11.6.14 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the determination of Judge Foudy should be set aside.

 6. The relevant background can be summarised  as  follows.  The  appellant
    claims to have first entered the UK on 23.8.11 with leave as a student.
    His leave was curtainled on 1.11.12, so that he had  no  extant  leave.
    The application for an EEA residence card was made on 27.12.12, on  the
    basis  of  the  appellant's  marriage  to  a  Portugese  national.  The
    application  was  refused  because  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
    satisfied on the evidence submitted that the  spouse  was  a  qualified
    person as defined  in  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006.  The
    appellant had to demonstrate that her Portuguese spouse was  exercising
    Treaty rights in the UK. Whilst there was evidence of a wage  slip  and
    an employer's letter for employment in December 2012, checked  made  by
    the respondent suggested that  she  had  only  worked  a  month  before
    leaving on maternity leave in January 2013 with no indication that  she
    would be returning to work. The appellant and his spouse also failed to
    attend two pre-arranged marriage interviews, intended  to  confirm  the
    relationship. In the circumstances, the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
    satisfied that the spouse was exercising Treaty  rights  and  thus  the
    application was refused on 23.7.13.

 7. The grounds of appeal contained in the Notice of Appeal  were  no  more
    than generic grounds of law and provided no evidence  that  the  spouse
    was exercising Treaty rights.

 8. The appeal had originally been listed in the First-tier Tribunal for an
    oral hearing on 6.12.13, with notification sent out on  23.10.13.  This
    notice directed the appellant to  send  to  the  Tribunal  and  to  the
    respondent no later than 5 days before the date of the hearing a bundle
    of all documents to be relied on at the hearing.  No  such  bundle  was
    ever  sent.  However,  by  letter  dated   26.11.13   the   appellant's
    representatives asked for the oral appeal to be instead  determined  on
    the papers and asked to be notified of the hearing date for  the  paper
    hearing. In response the  Tribunal  sent  out  a  notice  of  adjourned
    hearing, dated 2.12.13. This notice stated that a new notice of hearing
    will follow in due course. On  5.12.13  the  representatives  sought  a
    refund of the fees paid for the oral hearing. There was no reference in
    the representative's correspondence to any bundle to  be  submitted  on
    behalf of the appellant.

 9. The paper appeal  was  put  before  Judge  Foudy  on  21.1.14  and  the
    determination promulgated on 3.2.14. In determining the appeal  on  the
    papers, Judge Foudy noted that  there  was  no  appellant's  bundle  of
    evidence and thus the judge had no more information than was present in
    the respondent's  bundle  and  submitted  by  the  appellant  with  the
    application. In the absence of sufficient evidence the  judge  was  not
    satisfied that the EEA national spouse was  exercising  Treaty  rights.
    Neither was there evidence to substantiate  the  vague  EEA  article  8
    claim in relation to private and family life. In the circumstances, the
    appeal was dismissed.

10. An email dated 5.2.14 complained that the  representatives  had  called
    the Tribunal on numerous occasions to enquire about the new  notice  of
    hearing to be issue "as  we  had  the  full  appeal  bundle  ready  for
    submissions. However, we were always told that the matter had not  been
    listed and we would received a new  Notice  of  hearing  once  listed."
    However, no notice of hearing is sent out for a paper appeal, as  there
    is no hearing date. The directions had required the appellant to submit
    a bundle of the evidence he wished to rely on  prior  to  the  hearing.
    There is no reason why the appellant's representatives could  not  have
    submitted that bundle; they did not  need  to  wait  for  a  notice  of
    hearing to do so.  It  is  claimed  that  the  appellant's  bundle  was
    prepared in December 2013 and was ready for submission. On  5.2.14  the
    appellant submitted an application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

11. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Hollingworth found there was an
    arguable error of  law.  "The  judge  was  not  in  possession  of  the
    appellant's bundle. The case was  determined  on  the  papers.  A  full
    explanation has been provided for the absence of the appellant's bundle
    by reference to what took place. In the  circumstances  the  judge  was
    unable to consider the appellant's case."

12. The Secretary of State's Rule 24 response, dated 30.4.14,  opposes  the
    appeal on the basis that there  is  no  evidence  to  substantiate  the
    allegation of procedural irregularity.

13. Once permission had been granted to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  on
    16.4.14 that decision was notified to the appellant at his home address
    and to the appellant's representatives, the same firm acting  from  the
    outset, Arshed & Co of an address in Manchester. Their response,  dated
    15.5.14 was to the effect that they are no  longer  instructed  in  the
    matter. All further correspondence from the Tribunal has been  sent  to
    the appellant at the address in Manchester given  in  his  applications
    and correspondence. Notice of the hearing listed before me  on  11.6.14
    was sent to the appellant at  that  address  by  first  class  post  on
    2.5.14.

14. The directions accompanying the notice that permission had been granted
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal directed the appellant to serve on  the
    Upper Tribunal and the respondent, not later than  21  days  after  the
    directions, all documentary evidence it is intended to rely on  at  the
    forthcoming hearing. There has been no response from the  appellant  to
    those directions and no evidence has been submitted.

15. Whilst there may  have  been  a  procedural  error  in  the  Tribunal's
    communication with the appellant's representative,  failing  to  notify
    that the case  is  to  be  determined  on  the  papers  and  to  invite
    submission of a bundle, I am satisfied on the chronology set out  above
    that it was not material to the outcome of the appeal as the  appellant
    has even now failed to  submit  any  appellant's  bundle,  despite  the
    directions of the Tribunal to do so for the Upper Tribunal appeal.  The
    appellant did not respond to the notice of hearing for today's date and
    has submitted no further documentation.

16. In  the  circumstances,  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  in  the  exact  same
    evidential position as when Judge Foudy came to determine the appeal on
    the papers. There remains no satisfactory evidence that the appellant's
    spouse was or is a qualified person as defined in the Regulations.



Conclusions:

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed.
Signed: [pic]     Date: 11 June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
(rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
2005 and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007).

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  stands  and  the  appeal
remains dismissed. Signed: [pic]        Date: 11 June 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
