
IAC-TH-WYL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33180/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20th October 2014                          |On 15th December 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                            MR TAYLAN YILDIRIMlAR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Ali (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant's appeal against decisions to refuse to  vary  his  leave
    to remain and to remove him by way of directions under  section  47  of
    the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 was dismissed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  Bart-Stewart  ("the  judge")  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 11th August 2014.  The adverse decisions  were  made  by
    the Secretary of State following an application for leave to remain  in
    order to  continue  operating  a  business  under  the  Turkey-European
    Community Association Agreement.

2.   The appellant's case was that he established  a  clothing  business  in
    March 2012 and secured office premises by means of a tenancy or licence
    agreement.  The Secretary of State found that the appellant had  failed
    to show that either he or his landlord appeared on  the  lease  of  the
    premises and so she was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  any
    security there.   She  also  found  that  although  the  appellant  had
    provided profit and loss accounts, no balance sheet was made  available
    showing that the business had any  fixed  assets.   This  cast  further
    doubt on the security of tenure for the business premises.  She was not
    satisfied that the appellant  had  made  any  real  investment  in  his
    business.

3.   At the hearing of his appeal, the appellant gave  evidence,  as  did  a
    witness who said that the appellant rented business premises from  him.
    It appeared that the appellant moved to other premises after making his
    application.

4.   The judge found that the appellant's  case  that  he  lawfully  sub-let
    premises was not made out.  It appeared that the  appellant's  landlord
    only had a licence agreement with the superior title holder.  So far as
    business activities were concerned, the judge noted that the  appellant
    referred to a clothing enterprise in his application, whereas his  oral
    evidence suggested a  "variety  store".   Other  than  bank  statements
    showing payments to and sometimes from the person  he  rented  premises
    from, the judge found that there was no evidence of other  transactions
    showing the buying of stock or other business items or  expenses.   She
    went on to find that the majority of the 300 or more documents  in  the
    appellant's bundle post-dated the respondent's decision.   Her  overall
    conclusion was that the appellant had not  shown  that  he  operated  a
    business or had made any substantial investment.

5.   An application was made for permission to  appeal.   It  was  contended
    that the judge erred in several  respects.   First,  she  conflated  or
    confused the licence agreement between the superior  title  holder  and
    the person the appellant rented premises from and the rental  agreement
    between the appellant and his immediate landlord.  Secondly, so far  as
    business activity was concerned, the judge failed to take into  account
    payment of rent and similar bills and numerous  receipts  and  invoices
    relating  to  the  appellant's  business  activities.    This   showed,
    overwhelmingly, that he was in  business,  as  claimed.   Thirdly,  the
    judge failed to give reasons for excluding evidence that post-dated the
    respondent's decision and there was no legal basis for  excluding  this
    evidence.  Fourthly, the judge erred in finding that the appellant  had
    not invested in his business.  This was not material as  the  Secretary
    of State had not relied on this ground.  Finally, the judge  failed  to
    take into account tax and similar  documents,  which  appeared  in  the
    bundle.

6.   Permission to appeal was  granted  on  29th  August  2014.   The  judge
    granting permission found that it was arguable that  as  the  appellant
    had brought an  in-country  appeal,  section  85(4)  of  the  2002  Act
    applied, so that the judge ought to have considered evidence which post-
    dated the date of decision, rather than excluding it.

7.   In a brief rule 24 response from the Secretary of State, made  on  29th
    September 2014, it  was  contended  that  the  judge  directed  herself
    appropriately and that her conclusions were open to her.  There  was  a
    lack of adequate evidence that the appellant ran a successful business.



Submissions on Error of Law

8.   Mr Ali said, so far  as  the  first  ground  was  concerned,  that  the
    witness evidence and rental agreement  showed  the  arrangements.   The
    appellant rented premises from a person who accepted,  in  due  course,
    that the superior landlord's permission had not  been  given.   In  any
    event, the premises were lawfully licensed and so the appellant  had  a
    modest  degree  of  security  of  tenure  in  the  business   premises.
    Secondly, there was ample evidence in the  appellant's  bundle  showing
    transactions relating to the  premises  and  the  appellant's  business
    activities.  The judge erred in paragraph 15 of  the  determination  in
    finding against the appellant in this context.  The  relevant  evidence
    was contained at pages 205 to 334 of the appellant's bundle.  The items
    here showed that the appellant purchased stock.  Thirdly,  even  though
    some of the evidence post-dated the date of decision, this was  an  in-
    country appeal and there was no exclusionary  rule  of  evidence.   The
    judge was obliged to consider all of it.  The determination showed that
    she took into account the bank statements  but  not  the  other  items.
    Fourthly, a balance sheet was provided which was sufficient evidence of
    business activities and showed the assets the appellant had.  Moreover,
    the documentary evidence before the judge included items from HMRC,  at
    pages 23 to 78 in the appellant's bundle.  These were  not  taken  into
    account.  For example, the document at page 33 showed business premises
    at London W11 3HG and the appellant trading there  as  "Naz  Fashions".
    Pages 75 to 78 were receipts from HMRC showing that the  appellant  was
    self-employed  and  paid  Class  2  national  insurance  contributions.
    Events had moved on and he had now  taken  other  premises,  at  Camden
    Lock.

9.   Ms Holmes said that, so far as the  first  ground  was  concerned,  the
    judge was not confused.   It was simply unclear  why  the  arrangements
    were as they appeared to be.

10.  So far as evidence of business activity was concerned, Ms  Holmes  said
    that the invoices contained in the appellant's bundle  related  to  Naz
    Fashions and it was clear that some of them came into being before  the
    date of the adverse decision.  For example, at page 215 was an  invoice
    dated 1st November 2012, long before the adverse decisions were made in
    July 2013.  There were many similar  items.   The  Secretary  of  State
    accepted that the judge ought to have taken this evidence into  account
    as legally relevant and as bearing on the lawfulness of  the  Secretary
    of State's decisions  to  refuse  to  vary  leave  and  to  remove  the
    appellant.  The Secretary of State accepted that the  failure  to  take
    this evidence into account amounted to a material error of law.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11.  In the light of  the  submissions  from  the  representatives,  and  Ms
    Holmes' acceptance that the judge failed to take into account  material
    evidence, including evidence which bore  on  the  appellant's  business
    activities, I conclude that the decision of the First-Tribunal contains
    a material error of law and must be set aside and re-made.

12.  The evidence not taken into account is  substantial  and  the  findings
    made by the judge are, as a result,  limited.   In  the  light  of  the
    extent of the fact finding required, I conclude  that  the  appropriate
    course is to remit the appeal, so that it may be re-made in the  First-
    tier Tribunal, at Taylor House, before a judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  containing  a  material  error  of
law, is set aside.  It will  be  re-made  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  at
Taylor House, before a judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bart-
Stewart.

Short directions are attached.




Signed        Date 20th October 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


                                    [pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33180/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20th October 2014                          |On 15th December 2014        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                            MR TAYLAN YILDIRIMIAR

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Ali (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                                 DIRECTIONS


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been  set  aside.   It  will  be
remade in the First-tier Tribunal, at Taylor House, on the  first  available
date, before a judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bart-Stewart.
The following directions will take effect:

1.   Two hours will be set aside for the hearing of the appeal.

2.   Any further evidence relied upon by the parties  shall  be  filed  with
    the Tribunal and served on the other party no later  than  ten  working
    days before the hearing date.



Signed            Date 20th October 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

