
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33510/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                    Decision & Reasons  |
|                                      |Promulgated                             |
|On 27 July 2015                       |                    On 13 August 2015   |
|                                      |                                        |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                              mr muhammad sajid
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G McCall (Counsel instructed by Richmond Chambers
LLP)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This matter comes before me for  as  an  error  of  law  hearing.   The
    appellant whose date of birth is  3  February  1998  is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan.  He appeals against a decision and reasons of the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) (Judge Fowell) promulgated on 25 March 2015 in which his
    appeal was dismissed on immigration grounds.   The  appellant   applied
    for a visa as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant  under  the  points-based
    system (PBS) and in addition argued  that  his  right  to  respect  for
    private life was breached.

FtT Decision

2.   In a detailed and considered decision and reasons the FtT set  out  the
    detailed reasons for  refusal  together  with  the  relevant  statutory
    provisions and the  submissions  made  by  both  representatives.   The
    findings of fact were set out from [28-40] and the Article 8 issue  was
    considered from [41-44].

3.   At [29] the FtT found that the appellant  failed  to  comply  with  the
    Rules in terms of a third party declaration as it did not confirm  that
    the funds remained available to the appellant.  Further it  found  that
    there was no declaration from a legal representative  as  specified  in
    paragraph 41-SD(d) of Appendix A.  At [32] the FtT found the  appellant
    failed to provide the required evidence that  he  was  registered  with
    HMRC as self-employed.

4.   At [32] the FtT found that the evidence failed to specify the  duration
    of a trading contract as required by the Rules.  At [36] the FtT  found
    no evidence of business activity under the contract  provided  and  was
    not satisfied that the appellant met the  requirement  under  table  4,
    Appendix A, subparagraph (iv).

5.   At [36] the FtT considered the  issue  of  evidential  flexibility  and
    Rodriguez , and found that the letter from the bank did not come within
    this policy as it failed to provide the specified information.

6.   At [42] the FtT considered private  life  under  paragraph  276ADE  and
    concluded that there the appellant  failed  to  show  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to his  reintegration  into  Pakistan  given  his
    evidence of family ties with immediate family members.

7.   The FtT went on to consider whether or not Article 8  ECHR  outside  of
    the Rules was applicable at  [43]  and  with  reference  to  Aliyu  and
    Another, R (on the application of) v SSHD [2014] EWHC 3919 (Admin).  It
    found that there was no sufficiently good reason to consider Article  8
    directly and no argument was placed before the Tribunal to suggest that
    there was anything about the appellant's circumstances not  covered  by
    the Rules.

Grounds of Application

8.   It was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal erred as follows.

    (1)  The FtT applied the Rules in place after 11 July 2014 rather  than
         those applicable on 10 July 2014.


    (2)  The FtT failed to consider the factual basis  of  the  appellant's
         application with reference to receipt of funds from  third  parties
         rather than individuals holding their own funds.


    (3)  The FtT placed evidential requirements on the appellant which were
         not contained in the Rules requiring (1) a declaration to accompany
         a letter from the bank  and  (2)  the  "fruits  of  work"  to  show
         trading.


    (4)  The FtT  failed  to  consider  relevant  evidence  insofar  as  it
         concluded that the appellant did not submit evidence of being self-
         employed with his application.


    (5)   The  FtT  failed  to  apply  paragraph  245AA  when   considering
         evidential flexibility.


    (6)  The FtT failed to have regard to recent jurisprudence in  relation
         to Article 8 and placed too high a burden on the appellant.


Amended Grounds of Appeal

9.   The appellant submitted amended grounds of appeal dated 15  April  2015
    in response to the section 120 One-Stop  Warning  referred  to  in  the
    original refusal letter.

10.  The appellant argued that he satisfied the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276 Immigration Rules (HC 395) (as amended)  on  the  grounds  of  long
    residence  -  ten  years'  continuous  lawful  residence  in  the   UK.
    Accordingly the decision to remove him contravened  Section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998.

11.  Reliance was placed on AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1076  at
    [81] and Lamichane v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 260 [26] and AF (Afghanistan)
    in Patel and Others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72.  It was submitted  that  the
    Upper Tribunal was required to  determine  the  appellant's  appeal  in
    accordance with  paragraph  276B  notwithstanding  this  related  to  a
    different  paragraph  of  the  Immigration  Rules  from  that  in   the
    respondent's decision.

Permission to Appeal

12.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler granted permission  to  appeal  on  27
    May 2015 finding all of the grounds in the original grounds  of  appeal
    to be arguable.  Judge Pooler further commented "it  is  unlikely  that
    the additional grounds found in the amended grounds of appeal  disclose
    a material error of law  because  they  raise  matters  not  originally
    before the First-tier Tribunal; but since permission is to  be  granted
    on all grounds may be argued".

Rule 24 Response

13.  The Secretary of State opposed the appeal submitting  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal directed itself appropriately.  The FtT was  entitled  to
    conclude that the letter from the bank was not in  the  correct  format
    and there was no obligation to apply the evidential  flexibility  Rule.
    The evidence was deficient.  Further it was open to the FtT to conclude
    that the  current  appointments  report  was  not  submitted  with  the
    application.  It was open to the FtT to  conclude  that  regardless  of
    whether the appellant had a copy at appeal that it  did  not  establish
    that it was submitted at the application.   The  mere  existence  of  a
    document which the FtT was in any event barred from considering did not
    establish that it had been submitted.

14.  As regards Article 8 this argument is misconceived.

Error of Law Hearing

Submissions

15.  Ms McCall relied on the grounds of  appeal.   Her  starting  point  was
    that having submitted additional grounds of appeal in response  to  the
    One-Stop Warning in the refusal letter,  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    under a duty to respond to those grounds.  She argued that the Tribunal
    was able to determine this matter and that it should remit  the  matter
    to the Secretary of State for a decision on the long residence issue.

16.  As to the original grounds of appeal,  Ms  McCall  submitted  that  the
    appellant had been resident in the UK 28 days short of  ten  years  and
    had a private life capable of protection under Article 8 with which the
    Tribunal had not engaged at all and this amounted to a  material  error
    of law.

17.  Mc  McCall  submitted  that  whilst  the  appellant  was  not  actively
    pursuing the matters raised in the  grounds  of  appeal,  the  Tribunal
    decision was littered with errors, the wrong law  was  quoted  and  the
    incorrect burden was used.  She relied on the grounds set  out  in  the
    permission to appeal only insofar  as  a  material  error  of  law  was
    disclosed.  Those issues were relied on only if  it  was  not  accepted
    that the Section 120 grounds could be raised at the error of law stage.
     Ms McCall produced a bundle of authorities including AS (Afghanistan),
    Patel and the Upper Tribunal decision of MU.

18.  Mr Whitwell requested  sight  of  the  Section  120  notice  which  was
    provided by Ms McCall and which confirmed that it  was  served  on  the
    Tribunal and respondent on 15 April 2015.

19.  Mr Whitwell  submitted  that  the  Section  120  notice  postdated  the
    determination by the First-tier Tribunal and it could not be criticised
    for failing to deal with matters that did not exist at the date of  the
    hearing or up to the promulgation date.  The grounds relied on were not
    relevant to the issue of error of law. As and when an error of law  was
    found such matters could only become relevant at  the  remaking  stage.
    At the date of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal the  appellant
    did not have ten years' lawful residence.

20.   Turning  to  Article  8  Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  the   Tribunal
    considered Article 8 with reference  to  the  Immigration  Rules  under
    276ADE.  There were no factors relied on by the appellant to  establish
    that his circumstances had not been covered sufficiently in the  Rules.



21.  Mr Whitwell further made reference to the  skeleton  argument  produced
    by the appellant for the First-tier Tribunal hearing which  in  essence
    argued that the appellant was able to meet the  Rules  with  additional
    documentary evidence.  The appeal could not succeed.

22.  As an aside Mr Whitwell raised concerns that the appellant appeared  to
    be relying on his Tier 1 appeal which he hoped to discard in  order  to
    be able to pursue another form  of  leave,  which  indicated  that  the
    appeal had been pursued  in  order  to  give  him  the  opportunity  to
    establish ten years' residence.

23.  Ms McCall relied on SS (Congo).  There were matters to  be  weighed  up
    as the appellant had been in the UK for nearly ten years and was  close
    to meeting the Immigration Rules which lessened the public interest  in
    his removal from the UK.   The  Tribunal  was  required  to  give  full
    consideration outside of the Rules under Article 8.

24.  She responded to  Mr  Whitwell's  suggestion  that  the  appellant  had
    abused the system by emphasising that Section 120 existed to enable the
    appellant to provide any further grounds.

25.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now give  with
    my reasons.

Discussion and decision
Section 120 Notice

26.   Clearly  there  can  be  no  criticism  of  the  appellant   producing
    additional grounds in response  to  the  service  of  the  Section  120
    notice.  However, I am  satisfied  that  the  matter  he  raised  (long
    residence) in the additional grounds of appeal was not  a  matter  that
    was before the First-tier Tribunal and could not have been  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal as the appellant had not resided in the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of ten years by that  stage.  In  AQ  (Pakistan)  the
    Court of Appeal considered that the Section 120  notice  procedure  did
    not require consideration of events  subsequent  to  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision.   Furthermore, I find that no decision has been  made
    by the Secretary of State on this entirely new matter.   It  is  not  a
    matter for this Tribunal to determine as primary decision maker in  the
    course of an error of law hearing on an unrelated matter and the  Upper
    Tribunal is under no obligation to consider this new application in the
    context of these proceedings and /or for the matter to be  remitted  to
    the Secretary of State.  I am satisfied  that  the  additional  grounds
    have been submitted and served on the Secretary of State  who  will  no
    doubt in due course  make a decision.

Error of Law Grounds

27.  As I have rejected the appellant's primary submission  I  now  consider
    the error of law grounds.  I am satisfied that the  appellant  has  not
    made out the grounds of appeal relied on.  There was  no  issue  raised
    with the First-tier Tribunal as to the Immigration Rules applicable  to
    the appellant's application made on 10 July  2014.   The  Secretary  of
    State considered the Rules set out in the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
    which were those in force after 11 July 2014 and the  appeal  proceeded
    on that basis.  No such issue was taken in either the grounds of appeal
    or the skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal  in  which  the
    point was argued that  the  appellant  ought  to  have  been  given  an
    opportunity to provide further evidence that was not submitted  at  the
    time of the application.

28.  I find no material error of law in the Tribunal's consideration of  the
    evidence submitted to meet the Rules.  The correct  relevant  date  for
    points-based matters was  applied  and  evidence  was  adduced  by  the
    appellant which was inadmissible, for example the second  bank  letter.
    There was no evidence to show trading at the time of  the  application.
    I am satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  properly  considered  the
    requirements for specified evidence at paragraph 41-SD(e) of Appendix A
    and/or the arguments as to evidential flexibility.

29.  Turning to Article 8, it was common ground that there is no longer  any
    intermediary test prior to consideration of Article 8 ECHR.  However, I
    am satisfied that the Tribunal's approach to this appeal  was  correct.
    The Tribunal first considered the application  of  private  life  under
    paragraph  276ADE(vi)  and  thereafter  considered  whether  there  was
    anything about the appellant's circumstances that was  not  covered  by
    the Rules.  It can be inferred that as  long  residence  was  a  matter
    covered by the Rules, there was no argument for  it  to  be  considered
    under Article 8. There was no additional material for the  Tribunal  to
    consider in light of the fact that the appellant first came to  the  UK
    as a student in 2005 and was granted periods of leave under the points-
    based scheme until  that  expired  on  10  July  2014.   There  was  no
    additional evidence of any compelling nature before  the  Tribunal  and
    none  has  been  put  to  the  Tribunal  to  support  any   substantive
    consideration of Article 8.  If however the Tribunal did  err  in  that
    respect I find  that  such  error  is  not  material,  given  that  the
    appellant would  not  be  able  to  argue  that  the  interference  was
    disproportionate following Patel and Others.

30.  Accordingly any error of law in that regard is not material.

Notice of Decision

31.  There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision which shall stand.

      No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 9.8.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                                  Date 9.8.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

