

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/33757/2015

                                                  IA/33758/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal   |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17 August 2017                         |  On 18 September 2017           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                JAGDEEP KAUR
                                ASHMEET SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:              Mr Iqbal instructed by Visa Expert Ltd
For the Respondent:           Mr Kotas Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        A.M.S Green promulgated on 9  December  2016  in  which  the  Judge
        dismissed the appeals of both appellants.
     2. The appellants are a married couple who are both citizens of India.
        The first  appellant  was  born  on  12  January  1989  the  second
        appellant on 28 March 1989. The first appellant applied  for  leave
        to remain in the United Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
        Migrant. The second appellant's application is dependent  upon  the
        first appellant. On 9 October 2014, the applications were  refused.
        The first appellant appealed resulting in the matter being remitted
        to the Secretary of State. On 22 October 2015, a  further  decision
        was made refusing the application.
     3. Having considered the evidence the Judge sets out his core findings
        at [11] of the decision under challenge which I  set  out  as  they
        appear in the determination:


        11.  The essence of the First Appellants claim is that  she  should
             be given an extension to take account of the fact that despite
             her best efforts she was unable to secure an alternative offer
             from a licensed Sponsor and thus, she  could  not  provide  an
             alternative CAS within the 60-day timeframe. She says that the
             Respondent  acted  unfairly  by  not  releasing  her  original
             passport to her  despite  repeated  requests  to  do  so.  The
             decision in Patel (revocation of sponsors licence -  fairness)
             India [2011] 00211 (IAC) and Thakur (PBS decision - common law
             fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 151  (IAC)  are  relevant  to
             this appeal. In Thakur the Tribunal held that  a  decision  by
             the Secretary of State to refuse further leave to remain as  a
             Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant was not  in  accordance  with
             the law because of a failure to comply  with  the  common  law
             duty to act fairly in  the  decision-making  process  when  an
             applicant had not had an adequate opportunity of enrolling  at
             another college  following  the  withdrawal  of  his  sponsors
             licence  or  of  making  further  representations  before  the
             decision was made. However, the principles of fairness are not
             to be applied by rote: what fairness demands is  dependent  on
             the context of the decision and the  particular  circumstances
             of the applicant. On 13 August 2015 the  Respondent  wrote  to
             the First Appellant telling  her  that  she  had  60  days  to
             provide an alternative CAS. This would have taken  her  to  22
             October 2015. The Respondent enclosed an attested copy of  her
             passport and an explanatory leaflet which the First  Appellant
             could have shown  to  prospective  colleges  as  was  standard
             practice. The First Appellant claims that none of the colleges
             that she visited would  issue  a  CAS  without  sight  of  her
             original  passport.  However,  she  has   not   provided   any
             supporting evidence of  this  because  she  claims  that  they
             refused to issue her anything in writing. Frankly,  I  do  not
             find that credible. 60 day extensions in the circumstances are
             common and I have heard many similar cases and I know that  it
             is standard practice of the Respondent to retain the  original
             passport and that prospective colleges will accept an attested
             copy and can be guided by the explanatory leaflet. Whilst  the
             Respondent acted discourteously in failing to answer the First
             Appellants letters, I do not think  that  she  acted  unfairly
             under the circumstances. The Respondent discharged her  common
             law duty. The First Appellant had an adequate  opportunity  to
             enrol at another institution and had the  necessary  documents
             to do so.


     4. The Judge found the respondent  writing  to  the  appellant  on  13
        August 2015 and enclosing the leaflet  which  the  first  appellant
        refers to  in  her  witness  statement  meant  the  respondent  had
        complied with her policy and therefore the decision in relating  to
        the appellant was in accordance with the law.
     5. The Judge states at [14] that if  the  first  appellant  wishes  to
        study in the United Kingdom she will need to return  to  India  and
        make an out of country application for leave to enter.
     6. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-tier Tribunal in the following terms:


        The appellants applied in time on identical grounds for  permission
        to appeal against the decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
        AMS Green (promulgated on 9  December  2016)  in  which  the  judge
        dismissed the appeals in respect  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
        grounds disclosed arguable errors of law but for which the  outcome
        of the appeal might have been different. The  judge  arrived  at  a
        finding that the respondent had not acted unlawfully or unfairly by
        not releasing the first appellant's  passport  so  that  she  could
        obtain a Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies within  the  period
        of 60  days  by  recourse  to  the  judges  personal  knowledge  if
        paragraph 11 of the judge's decision was read.  The  judge  was  to
        arrive at findings of fact by reference to the evidence  presented.
        For the judge to have recourse to the  judge's  personal  knowledge
        was arguably an  inadequate  reason  and  arguably  amounted  to  a
        procedural irregularity which materially affected  the  outcome  of
        the appeals. The applications for permission are granted.



Error of law


     7. Mr Iqbal relied on only one ground of challenge  before  the  Upper
        Tribunal by reference  to  the  respondent's  publication  entitled
        'Retention of Valuable Documents, Version 7, valid from 30  January
        2014' which it was submitted sets out the Secretary of State policy
        in relation to the retention of valuable documents.
     8. Mr Iqbal maintained throughout that this document  represented  the
        Secretary of State's policy in relation to such issues. This is  an
        important matter for the document itself is described as Guidance -
        Retention of valuable documents - version 7.0  and  not  a  policy.
        There is, arguably, a material difference between the two types  of
        documents. Policy documents  represent  the  Secretary  of  State's
        official interpretation or view of specific  issues,  a  breach  of
        which could give rise to a finding a decision is 'not in accordance
        with the law' on the basis that there is a  legitimate  expectation
        that a decision-maker will follow published policy relevant to  the
        decision  being  made.  In  R  (on  the  application   of   Semeda)
        (statelessness; Pham [2015] UKSC 19 applied) IJR [2015] UKUT  00658
        it was held that the policies of public authorities are not  merely
        material considerations to be taken into account  by  the  decision
        maker.  Rather, they trigger a duty to give effect to their  terms,
        absent good reason for departure.
     9. Guidance documents, by contrast, are published to  further  clarify
        matters relating  to  pre-existing  provisions  and  to  assist  in
        implementation of those provisions.
    10. The first finding I make is that although Mr  Iqbal  addresses  the
        Upper Tribunal by reference to the  doctrine  of  fairness  arising
        from a breach of  the  policy,  he  fails  to  make  out  that  the
        Retention of Valuable Documents guidance is a statement of  policy.
        The guidance is published  for  the  reasons  stated  namely  "this
        guidance explains what to do with valuable documents where a person
        is  liable  to  removal".   The   statutory   basis   necessitating
        consideration of these matters is set out  in  section  17  of  the
        Asylum & Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc.) Act  2004  which
        gives the power to retain documents, such as a passport, where  the
        Secretary of State or an immigration officer suspects a migrant  is
        liable to removal and the retention of the document may  facilitate
        removal. The 2004 Act does not allow for the  indefinite  retention
        of documents and where a person is later granted leave, in whatever
        capacity, the document must be returned to the holder unless it  is
        a forgery, in which case it must be sent to the  National  Document
        Fraud Unit at Status Park.
    11. The guidance defines what  is  a  Valuable  Document  both  in  the
        version referred to by Mr Iqbal and the current  version  published
        by the Home Office on 24 August 2017.


    12. The guidance provides:


         Where a valid passport is retained and removal could take place  on
         that passport it is not necessary  to  retain  original  copies  of
         other valuable documents, although you must retain  photocopies  of
         them. It is necessary to retain original documents  however,  where
         they may be needed to effect the removal of a spouse  or  child  of
         the migrant.


         This applies if:


         . the migrant is unlawfully present in  the  UK,  for  example,  an
         overstayer or illegal entrant


         . the migrant has been refused asylum  or  humanitarian  protection
         and has no other basis of stay in the UK


         . the migrant has been refused leave to remain whether or not  they
         have a right of appeal in the UK  (unless  they  have  an  existing
         period of leave, other than under 3C or 3D of the  Immigration  Act
         1971)


         . a decision under  section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
         Nationality Act 2006 has been made


         . leave to enter or remain has been curtailed with the result  that
         the migrant has no outstanding leave, if you curtail  leave  to  60
         days you must return the valuable  documents  because  the  migrant
         still has valid leave to remain.


    13. Mr Iqbal placed great emphasis upon the  final  criteria  asserting
        that as leave to remain had been curtailment the valuable  document
        should be returned because the migrant still  has  valid  leave  to
        remain. It is important to read this provision as a whole.  It  is,
        as Mr Kotas referred, a provision that relates to  a  situation  in
        which a passport is to be retained and  removal  could  take  place
        when it is  not  necessary  to  retain  original  copies  of  other
        valuable documents. The wording "this  applies  if"  sets  out  the
        circumstances in which the passport is retained but other  valuable
        documents  need  not  necessarily  be  retained.  The  wording   is
        important as it is not creating and mandatory requirement  for  the
        documents to be returned but outlines circumstances where there  is
        no need to retain other valuable documents.  As  the  circumstances
        outlined come into being if a passport is being  retained  for  the
        purposes of effecting removal the reference to  valuable  documents
        cannot include that passport.
    14. It was accepted by Mr Iqbal that the submissions he made  were  not
        raised before Judge Green and nor was the guidance on retention  of
        valuable documents brought to  the  Judges  attention  either.  The
        document was not pleaded by  the  appellant  although,  if  it  was
        established that the document amounted to policy, such failure  may
        not be fatal to Mr Iqbal's submissions - see  R  v  SSHD  ex  parte
        Ahmed and Patel 1998 INLR 570 in which held that the  principle  of
        legitimate expectation in public law, as opposed to the doctrine of
        estoppel in private  law,  was  a  principle  of  fairness  in  the
        decision making process.  It was a wholly  objective  concept,  not
        based upon  any  actual  state  of  knowledge  of  the  individual.
        Although the appellant in the instant case  did  not  know  of  the
        policy, he was entitled to assume - indeed,  he  had  a  legitimate
        expectation - that whatever applicable policy was in  existence  at
        the time would be applied to him.  That view was supported  by  the
        Court of Appeal in reference [2005] EWCA Civ 744.  It was also  the
        view of Mr Justice Calvert in R  (on  the  application  of  Timothy
        Mugisha) [2005] EWHC 2720.
    15. The Judge in decision refers to his knowledge of it being  standard
        practice for the respondent to enclose  an  attested  copy  of  the
        passport and explanatory leaflet for a person whose leave has  been
        curtailment in the circumstances of the  first  appellant  in  this
        appeal. The assertion of legal error on this basis has no  arguable
        merit. In Secretary of State for the Home Department v Abdi  [1994]
        Imm AR 402, Steyn LJ at page 420 accepted that an  adjudicator  was
        entitled to rely on matters within his own knowledge, provided such
        matters were disclosed to the parties so as to afford them  a  fair
        opportunity to deal with them. In the more recent case of AM  (fair
        hearing) Sudan [2015] UKUT 00656 (IAC) it  was  held  that  if  the
        judge is cognisant of something conceivably material which does not
        form part of either party's case,  this  must  be  brought  to  the
        attention of the parties at the earliest possible stage, which duty
        could in principle extend beyond the hearing date. The statement by
        Judge Green in relation to standard practice is not something  that
        would not have been known to the parties to  this  action.  Indeed,
        that is not the basis of the submission made to the Tribunal  which
        is solely the assertion that the standard practice employed by  the
        Secretary of State is  unlawful  as  being  contrary  to  published
        policy. The difficulty with this argument, as identified above,  is
        that the appellant seeks to rely upon guidance rather  than  policy
        to support the argument.
    16. The appellant did not make out before the Judge that the actions of
        the Secretary of State were  in  any  way  procedurally  unfair  in
        providing an attested copy  of  the  passport  and  an  explanatory
        leaflet. The Secretary of State was arguably entitled to retain the
        passport in the circumstances of this case  where,  without  lawful
        leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  appellants  were
        removable. Their application was refused as the first appellant did
        not have a valid CAS and their leave had been curtailed.
    17. The appellants failed to produce  sufficient  evidence  before  the
        First-tier Tribunal to show that sufficient enquiries had been made
        of the colleges in question. The Judge expresses  surprise  at  the
        claim the colleges were not willing to set out  their  position  in
        writing  and  during  his  submissions   Mr   Kotas   referred   to
        difficulties that may have been experienced  by  the  appellant  in
        doing no more than speaking to a receptionist who,  understandably,
        may have advised a prospective  applicant  who  is  not  a  British
        national that a copy of their passport was required.
    18. Having considered the decision  together  with  the  evidence  made
        available and submissions relied upon by both advocates, I find the
        appellant has failed to establish any arguable legal error material
        to the decision to dismiss the appeal.



Decision

    19. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.








   Anonymity


    20. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order pursuant to
        rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
        Rules 2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 15 September 2017












