
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33619/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 December 2017                            |On 23 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                            mr rohit singh mehta
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Lourdes, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  which
    dismissed his appeal on 15th December 2016.  The grounds  explain  that
    the appellant is an Indian national and he appealed a decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 9 October 2015 denying him  further  leave  to
    remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student.   The  application  was
    refused on the  basis  that  the  appellant  did  not  submit  a  valid
    Confirmation of Acceptance of Studies (CAS).  The  relevant  provisions
    invoked under the Immigration Rules were paragraph 245ZX.

    Grounds for Permission to Appeal

 2. It was asserted in the  grounds  for  permission  to  appeal  that  the
    appellant  had  elaborated  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal   that   the
    respondent's decision was deficient as no discretion  was  afforded  to
    him  despite  his  compelling  circumstances  such  as   the   'rampant
    revocation of sponsor licences'.  In  line  with  the  public  duty  of
    fairness he should have been granted further limited leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom. It was submitted that the appellant was  unable  to
    file a valid CAS because his college had had its licence revoked and he
    had not managed to secure an alternative CAS.

 3. The proceedings recorded by the judge featured between paragraphs 2 and
    3 of the determination and dealt with  the  submissions  only  and  the
    judge failed to  consider  the  evidence  relied  on  and  the  serious
    consequences of the refusal and the strength of his case.   Further,  a
    wider assessment should have been carried out in respect of  Article  8
    rights.

 4. Three specific grounds were advanced in the application for  permission
    to appeal, that is:

    (i) Failure to consider a fairness point; the appellant  had  undergone
    unfortunate circumstances regarding the sponsor's licence being revoked
    and this was not the fault of the appellant and this should  have  been
    given due weight

    (ii) Erroneous finding on a private life, the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    did not carry out the requisite balancing exercise  as  required  under
    Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27. His  conclusions  under  Article  8  were
    incomplete

    (iii) Proportionality of removal and public interest:  The  grounds  of
    appeal submitted that the judge did not  conduct  an  assessment  under
    Section 117A-D and the judge proceeded on very little consideration  of
    the law and a  curtailed  assessment  of  facts  when  determining  the
    appeal.  For example the appellant was  law  abiding  and  could  speak
    English and the judge failed to give proper consideration  to  the  law
    and the facts.

 5. The appellant also took issue with the judge's statement that there was
    "no issue of human rights or other procedural unfairness".

 6. The application was made  late  and  the  circumstances  of  the  delay
    explained. The appellant was represented  at  the  hearing  by  Lexpert
    Solicitors and on 31 October 2016 the Tribunal was served with a letter
    of authority and a bundle containing documents supporting  the  appeal.
    Following the appeal the appellant's  representative  made  queries  to
    chase up the determination but no correspondence from the Tribunal  was
    received.  It transpired that the representatives were not on record as
    acting and thus the copy of the determination was  requested  but  only
    finally received on 5 September 2017.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge granting permission merely stated that

             "a wider assessment should have been carried out in respect of
             the  appellant's  Article  8  rights  and  proportionality  of
             removal is arguable because of the paucity of reasoning in the
             judge's decision".

Conclusions

 8. The application for permission to appeal was nine months out  of  time.
    That point was not taken by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  granting
    permission and nonetheless although the delay in filing was  egregious,
    I note the explanation and  I have considered the circumstances.

 9. Despite Mr Lourdes' assertion at the hearing before me that the  First-
    tier Tribunal had been provided with evidence  by  way  of  fax  on  31
    October 2016 and one day prior to the hearing before Judge Wilsher  the
    fax transmission that he provided me with was dated 13 September  2001.
    There is no record on file of any documentation being provided  to  the
    Tribunal by  Lexpert  Solicitors  and  the  further  documentation  and
    witness statements provided to me in the Upper Tribunal were by way  of
    a covering letter of 30 November 2017 and 22 November  2017.   Both  of
    those bundles postdate the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  by
    nearly a year.

10. I do note that curiously the appellant was nonetheless  represented  at
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing and also he confirmed that  he  was  in
    attendance.

11. The appellant is a national of India, born  in  1988  and  entered  the
    United Kingdom in May 2010 as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant.   He
    applied to extend his leave but this was refused on 7 March 2013 with a
    right of appeal. His appeal was withdrawn and the matter remitted  back
    to the Secretary of State  who  allowed  him  60  days  to  find  fresh
    sponsorship.   On  16  December  2013  the  appellant  lodged  a  fresh
    application with a CAS issued by Lee Valley College.  Their licence was
    then revoked on 11th August 2014.  On 3 August 2015 the  appellant  was
    given a further 60 days to find a sponsor and produce a CAS  after  his
    solicitors wrote to the respondent;  the extension expired on 2 October
    2015.  The Secretary of State's decision was made  on  9  October  2015
    after the two extensions had been granted.

12. The only CAS that was before the respondent was that  of  Lee  College.
    The appellant was given the opportunity to find a fresh sponsorship and
    a new CAS.  As the decision stated, as at the  decision  of  9  October
    2015, no further evidence of a new Tier  4  Sponsor  or  CAS  had  been
    submitted.  The application was refused under paragraphs 322(9),  245ZX
    (a) and 245ZX (c) of the Immigration Rules.

13. Judge Wisher set out the appellant's circumstances and  the  nature  of
    the appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  correctly  stated  in  his
    decision that the relevant law was at paragraph 245ZX and the appellant
    was required to file a Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies.  The
    appellant accepted that no such valid CAS was lodged because Lee Valley
    College had its licence revoked and he had not  managed  to  secure  an
    alternative.  The refusal was therefore correct in terms of the law.

14. As the judge reasoned, the fact  that  the  respondent  had  given  the
    appellant a further 120 days to secure a CAS did not engage unfairness.
     The judge referred to the relevant guidance  which  suggested  that  a
    single instance in which a college is suspended could be overlooked but
    this appellant had already had one college suspended prior to  the  Lee
    Valley suspension.

15. The fact is that this appellant did not produce a  CAS  and  EK  (Ivory
    Coast) v SSHD EWCA [2015] Civ 1517 has made clear  that  the  Rules  in
    this respect are firm and even where there is  cancellation  of  a  CAS
    without notification to the appellant, and  through  no  fault  of  the
    appellant, the application  can  be  refused  without  further  notice,
    because of the importance of maintaining clarity and predictability  in
    the points based scheme.  The  Secretary  of  State  had  afforded  the
    appellant in this case further opportunity to secure a valid CAS and he
    had  not  done  so.   As  EK  (Ivory  Coast)  makes  clear  it  is  the
    responsibility of the appellant to find a bona fide institution and  he
    had not done so.  As explained at paragraph 34

             'The  fact  that  there  is  scope  for  applicants  to   seek
             protection against administrative errors by choosing a college
             with a good reputation and checking the  contractual  position
             before enrolling is of some relevance to the fair  balance  to
             be struck between the public interest in the due operation  of
             the PBS regime and  the  interest  of  an  individual  who  is
             detrimentally affected by it'.

16. The judge in this case cannot be criticised for applying  the  relevant
    law. The failure to comply with the Immigration  Rules  is  a  relevant
    fact in the Article 8 assessment.

17. I am not persuaded that there were wider issues that should  be  raised
    or analysed by the judge in respect of Article 8  or  the  approach  to
    private life was legally flawed.  The judge clearly addressed the issue
    of any procedural unfairness and set out the facts,  referring  to  the
    time extensions to obtain a further CAS, and found that there was none.
     The appellant acknowledged that the Home Office  had  indeed  returned
    his passport and granted him an extension of time until 2 October  2015
    and there was no unfairness  in  this  respect.  The  judge  gave  full
    reasons in accordance with MK (duty to give  reasons)  Pakistan  [2013]
    UKUT 00641.

18. In relation to the findings on Article 8  it  was  suggested  that  the
    judge had not taken into account the appellant's witness statement.   I
    find there is no evidence that any witness  statement  was  before  the
    judge and even if it were the witness statement that I was referred  to
    was dated 31 October 2016 does no more than explain that the  appellant
    came to the UK as  a  student  and  had  spent  considerable  funds  in
    pursuing his academic career.

19. His father financed his higher education and he had  always  been  very
    focused on academic life and that his current position was unjustified.
     This witness statement, which I do not accept was  before  the  judge,
    adds absolutely nothing more to the appellant's case. Indeed the  judge
    noted that the appellant's private life was arguably  engaged  but  was
    not "in these circumstances a sufficiently weighty matter  to  outweigh
    the proportionate interests of maintaining immigration  control".   The
    judge did take into account the relevant facts  and  circumstances  and
    was entitled to make that finding.

20. On the facts of this case the  judge  was  unarguably  correct  in  his
    approach to private life having accepted that it may have been engaged.
     Article 8, however,  is  not  a  general  dispensing  power  and  that
    approach has been underlined by Patel & Others v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 and Nasim  and  others  (Article  8)
    [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC) .

21. Nor was there any arguable unfairness in the determination and  indeed,
    as the Secretary of State in  her  Rule  24  response  stated,  Marghia
    (procedural fairness) [2014] UKUT 366 stated, "the common law  duty  of
    fairness is  essentially  about  procedural  fairness".   There  is  no
    absolute duty of common law to make decisions which  are  substantially
    fair.  The court will  not  interfere  with  the  decisions  which  are
    objected to as being substantively unfair, except where the decision in
    question falls foul of the Wednesbury  test  i.e.  that  no  reasonable
    decision maker or public body could have arrived at such a decision.

22. It may indeed have been an error on the judge's part to have failed  to
    address Section 117 but that cannot be said in any way to be  material.
    Speaking English and not being  financially  dependent  on  the  public
    purse are considered neutral factors, see AM  (S  117B)  Malawi  [2015]
    UKUT 0260 (IAC) and contrary to the grounds the  appellant  did  indeed
    have a precarious immigration status from the moment of entry into  the
    UK.

23. The failure to consider Section 117 was therefore  to  the  appellant's
    advantage.  Nonetheless the judge gave  adequate  reasoning  which  was
    succinct and cogent and in line with Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:
    set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC).  Reasoning on the  central  aspects
    to the claim was made.  There is no error of law in his  decision  with
    regards to proportionality or otherwise.

24.   In my view I am surprised  permission  was  granted  in  this  matter
    particularly as the issue of the application being made out of time was
    not addressed.  Nonetheless I have implicitly  granted  permission  and
    considered the circumstances of the case and the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge contains no material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal made no error of law and the decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Helen   Rimington                                          9th
    January 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

