
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33828/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 March 2015                              |On 31 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                Khadija bibi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss M Singh, instructed by Kabir Ahmed & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Khadija Bibi, was born on 1 January 1953 and is a female
    citizen of Pakistan.  She came to the United Kingdom on 11 January 2014
    on a visit visa but, on the day before  her  visit  visa  expired,  she
    applied for further leave to remain on the basis of  her  family  life.
    That application was refused on 12 August 2014.  A  decision  was  also
    taken on that date to remove  her.   She  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Myers) which, in  a  determination  promulgated  on  14
    August 2014, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are four grounds of appeal.  Grounds 1 and 2 essentially  concern
    the same alleged error, namely that the judge, having found two of  the
    witnesses (the appellant's son-in-law and daughter) to be credible [21]
    then went on  to  make  findings  inconsistent  with  that  credibility
    finding.  Ground 3 is wholly without merit; there was  no  evidence  at
    all that the judge applied a higher standard of proof than that of  the
    balance of probabilities.  Ground 4 also arises out of the same alleged
    error as grounds 1/2 and amounts to little more than an assertion  that
    the appeal should have been allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds  had  the
    judge "followed through her positive credibility findings".

 3. I had the opportunity of hearing oral submissions from  Miss  Singh  of
    Counsel and  also  Mrs  Pettersen,  a  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.  I am grateful to Miss Singh for providing a detailed  written
    skeleton argument which I have also considered.

 4. It was accepted by both parties that  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.   The  judge  carried  out  an
    Article 8 ECHR  assessment  outside  the  Rules  at  [17  -  26].   The
    appellant claims to be in poor health, no longer have a home or support
    from family or others in Pakistan whilst her closest family members are
    living in the United Kingdom.  The judge  stated  that  she  had  "some
    issues with the appellant's evidence" but stated that she found the son
    and daughter-in-law to be credible [21].  At [22] the judge stated:

         I have  more  difficulty  with  the  appellant's  circumstances  in
         Pakistan.  The case is that she received the compensation money  in
         cash and paid it into a bank account but has now spent  it  all  on
         travel to the UK and general living expenses.  She claims  to  have
         no other resources or home in  Pakistan.   However,  she  has  been
         funding regular trips to the UK, the last one being in January 2014
         and the evidence was that her family in the UK did not  financially
         support her in Pakistan.  She must, therefore, have had  sufficient
         resources to meet her living expenses and travel costs.   It  would
         have been an easy enough matter to have  produced  bank  statements
         and without such evidence I do not accept that she has no money for
         accommodation and maintenance in Pakistan.

 5. At [24] the judge noted that the appellant does have siblings living in
    Pakistan and found that she had exaggerated any difficulties  that  she
    might experience on return to that country.  The judge did not  "accept
    that her siblings will refuse to help her  if  she  is  homeless.   Her
    brother helped in the past and she has not provided any  evidence  that
    he will not do so in the future."  As regards that last statement,  the
    appellant now asserts that the oral evidence given  by  the  son-in-law
    and daughter before the First-tier Tribunal confirmed that the  brother
    was not willing to provide help in the future.

 6. Whilst I admit there may be some infelicities in the language  used  in
    the determination, I do not find that Judge Myers has made inconsistent
    findings  as  alleged.   The  finding  regarding  the  son-in-law   and
    daughter's credibility follows  immediately  from  a  specific  finding
    which the judge made regarding compensation paid to  the  appellant  in
    Pakistan when her home was affected by the construction of a dam.   The
    judge said that she had misgivings regarding some  of  the  documentary
    evidence produced regarding the compensation but found that,  "all  the
    witnesses were consistent on this point".  I find that the  observation
    of the judge at the end of paragraph 21 regarding  the  credibility  of
    the son and daughter-in-law refers specifically to the  evidence  given
    regarding the compensation claimed by the appellant to have  been  paid
    to her.  The credibility finding went no further than that as the judge
    made clear at the beginning of the next paragraph [22] when she  stated
    that she had "more difficulty with  the  appellant's  circumstances  in
    Pakistan." I take that to mean that she had  difficulty  with  all  the
    evidence  given  by  all  the  witnesses  regarding   the   appellant's
    circumstances in Pakistan. Those difficulties led  the  judge  to  make
    findings that she did not accept that the appellant had  no  money  for
    accommodation and maintenance.

 7. Even if I am wrong as to the meaning of paragraph 21, there is  a  deal
    of difference  between  the  appellant's  evidence  regarding  her  own
    circumstances and the evidence given by third parties  regarding  those
    circumstances.  There was no reason to suppose that the son-in-law  and
    daughter know  the  mother's  affairs  in  intimate  detail  and  their
    evidence regarding her circumstances will always  amount  to  a  little
    more than a statement of belief as to what they consider  the  mother's
    circumstances to be.  Such a belief  may  be  genuinely  held  and  the
    evidence may be "credible" as a consequence but it did not prevent  the
    judge in this instance from making findings regarding  the  appellant's
    circumstances in Pakistan which differed from the evidence given by the
    witnesses.  It is, frankly, ridiculous to suppose that  the  judge  was
    bound to accept that, for example, siblings in Pakistan would not  help
    the appellant simply because the son-in-law and daughter  believe  they
    would not do so.

 8. Having found that medical care  was  available  for  the  appellant  in
    Pakistan and that she would have the help and support of family members
    there, it was entirely open to the judge to find that  the  appellant's
    removal would not be disproportionate.  Indeed, it could be  said  that
    the judge has given insufficient weight to the public interest in  this
    case.  The appellant was clearly not a credible witness if only because
    she had entered the United Kingdom as a visitor, declaring to the Entry
    Clearance Officer that she would return at the end of her visit when it
    is clear from the evidence which she has now  given  that  she  had  no
    intention of doing so. There plainly exists a  strong  public  interest
    concerned with the removal of individuals who behave in such a manner.

 9. Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.
                                        Date 30 March 2015
         Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
