
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33712/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9 September 2014                        |On 12 September 2014       |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MR GOHAR ALI
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
         For the Appellant: Mr T Wilding a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
                           For the Respondent: the appellant did not
           attend and was not represented


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department  ("the
      Secretary of State"). The respondent is a citizen of Pakistan who  was
      born on 1 April 1989 ("the claimant"). The Secretary of State has been
      given permission to appeal the determination  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
      Judge Herlihy ("the FTTJ") who allowed the claimant's  appeal  against
      the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse  to  vary  his  leave  to
      remain in the UK as a Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant  under  the
      provisions of paragraph 245ZX of the Immigration Rules. The  Secretary
      of State also made a decision to remove the claimant from  the  UK  by
      way of directions under Section 47 of the Immigration and  Asylum  and
      Nationality Act 2006.


   2. The claimant claimed 30 points for his Confirmation of Acceptance  for
      Studies ("CAS"). The Secretary of State was  not  satisfied  that  the
      claimant had a valid CAS and found that no CAS  reference  number  was
      submitted with the application.  The  application  was  refused  under
      paragraph 245ZX(c). As the claimant had failed to provide a valid  CAS
      the Secretary of State  was  unable  to  assess  whether  he  met  the
      requirements of Appendix C of the Immigration Rules and  also  refused
      the application under paragraph 245ZX(d).


   3. The claimant appealed and the FTTJ heard the appeal on  3  June  2014.
      Both parties were represented  and  the  claimant  attended  and  gave
      evidence. The FTTJ set out the correct burden and standard of proof in
      paragraph 5.1: the burden  of  proof  lay  on  the  claimant  and  the
      standard was that of the balance of probabilities.


   4. The claimant said that in December 2012,  when  he  still  had  extant
      leave, he made an application for a Tier 1  Entrepreneurial  visa  but
      decided to withdraw that application and make the application which is
      the subject of the present  appeal  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
      Migrant. He submitted the application  without  his  English  language
      test certificate because it had  not  been  returned  to  him  by  the
      Secretary of State, although he had asked for it to  be  returned.  He
      had tried to take another English language test but was unable  to  do
      so because the Secretary of State had not returned his passport.


   5. The Secretary of State said that  her  records  showed  that  all  the
      documents including the passport and English language test certificate
      had been returned to the  claimant  by  recorded  delivery  post.  The
      claimant said that although the passport had reached him  the  English
      language test certificate had not.


   6. The FTTJ found that the claimant was not, in some respects, a credible
      witness. However, she concluded that it was possible that the  English
      language test certificate  had  not  been  returned  to  him.  He  had
      provided a plausible account as to why he could  not  submit  a  valid
      CAS. He should be afforded  the  opportunity  of  submitting  a  fresh
      English language test certificate which  could  permit  a  College  to
      issue him with a valid CAS. She allowed the appeal to the extent  that
      the Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with  the  law
      and that the application should be reconsidered.


   7. The Secretary of State applied  for  and  was  granted  permission  to
      appeal submitting that the FTTJ erred in law in that she had failed to
      apply the correct standard of proof, made inconsistent  findings  that
      the claimant was credible in some respects but not credible in  others
      and failed to give clear reasons for her conclusions.


   8. Since permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  the
      claimant has written to the Tribunal stating that he  "would  like  to
      withdraw my application for appeal. I shall not be attending and I  do
      not wish further action to be taken for this." An Upper Tribunal Judge
      directed that the following response be given;  "Thank  you  for  your
      letter received today requesting that your application for  appeal  be
      withdrawn. However it is the  Secretary  of  State's  application  and
      appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  not  your  application  and
      accordingly consent cannot be given to a withdrawal pursuant  to  rule
      17 (2) of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.  Should
      you  not  attend  the  hearing,  the  Upper  Tribunal  would  consider
      submissions from the Secretary of State's representatives and, in  the
      event that those submissions are accepted,  may  well  set  aside  the
      decision of the First-Tier Tribunal allowing your appeal  and  proceed
      to remake the decision in your absence."


   9. The claimant did not attend the hearing before me. I am satisfied that
      he has received the notice  of  hearing.  Mr  Wilding  relied  on  the
      grounds of appeal, asked me to set aside the decision and remake it by
      dismissing the claimant's original appeal.


  10. I find that the FTTJ erred in law. In paragraph 5.1 she  set  out  the
      correct burden and standard of proof. However, in paragraph  7.10  she
      failed to apply this in reaching the conclusion that; "it is  possible
      that the original test certificate has been misled by the respondent".
      She  should  have  asked  herself   whether,   on   the   balance   of
      probabilities, the claimant had established  that  the  original  test
      certificate had been returned to him by the Secretary of State and  if
      so whether he had received it.


  11. This finding is the more surprising in the light of other  conclusions
      reached by the FTTJ. She found that there were problems with the  copy
      test certificate which the claimant had produced and submitted to  the
      Secretary of State which was undated. There was no evidence from  City
      and Guilds to confirm that the claimant had taken the test or that  he
      had been awarded the certificate. This undermined the  reliance  which
      could be placed on it. The FTTJ found that the claimant's  explanation
      for not undertaking a fresh test was not credible. She did not address
      the inconsistency between the evidence of the Secretary of State  that
      the claimant's passport and test certificate had been returned to  him
      in the same envelope with the claimant's evidence that he had received
      the passport from the Secretary of State at the address  to  which  it
      had been sent but not the test certificate.


  12. In paragraph 7.10 the FTTJ said; "the original certificate may in  any
      event not be valid for the reasons I have given". She should have made
      a finding as to whether the claimant had established that the original
      English language test certificate was valid and met  the  requirements
      of the Immigration Rules particularly where the reasons she had  given
      pointed towards it not being valid.


  13. I find that the FTTJ erred in law and I set aside the decision.


  14. I find that the claimant has not established that at the date  of  his
      application he was in possession of a valid CAS. He  accepts  that  he
      did not submit a CAS with his application. The reason he gave was that
      he was not able to obtain a CAS because the Secretary of State had not
      returned to him the English language test certificate  submitted  with
      his earlier application which he had withdrawn.


  15. It is for the claimant to establish the facts on  which  he  seeks  to
      rely and that he meets the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  to
      the standard of the balance of probabilities. In short the  burden  of
      proof falls on him  and  the  standard  is  that  of  the  balance  of
      probabilities. He accepts that  he  received  his  passport  from  the
      Secretary of State through the post on 23  June  2013.  He  failed  to
      produce the accompanying  letter.  He  denies  that  he  received  the
      English language test certificate which the Secretary  of  State  said
      was sent to him at  the  same  time  as  the  passport.  Even  if  the
      claimant's Royal Mail search does not show that the recorded  delivery
      letter has been delivered the claimant's own evidence  indicates  that
      it has. I adopt the FTTJ's findings that  the  copy  test  certificate
      which the claimant submitted is suspect because it does not  show  the
      date on which it was awarded  and  there  was  no  evidence  from  the
      issuing body, City and Guilds, to show that the claimant had taken the
      test and was awarded the certificate on any particular  date.  I  also
      find that the claimant's explanation for not undertaking a fresh  test
      is not credible. I find that the claimant has not established that  he
      did not receive the original test certificate from  the  Secretary  of
      State.


  16. The claimant has failed to show that he met the  requirements  of  the
      Immigration Rules.


  17. I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction and  can  see  no
      good reason to do so.


  18. Having set aside the decision of the FTTJ I  remake  the  decision.  I
      allow the appeal of the Secretary of State to the Upper  Tribunal  and
      dismiss the original appeal by the claimant.










      .............................................
            Signed                                    Date 10 September
      2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

