

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/33725/2015

                                                  IA/33728/2015

                                                  IA/33729/2015

                                                  IA/33730/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard in Birmingham                       | Determination Promulgated       |
|On Thursday 3 August 2017                 | On Tuesday 15 August 2017       |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     HS
                                     PK
                                     AK1
                                     AK2
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:            Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting
                 Officer
For the Respondent:       Mr H Sarwar, instructed by Malik Law Chambers

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted by the First-tier Tribunal.  The Respondents  in  this
appeal include  a  minor  child.   Pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/269)  I  therefore  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Respondents are granted anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  or  any
form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  them  or
any member of their family. This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all
parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  give  rise  to
contempt of court proceedings.
                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of reference,
       I refer below to the parties as they were in the First-Tier Tribunal
       albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the  Appellant  in
       this particular appeal.  The Secretary of State  appeals  against  a
       decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge  Shergill  promulgated  on  21
       December 2016 ("the  Decision")  allowing  the  Appellants'  appeals
       against her decision dated 15 October 2015 refusing  them  leave  to
       remain based on their private life and family life in the  UK.   The
       focus of the appeals is on the position of the two children, one  of
       whom remains a minor child.


    2. The First and Second Appellants are the parents  of  the  Third  and
       Fourth Appellants.  The Third Appellant  was  born  on  25  December
       1997.  The  Fourth  Appellant  was  born  on  24  April  2000.   The
       Appellants are all nationals of India.  The First Appellant  entered
       the UK clandestinely in 2000.  The Second Appellant came to  the  UK
       with the children on a visit visa in 2007 and overstayed.  Following
       enquiries made by me during the hearing, I have  now  been  provided
       with a copy of the passports of  the  Second  to  Fourth  Appellants
       showing that they entered the UK on 6 June  2007.   The  application
       which led to the Respondent's decision under refusal was made on  13
       June 2014 and therefore almost immediately that  the  two  children,
       then both minors, had attained a period of residence of seven years.




    3. The Judge allowed the appeals on human rights grounds on  the  basis
       that paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules ("the  Rules")
       was satisfied as it was not reasonable to  expect  the  children  to
       return to India.  He did so also outside the Rules on the basis that
       removal  would  disproportionately  interfere  with  the  children's
       rights under Article 8 ECHR ("Article 8") and it was  not  in  their
       best interests to return.


    4. The Respondent appeals on  the  basis  that  the  Judge  misdirected
       himself in law by failing to  take  into  consideration  the  public
       interest when dealing with the question whether it was reasonable to
       expect the children to return and failing to consider,  in  relation
       to  the  children,  sections  117A  and  117B  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("the  2002  Act").   As  Mr  Mills
       accepted in his submissions, those grounds are really two  sides  of
       the same coin.


    5. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Mailer  on  12
       June 2017 in the following terms so far as relevant:
            "[3] It is arguable that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  all
           relevant  factors  when  considering  the   third   and   fourth
           appellants' appeal.  It  is  also  arguable  that  the  relevant
           public interest considerations under  s117B  were  not  properly
           assessed."


    6. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision contains a
       material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision  or  remit
       the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

      Error of law decision and reasons


    7. The main thrust of the Respondent's case is that the Judge failed to
       have regard to the Court of Appeal's judgment in MA  (Pakistan)  and
       others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA  Civ
       705 ("MA (Pakistan)").  The judgment  is  one  to  which  the  Judge
       claims to have had regard at [10] of  the  Decision.   However,  the
       Judge then went on at [13] to [22] to deal with the  parents'  cases
       first before turning to the children's cases at [23] to [36] of  the
       Decision.


    8. Having concluded that the parents' cases involved a "gross violation
       of immigration control" ([20]), he then  went  on  to  consider  the
       children's cases on the basis that none of the factors considered in
       relation to the parent's cases could  be  taken  into  account  when
       dealing with the children.  He repeated a number  of  times  in  his
       consideration of the children's cases that the children could not be
       blamed for the parent's immigration violations.  Expressly, at  [31]
       he said this:-
            "[31]      Both AK1 and AK2 were at the time of the application
           at important junctures in their education.  That is an education
           that they had no right to expect and which has been obtained  at
           public expense.  However, the children (as AK1 was then) are not
           to  be  blamed  for  their  immigration  status  or  the   gross
           violations of immigration control by the parents."


    9. I took little persuading that there  is  an  error  of  law  in  the
       Decision.  Whilst, as Mr Mills rightly submitted, the "sins  of  the
       parents" are not to be visited on the  children  when  it  comes  to
       assess their best interests that does not mean that those are to  be
       left out of account when assessing  proportionality.   Specifically,
       MA (Pakistan) requires public interest factors such  as  immigration
       control to be weighed in the equation when considering whether it is
       reasonable to expect a child to return to his/her country of  origin
       whether under or outside the Rules.  The Judge has clearly failed to
       note this part of the judgment in  MA  (Pakistan)  when  making  his
       assessment. This  discloses  a  very  clear  error  of  law  in  the
       Decision.


   10. Mr Sarwar sought to persuade me that the error is not material.   He
       pointed me to the Respondent's policy dated August 2015 which  makes
       clear that a period of residence of seven years is  significant  and
       that strong countervailing factors are  required  to  outweigh  that
       period.  In this case, the two children arrived in the UK aged seven
       and nine years and had both spent the requisite seven years  in  the
       UK. I was unpersuaded by  that  submission.   Proportionality  is  a
       matter of balancing factors for and against an appellant.   In  this
       case, the Judge has made strong findings against the  parents  which
       are relevant to  the  public  interest  in  removal.   There  is  no
       assessment of how those findings are  to  be  balanced  against  the
       children's interests.  Whilst the outcome may be the  same  if  that
       assessment is carried out correctly, I could not say that this would
       necessarily be so.   It  follows  that  the  error  of  law  is  not
       immaterial.


   11. Mr Sarwar also sought to persuade  me  that,  if  I  set  aside  the
       Decision, I should remit to the First-tier Tribunal.  Having  regard
       to the Tribunal's guidance as to when it is appropriate to remit,  I
       indicated to him my view that  this  is  a  case  where  it  is  not
       appropriate to remit.  There are  no  issues  of  credibility.   The
       Judge has made findings which I am able to take into account as they
       are unchallenged (and even though I set aside the  Decision)  and  I
       have before me the evidence which the Judge had save  for  the  oral
       evidence (as to which findings have been made).


   12. I did however agree to take oral evidence from the two children (one
       of whom is now no longer a child) so that I could be  aware  of  the
       updated position as  to  their  private  lives.  I  deal  with  that
       evidence within my decision below so far as relevant.


   13. For the above reasons, I find that the Decision discloses a material
       error of law.  I set aside the Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
       Shergill.  I now move on to re-make the Decision.


    Decision and reasons


   14. I start with the Court of Appeal's judgment in  MA  (Pakistan).  The
       Court of Appeal there considered six individual cases all concerning
       children who had been resident in the UK for more than  seven  years
       and therefore fell within the definition of  "qualifying"  children.
       In two of the cases, paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) was in  play.   In  the
       remaining four cases, section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act was the focus.
        In all cases, however, the question of "reasonableness"  of  return
       of a child who had lived in the UK for seven years arose.  Although,
       as the Court observed at  [10]  of  the  judgment,  there  are  some
       distinctions to be drawn between paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and section
       117B(6), when it came  to  deal  with  the  individual  appeals,  it
       adopted the same approach.


   15. The Court held, following the  Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in  MM
       (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA
       Civ 450 that the consideration  of  "reasonableness"  imports  other
       public  interest  considerations  including  such  matters  as   the
       parent's immigration history.  The best interests of the child  are,
       however, a primary consideration. Moreover, paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)
       and section 117B(6)  provide  that  the  fact  of  the  child  being
       resident for more than seven years or being a British citizen  is  a
       factor to be given some weight in favour of leave  to  remain  being
       granted (see [45] of MA (Pakistan)) As such, as noted at [49] of  MA
       (Pakistan), section 117B(6) "establishes as a  starting  point  that
       leave should be granted unless there are  powerful  reasons  to  the
       contrary."


   16. I start therefore with the best interests of the child.  I  have  to
       consider that at the date of the hearing before me and therefore the
       Third Appellant is no longer a child.   She is though still part  of
       the family unit and has not moved to form her own independent  life.
       She told me in oral evidence that she hopes  to  go  to  university.
       She has been unable to do so as a result of her immigration  status.
       Although she would presumably be able to apply as a foreign student,
       she could not do so whilst she is in the  UK.   Rather  than  simply
       wasting time whilst waiting for these appeals to be  concluded,  she
       has embarked on another BTEC course which she has been advised  will
       help her when, she  hopes,  she  will  eventually  be  permitted  to
       continue with her university education.  She wishes to  undertake  a
       degree in psychology.


   17. The Third Appellant told me that she does not want  to  go  back  to
       India, a country  she  left  aged  nine  years.   She  is  now  aged
       nineteen. She has made a lot of friends in the UK.   She  sees  them
       every day.  They all live close by.  She practises sport.  She plays
       badminton once per week.  She attained reasonable grades  in  her  A
       levels.  She hopes to be able to apply to university in December.


   18. The Fourth Appellant is now aged seventeen years.  He is  at  school
       studying for A levels.  He is experiencing  some  difficulties  with
       work experience as he wants to go into  medicine  but  he  has  been
       unable to undertake some work placements because of his  immigration
       status.  As a result, he has only been able  to  do  some  voluntary
       work.  He expects to apply later this year to go to university  next
       year.  He too has a number of friends, attends school clubs and goes
       to the gym nearly every day.


   19. Although I have set aside the Decision, as I note above, there is no
       challenge by the Respondent to the facts as therein set out.   Those
       appear at [31] and [32] of the Decision.  I  have  already  set  out
       [31] at [8] above.  Paragraph [32] reads as follows:-


           "I accepted their credible evidence to conclude that they do not
           know any other place other than the  United  Kingdom  given  the
           young ages that they came here.  They have been  in  the  United
           Kingdom well in excess of the various time thresholds set out in
           case law.  I accept that they do not read or  write  any  Indian
           languages; and AK1 only speaks Punjabi with AK2 only  knowing  a
           little.  He will be disproportionately affected by returning  in
           my view.  His high academic achievements have the hallmarks of a
           great future ahead of him.  Yet by being returned  to  India  he
           will be illiterate and with limited verbal communication skills.
            He may be able to  go  into  science  related  subjects,  where
           English is likely to be the lingua franca, but that  presupposes
           he will be able to make the social transition into  life  there.
           I accept he is at an important social and  existential  juncture
           in his life given his adolescence; social ties  and  integration
           into life in the United Kingdom.  That disruption is not in  his
           best  interests  and  is  likely  to   cause   irreparable   and
           disproportionate damage to his future life chances"


   20. The position in relation to linguistic difficulties may be  somewhat
       overstated; the Third Appellant said, for example, that she  attends
       the gurdwara and would presumably therefore be  able  to  understand
       and  communicate  in  her  native   language.    However,   overall,
       particularly as  regards  the  Fourth  Appellant  who  is  the  only
       remaining "child" to whom the best interests' consideration applies,
       I concur with that view.   It was clear from his evidence that he is
       completely integrated into society in this country and is doing very
       well at school and has a promising future ahead  of  him.   He  left
       India aged seven years and will have  less  understanding  than  his
       sister of the educational system there.  He is at a crucial point in
       his education and social development.  It is  clear  that  his  best
       interests at this point in time very strongly favour  him  remaining
       in the UK.


   21. The Third Appellant is now an adult but a young one.  She  too  will
       be affected by removal to India.  She has not lived there  for  over
       ten years.  Whilst she may have had a  longer  period  in  education
       there before coming to the UK, there is no doubt that it is  in  the
       UK that she has received most of her education.  It is also  in  the
       UK that she has made friends.  Of course, if she  were  returned  to
       India there is nothing  to  prevent  her  from  applying  to  attend
       university in  the  UK  as  a  foreign  student.   Whether  that  is
       financially  viable  is  not  something  on  which  I  received  any
       evidence.  However, to that extent, it  may  be  possible  to  avoid
       undue interference with her educational plans.  However,  it  is  in
       any event the case that removal would disrupt the social ties  which
       she has formed here.  Although I recognise that the public  interest
       has to be balanced against  the  interference  with  her  individual
       interests, it is the case that she is at no fault for the  situation
       in which she finds herself.


   22. I turn then to consider the cases of the parents (First  and  Second
       Appellants).  As will be clear from what I say above in relation  to
       the factual background, their cases are ones entirely undeserving of
       compassion.  The following passages taken  from  the  Decision  ably
       summarise the position in their cases:-


            "[14]       The  parents  have  committed  gross  and  flagrant
           breaches  of  immigration  control;   not   only   by   entering
           clandestinely and working illegally but then compounded  by  the
           mother bringing the other two appellants to the United  Kingdom,
           never to return.  I have no doubt that  there  was  a  concerted
           effort to obtain a free  education  and  economic  advantage  in
           doing so.
            [15] They have managed to support themselves here for a  number
           of years through illegal working and family contributions.  I am
           satisfied there is no sound reason why the  wider  family  would
           not be willing to pay the �450 they currently pay  for  rent  to
           support the family in India.
            [16] I am unable to attach much weight to  the  parents  claims
           made about lack of prospects for jobs; lack of family  ties  and
           an inability to support themselves back in India. The reality is
           that there is  a  family  member  there;  they  were  well  into
           adulthood when they came here and they  come  from  one  of  the
           larger towns in Punjab (Jullundur)...
            [19] In terms of Article 8 rights, the family life  claims  are
           dependent on the children and they will follow their parents  or
           vice versa.  My conclusions are drawn below on that  matter.   I
           am not satisfied there are any other family life claims.  As for
           private life claims, I have considered how section 117B  of  the
           2002 Act applies.  The parents claim to be supported  by  others
           and/or working.  They claim not to have been reliant  on  public
           funds.  However, they have both  benefitted  from  the  NHS  and
           sending their children to school....
            [20] In terms of their immigration status, coming to the United
           Kingdom on a visit visa when the  first  appellant  was  already
           here illegally is likely to have involved some  dishonesty  from
           the outset in terms of the motives  for  visiting.   I  have  no
           doubt that there was never any intention to leave when the  visa
           was applied for.  The first two appellants have orchestrated the
           entire situation.  I am satisfied  their  actions  are  a  gross
           violation of immigration control both in terms of entry into the
           United  Kingdom  which  on  balance   I   have   concluded   was
           orchestrated  from  the  outset   without   any   intention   to
           return...."


   23. Section 117B of the 2002 Act is relevant to the  assessment  of  the
       proportionality of removal of the parents but also to  the  question
       of  reasonableness  of  removal  of  the  children,  whether   under
       paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) or section 117B(6).  There does  not  appear
       to be any issue about the  Appellants'  ability  to  speak  English.
       Very clearly, both the Third  and  Fourth  Appellants  speak  fluent
       English.  I accept Mr Mills submission that none of  the  Appellants
       is financially independent.  As he pointed out, the  fact  that  any
       working was illegal is also relevant to the public interest  but  in
       any event, the Appellants' evidence is  that  they  receive  support
       from wider family members.  They have also been  reliant  on  public
       funds at the very least in relation to the education which the Third
       and Fourth Appellants have received.


   24. The private lives of all the Appellants have been formed whilst they
       have been here  without  leave.   Certainly,  in  the  case  of  the
       parents, I can only give little weight to their private lives.   The
       position is more nuanced in relation to the children.  They  had  no
       choice about their residence here.  They were brought here by  their
       parents and have lived here because their parents chose to.  As case
       law makes clear, the "sins of the parents" should not be visited  on
       the  children,  certainly  when  their  best  interests  are   being
       assessed.  I have already made clear  that  the  Fourth  Appellant's
       best interests strongly favour him remaining.  I have also made  the
       point that the Third Appellant does  not  bear  any  blame  for  the
       position in which she finds herself.


   25. As Mr Mills submitted, and I accept, the main public interest  issue
       in this case is immigration control,  given  the  flagrancy  of  the
       breaches  which  I  have  accepted  and   the   apparently   cynical
       manipulation of the immigration  system  by  the  First  and  Second
       Appellants to meet their own ends.  As they say in their statements,
       they wished to make a better life for their children and that is  an
       understandable sentiment for a parent.   It  is  probably  though  a
       sentiment shared by parents  all  over  the  world.  To  permit  all
       parents to bring their children to the UK so that  they  can  obtain
       better education (at the expense of the public here) and better life
       chances would lead to a complete breakdown of migration control.  It
       does not therefore excuse the breaches of immigration control  which
       both parents have committed to achieve their aim.


   26. I turn then to assess the reasonableness  of  requiring  the  Fourth
       Appellant to return to India  against  that  background.   His  best
       interests  are  a  primary  consideration.  They  are  not   however
       paramount and can be outweighed by  other  considerations.   I  also
       take into account the Respondent's policy which is that a period  of
       residence of seven years for a child is a significant milestone  and
       something strong is required to outweigh that  as  a  consideration.
       As the Court of Appeal remarked  at  [46]  of  the  judgment  in  MA
       (Pakistan), when dealing with  that  policy,  the  disruption  to  a
       child's life by removal will become more serious as they  get  older
       and removal is therefore likely to become "highly disruptive".


   27. Ultimately,  in  this  case,  the  balance  is  between  the  Fourth
       Appellant's best interests on the one hand and the  public  interest
       in removal of the family on the other.  Both  factors  are  in  this
       case, very strong.  The case  is  therefore  very  finely  balanced.
       However, I am (just) persuaded that, in this case, the  position  of
       the Fourth Appellant wins out.  He is  at  an  acute  point  in  his
       education.  It is doubtful that he could  adjust  to  the  education
       system in India at this point  and  still  fulfil  his  promise  and
       ambition (as the First-tier Tribunal Judge found).  He  is  said  to
       speak little of the language.  He  knows  little  of  the  education
       system there.  Both he and his sister are completely  integrated  in
       the UK, having spent ten formative years of their life here.


   28. For those reasons, I find that it would not be  reasonable  for  the
       Fourth Appellant to be removed to India.  It follows that his appeal
       is allowed on the basis that he satisfies paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of
       the Rules.


   29. The First and Second Appellants are  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
       relationship with the Fourth Appellant who is, for now at  least,  a
       qualifying child.  It follows since I have found that it  would  not
       be reasonable for him to be removed to India, that  section  117B(6)
       provides that the public interest does not require their removal  at
       least at this point in time.  I do  note  however  that  the  Fourth
       Appellant will turn eighteen next year.   Whilst  as  the  case  law
       makes clear, that does not automatically break any family life ties,
       as and when the children go on to form their own independent  lives,
       the parents' rights to remain in the UK may weaken in  the  equation
       as time moves on.  They will though have achieved their ambition  of
       giving their children a better future.


   30. The  position  is  slightly  different  in  relation  to  the  Third
       Appellant.  She was a minor child at the  date  of  application  and
       therefore the issue is whether it would be reasonable to remove her.
        Her best interests no longer fall to be factored into the  equation
       because she is no longer a child.  It is though highly relevant that
       she too had been here for seven years when the application was  made
       and that she was, at that date, a child.  Again, by reference to the
       Respondent's policy guidance, the fact that she has  been  here  for
       seven years is a factor which is to be given weight  in  her  favour
       although that obviously falls to  be  balanced  against  the  public
       interest, particularly in relation to immigration control.


   31. On balance, I am satisfied that it would not be reasonable to remove
       the Third Appellant.  Although she is no longer a child, as  I  note
       above, she has spent ten of her formative years  here;  indeed,  she
       has been here for nearly half her life.  She may  remember  more  of
       her former life since she  was  slightly  older  when  she  arrived.
       However, she too has assimilated into a life in the  UK  and  would,
       following a period of ten years, find it very difficult  to  adjust.
       Added to that difficulty, I have of course found  that  her  brother
       and parents should not be removed.  It follows  that  she  would  be
       returning to a country with which she  has  little  familiarity  and
       where she has not lived since she was a  young  child.   It  appears
       there may be some family there but I have little detail about  that.
       Given her young age and that she remains part of the family unit,  I
       am satisfied that it is not  reasonable  to  remove  her,  with  the
       result that she too succeeds under paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
       Rules.

DECISION
    I am satisfied that the Decision contains material errors of  law.  The
    decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shergill  promulgated  on  21
    December 2016 is set aside.
    I re-make the decision as follows:
    I allow the appeals of the Third and Fourth Appellants under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) on the basis that it would not be reasonable for them  to
    be removed to India.
    I allow the appeals of the First  and  Second  Appellants  outside  the
    Rules on the basis of Article  8  ECHR  since,  as  the  parents  of  a
    qualifying child who it would not be reasonable to remove,  the  public
    interest does not require their removal.
      Signed           [pic]      Dated:  14 August 2017
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
