
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33474/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 September 2015                 |On 9 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                             MR SIRAJ AHMED KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Laughton of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  10  August  1984.  He
    appealed  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   NMK
    Lawrence's dated 17 March 2015 from  the  decision  of  the  respondent
    dated 7 August 2014 refusing him further leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom pursuant to Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the first-tier  Tribunal
    Shimmin on 18 May 2015, stating that it is arguable that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  failed  to  consider  s117B  (6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, that the respondent's decision did not
    interfere with the Article 8 rights of the appellant, his  partner  and
    her stepson, rejecting evidence as being self-serving,  considering  he
    was not bound by the case of Chikwamba v SS HD [2008] 1 WLR 1420 and by
    finding that it was  not  unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant's  son  to
    relocate to Pakistan.

First-Tier Tribunal's Findings

 3. The First-tier Tribunal's findings were as follows which  I  summarise.
    The appellant's relationship with his sponsor is  a  recent  one.  They
    initiated contact in January 2013, met in February 2013 and married  in
    April 2013. This is after the appellant had been trying by all means to
    remain in the United Kingdom under the Tier 4 scheme  and  outside  the
    Immigration Rules. The respondent has taken these factors into  account
    and calls the appellant's intentions in  forming  such  a  relationship
    into question.

 4. It  is  asserted  that  the  appellant's  sponsor  was  in  an  abusive
    relationship and  escaped  that  relationship  and  that  marriage  was
    dissolved in 2003. It is further asserted that her son did not enjoy  a
    father-son relationship with his biological father which he now  enjoys
    with the appellant. The appellant's sponsor may have been in an abusive
    relationship in the past but this has  no  evidential  bearing  on  the
    appellant's current relationship. The child was born on 20  April  2002
    and the divorce took place in 2003. There was  not  much  chance  of  a
    father-son relationship developing between them in that short time. The
    appellant has been involved in the child's  life  only  since  February
    2013 and the child calls the appellant "dad". The child  may  call  the
    appellant "dad" as asked,  or  directed  by  the  adults  concerned  to
    achieve a particular purpose. The appellant's witness  Mr  Abbasi  said
    that the appellant and the child play football together and  the  child
    appears happy. It is not unusual for a child, especially a boy,  to  be
    happy playing football with an adult.

 5. The relationship between the appellant and his sponsor and her son were
    formed whilst the appellant had  no  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The amended  sections  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2014 and in  particular  section  117B  states  that  little
    weight should be given to a relationship formed when the partner is  in
    this country unlawfully. It was also a relationship entered into within
    a short space of time. Account has also been taken that the appellant's
    previous attempts to remain in the United  Kingdom  under  the  Tier  4
    scheme and outside the  Immigration  Rules.  All  these  factors  taken
    together leads me to find that little weight should be given  to  these
    relationships.

 6. The best interests of the minor appellant has been taken into  account.
    The child's best interests are  a  starting  point  but  it  is  not  a
    determinative factor. In ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, the Supreme Court
    held "any decision which is taken without having regard to the need  to
    safeguard and promote the welfare of any children involved will not  be
    in accordance with the law.

 7. In the instant case, the  child  in  question  has  lived  without  the
    appellant for nearly 11 years. There is  nothing  put  before  me  that
    indicates refusal of leave to the appellant will have an adverse impact
    on safeguarding and promoting the welfare of  the  child  in  question.
    Mere self-serving decisions by the appellant and his  sponsor  are  not
    sufficient. The written account provided by the  child  has  also  been
    considered and that too is self-serving and perhaps drafted or dictated
    by the adults to serve their purposes.

 8. There are distinctions to be found between the facts of  Chikwamba  and
    the instant appeal. "Such that I do not find I am bound by Chikwamba. I
    do not find that there are any exceptional circumstances which lead  me
    to go outside the new Article 8 Rules. However in the  case  of  Aliyu,
    the High Court found that there is a duty to  assess  an  appeal  under
    Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention when the new Article  8  Rules
    are not met.

 9. In respect of Article 8, it is considered that if the  family  life  is
    genuine, the appellant could return to Pakistan and make the  necessary
    entry clearance application from that country. The sponsor and her  son
    could follow or choose to remain in the UK and await the return of  the
    appellant with the correct entry clearance. They have lived without the
    appellant until April 2013 and have fended for themselves  and  perhaps
    before  that  too.  In  respect  of  the  fourth  question  of  Razgar,
    interference with the family life  is  proportionate.  It  is  a  short
    relationship formed at the time the appellant has  been  seeking  other
    means of settling in the United Kingdom; it was formed whilst he had no
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom, there  is  nothing  to  indicate
    that his sponsor and her son  will  suffer  undue  hardship  either  in
    Pakistan or here awaiting the appellant return with the  correct  entry
    clearance.

The Grounds of Appeal

10. The grounds of appeal state the following which I summarise. The  first
    ground of appeal is that the Judge erred by failing to consider s  117B
    (6) of the NIA 2002. The appellant had an  Islamic  marriage  with  the
    British citizen who has a step son aged 13.  There  was  evidence  from
    various parties concerning  the  relationship  including  that  of  the
    appellant, his partner and his partner's son. The stepson has  provided
    written evidence and also attended court.

11. A core aspect of the appellant's appeal is that he is  in  the  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with his stepson who is a qualifying  child
    under section 117D as a British citizen who  has  spent  more  than  10
    years in the United Kingdom. It will therefore not  be  reasonable  for
    his stepson to leave the United Kingdom and  section  117D  (6)  states
    that the public interest does  not  require  the  appellant's  removal.
    Despite this being a core issue and despite this aspect  of  the  claim
    being expressed both in the skeleton argument and oral submissions, the
    Judge failed to consider or determine it. The Judge quotes section 117B
    (1) to (4) of the Act but failed to cover or even refer to section 117D
    (6) which is a material error of law.

12. The second ground states that the  Judge  erred  by  stating  that  the
    decision to not an interference with the appellant, his partner of  his
    stepson's Article 8 rights. This is quite  an  astonishing  finding  in
    light of the fact that the appellant will  have  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom, potentially leaving his partner and stepson. This is  a  clear
    interference.

13. The appellant's spouse and stepson  will  have  to  decide  whether  to
    remain in the United Kingdom resulting in an  interference  with  their
    family  life  or  move  to  Pakistan  which  is  clearly  against   the
    appellant's stepson's best interests  which  will  constitute  a  clear
    interference with all their private lives.  As  held  in  AG  (Eritrea)
    [2007] EW CA Civ 801, the test for engagement  is  not  a  particularly
    high one. Therefore the conclusion of the Judge that there will  be  no
    interference is both unreasoned and perverse.

14. The third ground of appeal  states  that  the  Judge  referred  to  and
    seemingly rejected evidence as being self-serving without giving proper
    reasons. This is  a  material  error  of  law  given  that  appellant's
    evidence was provided, both written and oral form from  the  appellant,
    his sponsor and the stepson including, Mr Abbasi a family friend. There
    was also written evidence from the appellant's sister-in-law  that  the
    appellant is a  much  more  confident  and  happy  child  than  he  has
    previously been with the appellant is in his life.

15. All evidence produced in appeals is by its very nature self-serving  in
    the sense that it serves the appellant and that  in  itself  is  not  a
    reason enough to reject it. This was held in the case of Moyo [2002] UK
    IAT 01104.

16. The evidence of the appellant stepson is particularly important because
    the court emphasised in the ZH (Tanzania),  the  need  to  consult  the
    children and have evidence of their views. The duty is imposed  by  s55
    to have regard to the statutory guidance promulgated by  the  Secretary
    of State. The guidance states that the decision maker must have  regard
    to the views of the  child  and  there  is  no  element  of  choice  or
    discretion. This guidance was duly published in November 2009  entitled
    "Every Child Matters Change for Children". At paragraph 2.7 a series of
    principles are highlighted which are rehearsed  in  the  context  of  a
    statement that UKBA must act according to the same. The  first  is  the
    ethnic identity language faith and gender when working with  the  child
    and their family. The second that children should be consulted and  the
    wishes and feelings of children should be taken into  account  whenever
    practicable when decision affecting them are made. Children should have
    their  applications  dealt  with  in  a  timely  way  which   minimises
    uncertainty. These principles considered in tandem with the  principles
    enunciated by the Supreme Court and the  public  law  duties  rehearsed
    above,  envisage  a  process  of  deliberation,  assessment  and  final
    decision of some depth. The antithesis namely something cursory, casual
    or superficial which plainly is not in accordance  with  the  specified
    duty imposed by s55 (3) or the overcharging duty to have regard to  the
    need to safeguard and promote the welfare of any children  involved  in
    or affected by the relevant factual matrix. To reject  the  appellant's
    son's evidence out of hand based upon  nothing  more  than  an  evident
    speculation that it was drafted or dictated by  adults,  amounts  to  a
    further error of law.

17. The fourth ground of appeal is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred
    when he said that he is "not bound" by Chikwamba. The Judge by  stating
    that he is not bound by this case is erroneous in law.  The  first-tier
    Tribunal Judge may distinguish the case but it is  still  binding  upon
    him. In any event the case is binding as a point  of  law,  not  by  an
    exercise in factual comparisons. The central premise  in  the  case  is
    that as a point of principle and Article 8 claims should not be refused
    on the basis that it would be more proportionate for the  appellant  to
    return and apply for entry clearance. This principle  was  subsequently
    confirmed in the case of Hayat [2012] EW CA Civ 1054.

The respondent's Rule 24 response

18. The respondent in her Rule 24 response stated  the  following  which  I
    summarise. The Judge  was  not  persuaded  by  the  evidence  that  the
    relationship between the appellant and his partner's  son  fell  within
    section 117B (6) of the 2002 Act. This is clear from paragraph 12 where
    the  Judge  concluded  that  little  weight  should  be  given  to  the
    relationship relied upon as it was entered into after  the  appellant's
    appeal rights were exhausted.

19. In the case of R (on the application Chen) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department IJR [2015] UKUT 189 (IAC), it was stated that  Appendix
    FM does not include consideration of the question whether it  would  be
    disproportionate to expect an individual to return to his home  country
    to make an entry clearance application to re-join the family members in
    the  United  Kingdom.  There  may  be  cases   in   which   there   are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed  outside  the  UK
    and temporary separation to enable an individual to make an application
    for entry clearance may be disproportionate. In all cases  it  will  be
    for the individual to place before the Secretary of State evidence that
    such  temporary  separation  will  interfere  disproportionately   with
    protected  rights.  There  is  no  evidence  that  separation  for   an
    application from abroad could lead to a  disproportionate  interference
    with protected rights.

The hearing

20. At the hearing I heard submissions from  both  parties  as  to  whether
    there is an    error of law in  the  determination  of  the  first-tier
    Tribunal Judge, the full notes which are in my record of proceedings.

Discussion and findings as to whether there is an error of law

21. It was accepted at the hearing that the appellant could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules because he  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of GEN 1.2  because  he  and  his  sponsor  had  not  been
    cohabiting  together  for  two  years  to  satisfy  the  definition  of
    "partner" as set out in the Rules. The  appellant's  claim  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was that refusal of leave to remain  in  this
    country will breach his family life with his sponsor and  her  son  and
    vice versa. Therefore the first issue in the  appeal  that  had  to  be
    decided by the Judge was whether the appellant's, his sponsor  and  his
    sponsor son have family life  which  requires  protection  pursuant  to
    Article 8 and which will be breached by the  respondent's  decision  to
    exclude him from the United Kingdom.

22. The Judge in his determination made it clear that the appellant had not
    demonstrated that his relationship with his sponsor and  his  sponsor's
    son was genuine.  The Judge in his determination at paragraph 11 stated
    that the appellant's relationship with his sponsor is a recent one.  He
    found that the appellant and his sponsor "initiated" contact in January
    2013, met in February 2013 and married in April 2013. The  Judge  noted
    that this was after the appellant has been trying unsuccessfully by all
    means to remain in the United Kingdom  under  the  Tier  4  regime  and
    outside the Immigration Rules. The Judge found that it was  only  after
    the appellant became appeals right exhausted and had no  further  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom that he  brought  his  application  for
    leave to remain on the bases of his family life with  his  sponsor  and
    her son. The Judge was entitled to  take  this  into  account,  on  the
    evidence before him and made in adverse credibility finding  about  the
    appellant.

23. The evidence before the Judge for the genuineness  of  the  appellant's
    relationship with his sponsor and her son  was  that  the  sponsor  son
    calls the  appellant  "dad".   There  was  also  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant, the sponsor her son and Mr Abbasi that the appellant  has  a
    genuine relationship with the sponsor's son. The Judge was entitled  to
    find that  this  is  self-serving  evidence  taking  into  account  the
    evidence in the round in light of the appellant's  adverse  immigration
    history. The Judge was also  entitled  to  find  on  the  evidence  the
    sponsor's son who is 13 years of age would have done what the appellant
    and his mother told him to do. The Judge was also entitled to find  the
    sponsor son could have been directed to call the appellant "dad" by the
    adults in his life. There is no perversity in the Judge's findings that
    this evidence in itself cannot be relied upon to prove the  genuineness
    of the relationship given the appellants  adverse  immigration  history
    which goes to the appellant's credibility and to the credibility of his
    claim.

24. The only independent evidence, (that is to say evidence  not  from  the
    appellant, the sponsor and the sponsor's son), is from a family friend,
    Mr Abbasi. His evidence was that the appellant and the sponsor son play
    football together and are happy. The Judge was entitled to find that it
    is not unusual for a child,  especially  a  boy  to  be  happy  playing
    football with an adult and that this does  not  in  itself  demonstrate
    that they are in a genuine relationship. I find no  material  error  of
    law in these findings.

25. Essentially the Judge found that the swift nature of this  relationship
    comes as it does after the appellant has  been  refused  permission  to
    live  in  this  country,  was  not  sufficient  for  the  appellant  to
    demonstrate that he is in the genuine relationship with his sponsor and
    her son. In fact the Judge found the converse and. At paragraph 11  the
    judge  said  that  that  this  calls  into  question  the   appellant's
    intentions in forming this  relationship  at  the  time  that  he  did.
    Implicit in this finding is that the relationship has been contrived in
    order for the appellant to live in this country having  failed  in  all
    his attempts to remain in this country under  the  Tier  4  scheme  and
    outside the Immigration Rules. Furthermore, the relationship was formed
    at the time that the appellant had no leave to remain in  this  country
    and therefore no weight can be placed on his relationship.

26. The Judge having found that the appellant  is  not  in  the  subsisting
    relationship with a British citizen sponsor and her son aged 13 in  the
    United Kingdom should have stopped at that  point.  He  need  not  have
    considered section 117 especially (6) and Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights as these would now be moot in the absence of
    presence of a genuine relationship. That is  where  the  matter  should
    have ended. If the appellant  did  not  have  a  family  life  in  this
    country, there could not be a breach of  it  for  any  of  the  parties
    involved.

27. I accept that there are errors in the determination such as  the  Judge
    saying that he is not bound by Chikwamba, and  by  applying  the  wrong
    test which was when he stated that it was  not  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant's sponsor son to relocate to Pakistan. These  errors  however
    are not material errors of law because they do not go to the  issue  as
    to whether the appellant's relationship with his sponsor and  sponsor's
    son is genuine which the first hurdle is. If the  relationship  is  not
    genuine, no further enquiry is necessary.

28. Given that the Judge did not find that the appellant had a family  life
    with his sponsor and his sponsor's son, he was entitled to say that the
    respondent's decision does not interfere with the Article 8  rights  of
    the appellant, his sponsor and his stepson because they  do  not  enjoy
    family life in the first place.

29. There is no material error  in  the  determination.  I  find  that  the
    grounds of appeal reveal no more than a disagreement with  the  Judge's
    conclusion on the evidence before him. There is no error of law in  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal and it stands.

    Decision

    Appeal Dismissed


Signed by

Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal    This 8th day of October 2015
