
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33065/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 29 May 2014                                |On 29th May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                JAHANGIR ALAM
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr D Brown, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

No anonymity order requested or made

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This determination refers to parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

2) The SSHD appeals against a determination by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  P
   Grant-Hutchison, promulgated on 3 February 2014, allowing on human rights
   grounds the appellant's appeal against removal to Bangladesh.

3) The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 16 June 1970.  He  came
   here as a student in 2006.  His wife is also  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh.
   Her daughter was born on 22 December 2007.  The appeal was allowed mainly
   on the basis of the best interests of the  daughter  of  the  appellant's
   wife, his stepdaughter, she being a UK citizen.

4) These are the SSHD's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal:

    Failing to give reasons or adequate reasons for findings on a  material
    matters


        1. ... the Tribunal has erred in law in its approach to the Article
           8 assessment ...


        2. MF Nigeria [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 confirms  that  the  Immigration
           Rules are a complete code that form the starting point  for  the
           decision maker.  Any Article 8 assessment should  only  be  made
           after consideration under these Rules.  It  was  made  clear  in
           Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) that the  Article  8  assessment
           shall  only  be  carried   out   when   there   are   compelling
           circumstances not recognised by these Rules.  In this  case  the
           Tribunal did not identify such compelling circumstances and  its
           findings are therefore unsustainable.

        3. Gulshan also makes clear at this stage an appeal should only  be
           allowed where there are exceptional circumstances.  Nagre [2013]
           EWHC 720 Admin endorsed the Secretary of State's guidance on the
           meaning of exceptional circumstances, namely ones where  refusal
           would lead to an unjustifiably harsh outcome  ...  the  Tribunal
           has not followed this approach and thereby has erred.

        4. ... the Tribunal has failed to provide adequate reasons why  the
           appellant's circumstances are compelling or exceptional ...  the
           appellant can maintain contact with his wife and  stepchild  via
           modern methods of communication and via  visits  and  they  were
           fully aware when they began their relationship that  he  may  be
           required to return to Bangladesh ... his wife only has temporary
           status in the UK and there is no guarantee she will be  able  to
           remain so his wife may be  forced  to  make  a  decision  as  to
           whether her daughter remains in the UK without her or they  both
           relocate to Bangladesh ... the Tribunal has  failed  to  provide
           adequate reasons why his  stepdaughter  could  not  relocate  to
           Bangladesh given she was born there and has spent half her  life
           there, whilst she may have established some form of private life
           here she is young enough to be able to fully re-adapt to life in
           Bangladesh and as a British  citizen  would  be  fully  able  to
           return to the UK at any stage ...  this  is  a  choice  for  the
           appellant and his wife to make and there are  no  insurmountable
           obstacles from them continuing their  family  life  together  in
           Bangladesh.  At paragraph 20 the Tribunal  has  found  that  the
           appellant's  wife's  child  may   experience   difficulties   in
           Bangladesh due to her skin colour ... the Tribunal has failed to
           provide adequate reasons for their finding and has  provided  no
           reference to any evidence in support of their findings ... there
           is no  evidence  the  appellant's  stepchild  would  suffer  any
           difficulties  and  there  is  no  evidence  she   suffered   any
           difficulties during her time there.


        5. ... had the Tribunal taken these issues into consideration  they
           would have found that the decision to remove is proportionate.

5) Mr Mullen acknowledged that paragraph 4 of the grounds  argues  on  lines
   which overlook the  SSHD's  concession  in  Sanade  and  others  (British
   children - Zambrano - Dereci)  [2012]  UKUT  00048(IAC),  which  has  the
   effect that where a child is a British citizen and therefore a citizen of
   the European Union, it is not possible to require the child  to  relocate
   outside of the European Union or to submit that it  would  be  reasonable
   for her to do so.  He also acknowledged that the judge correctly took  as
   his starting point on whether to go outside the terms of  the  Rules  the
   case of MS v SSHD [2013] CSIH 52 (paragraph 13 of the  determination)  as
   well as referring to MF (paragraph 14).

6) I find that the judge directed himself correctly on  when  a  case  might
   succeed outside the Rules, and reached a  conclusion  on  proportionality
   which was properly open to him for  the  reasons  he  gave.   The  SSHD's
   grounds do not disclose any error of law which might  entitle  the  Upper
   Tribunal to interfere.

7) The SSHD's appeal to the UT is dismissed.  The determination of  the  FtT
   shall stand.





                               [pic]
                                29 May 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
