

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
                (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA335102015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10 August 2017                         |On 16 August 2017                |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |Secretary of State for the Home Department        |Appellant    |
|And                                                                         |
|           |MA                                                |Respondent   |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |


                                  Anonymity

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members  of  the  public  to  identify  the  MA's  partner  and  her
child/children. I therefore issue an anonymity order which  extends  to  all
the  appellants.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall   directly   or
indirectly identify them.  This direction applies  to  both  the  appellants
and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms M Malhotra, of Counsel.


                           DECISION AND Directions


 1. The Secretary of State has been granted permission to appeal against  a
    decision of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Iqbal who, following a
    hearing on 2 November 2016, allowed the appeal  of  MA  (hereafter  the
    "claimant") under the Immigration  Rules  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State 15 October 2015 to  refuse  his  application  of  25
    March 2015 for leave to remain on the basis of his family  and  private
    life under Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention for the Protection
    of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR).

 2. The claimant is a national of Pakistan,  born  on  15  March  1989.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom with entry clearance as  a  student.  His
    leave as a student was subsequently extended. He last had  leave  as  a
    student until 20 October 2014.

 3. On 20 October 2014, the claimant was  served  with  an  IS151A  on  the
    ground that he had used deception to gain leave to remain. His leave to
    remain was curtailed to expire on the same date.

 4. The claimant's family life claim was based on his relationship with his
    partner, a Ms MT, a British citizen (hereafter the "sponsor").  On  the
    evidence before the judge, the claimant and the sponsor  did  not  have
    any children, although the sponsor had a child,  JT,  from  a  previous
    relationship. The child JT was living with her father.  The  claimant's
    private life claim was based on  private  life  established  since  his
    arrival in the United Kingdom.

The Secretary of State's decision

 5. The Secretary of State considered  the  claimant's  family  life  claim
    under Appendix FM and EX.1 of Statement of Changes in  the  Immigration
    Rules HC 395 (as amended) (hereafter  referred  to  individually  as  a
    "Rule" and collectively the "Rules"). In summary, she  considered  that
    he did not satisfy the relevant suitability requirements because he had
    practised deception in a previous application for leave to  remain.  He
    did not satisfy the relevant eligibility  requirements  which  provided
    that applicants must  not  be  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of
    immigration laws unless EX.1. applied. She considered that the claimant
    was an overstayer and that EX.1 did not apply.

 6. In relation to para 276ADE(1) of the  Rules,  the  Secretary  of  State
    considered that the claimant did not meet the  suitability  requirement
    in para 276ADE(1)(i). She further considered that  the  claimant  could
    not qualify under para 276ADE(1)(iii) and 276ADE(1)(iv) and that  there
    would not  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his  reintegration  in
    Pakistan and therefore he did not satisfy para 276ADE(1)(vi).

 7. The Secretary of State then considered the Article 8 claim outside  the
    Rules. She considered the medical evidence in relation to  the  sponsor
    which showed that she had been  diagnosed  ten  years  previously  with
    early  onset  of  Parkinson's  disease  and  suffers   from   disabling
    fluctuations in her mobility, with severe tremors and episodes when she
    is unable to  walk.  She  concluded  that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances for the grant of leave on the basis of Article 8  outside
    the Rules.

Right of appeal

 8. As the claimant's application  was  made  on  25  March  2015  and  the
    Secretary of State's decision on 15 October 2015, the claimant did  not
    have a right of appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules.  He  could  only
    appeal  on  human  rights  grounds.  This  is  because  s.82   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (the  "2002  Act")  was
    amended by s.15 of the Immigration Act 2014 with effect from 20 October
    2014 and because the transitional provisions do not apply.

The judge's decision

 9. Although the claimant did not have a right of appeal under  the  Rules,
    the judge considered Appendix FM and EX.1.

10. The judge found, in  the  claimant's  favour,  that  he  had  not  used
    deception in his previous application for leave.  She  therefore  found
    that the claimant satisfied the suitability requirement under  Appendix
    FM.

11. In relation to eligibility, it was necessary for the claimant not to be
    present in the United  Kingdom  in  breach  of  the  immigration  laws.
    However, this would not apply if EX.1 applied. She therefore  proceeded
    to consider whether EX.1(b) and EX.2. applied. EX.1 provides:


    "EX.1. This paragraph applies if
      (a)
            (i) ...

      (b)   the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a
           partner who is in the UK and is a British  Citizen,  settled  in
           the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
           protection, and there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
           life with that partner continuing outside the UK.

       EX.2.  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph   EX.1.(b)   "insurmountable
      obstacles" means the very  significant  difficulties  which  would  be
      faced by the applicant or their partner  in  continuing  their  family
      life together outside the UK and which could not be overcome or  would
      entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."

12. At para 37 of her decision, the judge stated that she found "on balance
    that relocation to Pakistan for the couple would create  insurmountable
    obstacles". She therefore allowed the appeal under the Rules  (Appendix
    FM with reference to EX.1 (b)).

13. The judge's reasons for her conclusion are set out at para  29  onwards
    of her decision, which I will now quote.


        "29.     Mr Bellara on behalf of  the  [claimant]  has  highlighted
             that there is an up to date neurologist's letter  in  relation
             to the [claimant's] partner's condition. This letter  was  not
             before the Respondent and is dated the 14th October  2016.  It
             highlights that the [claimant]  is  the  principal  carer  and
             partner of  [MT].  It   further  sets  out  the  following  in
             relation to [MT's] condition:


                 [MT] was diagnosed with young  onset  Parkinson's  disease
                  more  than  ten  years  ago.  This   is   a   relentlessly
                  progressive  neuro-degenerative  disorder   resulting   in
                  tremors, muscle rigidity, loss of walk  and  inability  to
                  maintain independent living and manage  aspects  of  self-
                  care and normal  range  of  activities  of  daily  living.
                  Patients  with   Parkinson's   disease   are   exquisitely
                  vulnerable to stress and have high  incidents  of  anxiety
                  and  depression.  Parkinson's  Disease  is  treated   with
                  frequent  administration  of  medication  at   progressive
                  increasing doses over time with gradual loss  of  efficacy
                  and  onset  of  fluctuations  in  movement  with  episodic
                  cramping and rigidity and complete loss of ability to move
                  and  walk  for  variable  periods   of   times   requiring
                  supervision and assistance during the day and also in  the
                  nigh when it can be impossible to shift position in bed or
                  go to the toilet without help.


                 [The claimant] is both [MT's] primary carer, administering
                  support and assistance continuously, both  day  and  night
                  and has been her partner since June 2012.  [The  claimant]
                  assists  [MT]  with  washing,  dressing,   toileting   and
                  administration  of  her  medication.  [MT]   is   entirely
                  dependent upon his assistance for her day-to-day needs and
                  furthermore considers him now to be her life partner.


                 It is essential for [MT's] physical and  mental  wellbeing
                  that she should not be separated from  [the  claimant]  as
                  this would have profoundly  deleterious  consequences  for
                  her physical and psychological health.


                 [MT]  tolerates  only  one  form  of  medication  for  her
                  Parkinson's disease and  this  needs  to  be  administered
                  several times daily at the correct times and the  form  of
                  medication is not available in all countries  outside  the
                  UK.


        30.      I have also been referred to a letter from DWP in relation
             to [MT's] DLA. It is clear she is receiving  the  higher  rate
             for her personal care which  means  that  "she  is  constantly
             supervised with or without short breaks right through the  day
             so that she does not cause substantial danger  to  herself  or
             others, and also needs attention with  bodily  functions  more
             than once a night or once for a  prolonged  period".  She  has
             been in receipt of this allowance from the 11th  of  September
             2006.


        31.      The  evidence  before  me  demonstrates  the  [claimant's]
             partner is suffering from a serious condition which I find  on
             balance, would make it difficult for her  to  be  required  to
             relocate to another country. Her  partner  is  her  full  time
             carer and they both highlight in recent times  that  [MT]  has
             deteriorated due to age and the stresses including her  recent
             divorce so that she has not been able to  manage  without  the
             [claimant], especially  at  night.   In  particular,  she  has
             highlighted that on one occasion there was an  incident  where
             she accidentally soiled herself in bed.  It was the [claimant]
             who had cleaned her up.


        32.       I  consider  the  [MT's]  condition  will   continue   to
             deteriorate over the years and I find that there would be very
             serious hardships for her  including  the  fact  that  if  the
             [claimant] was required to financially  support  her  if  they
             relocated to Pakistan, then  she  would  essentially  be  left
             without the care she currently receives from him.


        33.      Whilst, [MT] also has her family  in  the  United  Kingdom
             which includes her parents, who are elderly and a sister and a
             brother, both  who  have  their  own  families,  it  has  been
             difficult to get the level of assistance  and  care  that  the
             [claimant] provided.  Further they did not really  approve  of
             the [sic] [MT's] relationship with the [claimant].


        34.      I have further considered the guidance of Appendix FM  1.0
             Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year
             Routes August 2015  guidance as follows:


                 This means that an insurmountable obstacle  can  take  two
        forms:
                 1. A very significant difficulty which would be  literally
                  impossible to overcome, so  it  would  be  impossible  for
                  family life  with  the  applicant's  partner  to  continue
                  overseas. For example, because they would not be  able  to
                  gain entry to the proposed country of return; or
                 2. A very significant difficulty which would be  faced  by
                  the applicant or their partner in continuing their  family
                  life together outside the UK and which could  be  overcome
                  but would entail very serious hardship for one or both  of
                  them.
                 .....
                 The factors which might be relevant to  the  consideration
                  of whether an insurmountable obstacle exists  include  but
                  are not limited to: a. Ability to lawfully enter and  stay
                  in another country. The decision maker should consider the
                  ability of the parties  to  lawfully  enter  and  stay  in
                  another country. Decision makers should  consider  country
                  policy and information where relevant. However,  the  onus
                  is on the applicant to show that it is  not  possible  for
                  them and their family to enter and stay in another country
                  for this to amount to an insurmountable obstacle.  A  mere
                  wish, desire or preference to live in  the  UK  would  not
                  amount to an insurmountable obstacle.
                 b. Cultural barriers. This might be relevant in situations
                  where the partner would  be  so  disadvantaged  that  they
                  could not be expected to go and live in that country,  for
                  example a same sex couple where the UK partner would  face
                  substantial social discrimination, or where the rights and
                  freedoms of the UK partner would be  severely  restricted.
                  It must be a barrier which either cannot  be  overcome  or
                  would present a very serious hardship to the partner  such
                  that it amounts to an insurmountable obstacle.
                  c. The impact of a mental or physical disability. Whether
                  or not either party has a mental or physical disability, a
                  move to another country may involve a period  of  hardship
                  as the person adjusts to their  new  surroundings.  But  a
                  physical or mental disability could be such that  in  some
                  circumstances it could lead to very serious hardship,  for
                  example due to lack of health care  that  amounted  to  an
                  insurmountable obstacle.
                 d. The security situation in the  country  of  return.  In
                  some  circumstances  there  may  be  particular  risks  to
                  foreign nationals which extend to the whole of the country
                  of return. [page 25-27]


        35.      I find that the guidance further supports my conclusion in
             relation to [MT's] disability and in addition I  consider  she
             may also face cultural barriers in moving to  Pakistan,  which
             is  not  a  tolerant  society  insofar  as   mixed   religious
             relationships are concerned.


        36.      I  also  take  judicial  note  of  the  current   security
             situation in Pakistan, especially for those  individuals  from
             the west.


        37.      For all these reasons, i find on balance  that  relocation
             to  Pakistan  for  the  couple  would   create  insurmountable
             obstacles and therefore the Application ought  to  be  allowed
             with reference to EX.1`(b).


        38.      Given the [claimant] satisfies the Immigration Rules under
             Appendix FM, I do not go further to consider his private  life
             or indeed any matters outside the Immigration Rules."

The Secretary of State's grounds

14. The Secretary of State sought permission  on  two  grounds.  The  first
    ground challenged  the  judge's  finding  that  the  claimant  had  not
    practised deception in a previous application for leave. Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Brunnen refused  permission  on  this  ground.  The
    Secretary of State did not renew her application for permission on this
    ground.

15. However, Judge Brunnen granted permission on the  second  ground  (i.e.
    Issue A below). Judge Brunnen raised an  issue  of  his  own  (issue  B
    below). At the commencement of the hearing before me, I raised an issue
    of my own (Issue C).

16. There are therefore three issues before me, as follows:

    (i)     (Issue A) The Secretary of State's second ground contended that
        the judge had not given adequate reasons for concluding that  there
        were insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the
        United Kingdom, why the difficulties that the couple would face  in
        Pakistan reach the relevant threshold and that the judge had failed
        to consider the availability of support from the claimant's  family
        or state support. The judge made no  reference  to  any  background
        material in  making  her  findings  in  relation  to  the  security
        situation and that there would cultural barriers  due  to  a  mixed
        religious relationship.

    (ii)    (Issue B) The issue that Judge Brunnen raised was  whether  the
        judge erred in law in allowing the appeal  under  the  Rules  given
        that the claimant only had available to him a human  rights  ground
        of appeal.

    (iii)   (Issue C) The issue I raised was whether, in her  consideration
        of the question whether  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to
        family life continuing in Pakistan, the judge was obliged  to  take
        into account the weight  to  be  given  to  the  state's  interests
        pursuant to s.117B of the 2002 Act, by analogy with  the  reasoning
        of the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) and others  v  SSHD  [2016]
        EWCA Civ 705 in which the Court of Appeal held  that  wider  public
        interest considerations are to be taken into  account  in  deciding
        whether it is reasonable for a 'qualifying child' (a child who  had
        lived in the United Kingdom continuously for at least 7  years)  to
        leave the United Kingdom.

Assessment

17. In relation to Issue B, Ms Malhotra and Mr  Tarlow  accepted  that  the
    judge had no jurisdiction to allow the appeal  under  the  Rules.  They
    also accepted that, if the judge did not err in  law  in  reaching  her
    finding that there were insurmountable obstacles to family  life  being
    enjoyed in Pakistan, then she should have allowed  the  appeal  outside
    the Rules on the basis of Article 8. In that event, I would  set  aside
    her decision to allow the appeal  under  the  Rules  and  substitute  a
    decision to allow the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  (Article  8)
    outside the Rules.

18. In relation to Issue C, Ms Malhotra accepted that  the  judge  did  not
    state explicitly that she had taken into account the state's  interests
    and the factors in s.117B of the 2002 Act. However, she submitted  that
    it was implicit that the judge had considered the state's interests  in
    reaching her decision  that  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life being enjoyed in Pakistan.

19. When a judge carries out the balancing exercise in relation to  Article
    8 outside the Rules, it may be implicit that he or she must have had in
    mind the state's  interests,  although  consideration  of  the  precise
    weight to be given to the states interests in each individual case will
    be case-specific  and  will  require  specific  consideration.  In  the
    instant case, the judge considered whether  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles under the Rules. She gave no indication at all that  she  was
    aware that, by analogy with  the  Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in  MA
    (Pakistan), the state's interests must be considered  and  that  it  is
    necessary to carry out a balancing exercise. She made no mention of the
    state's interests at all at para 29 onwards of her decision.  She  made
    no mention of the weight she considered should be given to the  state's
    interests in the instant case. She made no  mention  of  any  balancing
    exercise.

20. Ms  Malhotra  accepted  that  the  judge  did  not  take  into  account
    s.117B(4), which requires little weight to  be  given  to  family  life
    established  with  a  qualifying   partner   whilst   an   individual's
    immigration status is unlawful. The effect of s.117B(4) is  to  require
    the personal circumstances of the claimant and the sponsor to  be  more
    weighty for them  to  succeed  in  establishing  that  there  would  be
    insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed in Pakistan.  The
    judge was plainly unaware that this was the case because  she  made  no
    mention of s.117B(4).

21. Ms Malhotra accepted that  the  judge  did  not  consider  whether  the
    claimant  was  financially  independent.  If  he  was  not  financially
    independent, this increases the weight  to  be  given  to  the  state's
    interests in his removal, although financial independence is a  neutral
    factor: AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC).

22. Ms Malhotra referred me to the fact that the  judge  had  resolved  the
    deception issue in the claimant's favour. She submitted  that  this  is
    relevant not only to the strength of the state's  interests,  but  also
    the fact that he  is  someone  who,  on  the  judge's  findings  speaks
    English. Thus, she submitted, s.117B(2) applies.  However, the fact  is
    that it is not for me to carry out the balancing exercise. Further  and
    in any event, a person's ability to speak English is a neutral  factor,
    as the Upper Tribunal said in AM (Malawi).

23. For all of the above reasons, I am satisfied that the  judge  erred  in
    law by failing to consider the  weight  to  be  given  to  the  state's
    interests, failing to apply the s.117B factors and failing to take into
    account the state's interests in reaching her finding that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed in Pakistan, i.e.
    Issue C is established. I am  further  satisfied  that  this  error  is
    material.

24. Ms Malhotra accepted that there was no evidence before the  judge  that
    the medication that the sponsor tolerates is not available in Pakistan.
    She asked me to bear in mind the seriousness of the  medical  condition
    of the sponsor.

25. Although I acknowledge that the sponsor is suffering  from  Parkinson's
    disease, it is impossible to say  that,  on  the  evidence  before  the
    judge, her condition was such that no reasonable Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal could reach a different decision  on  proportionality  in
    relation to the Article 8 claim outside the Rules.

26. In relation to Issue A, on the discrete issue as to whether the judge's
    use of the word "difficult" in the first sentence of para 31 shows that
    she applied too low a threshold when reaching her decision  on  whether
    there were insurmountable obstacles to family  life  being  enjoyed  in
    Pakistan, I agree with Ms Malhotra that,  when  the  judge's  reasoning
    from para 29 onwards is read as a whole, her single  use  of  the  word
    "difficult" at para 31  is  not  determinative.  She  quoted  from  the
    Secretary of State's guidance at paragraph 34 of her decision at length
    and used the phrase "insurmountable obstacles" on a few occasions.

27. Nevertheless, the judge did err in  failing  to  consider  whether  the
    claimant had established that the  only  medication  that  the  sponsor
    tolerates is not available in Pakistan. Her finding at  para  35,  that
    the sponsor may face cultural barriers in moving to Pakistan,  was  not
    based on any evidence placed before her. She did not refer to  specific
    background material in reaching her finding  at  para  36.  When  these
    errors are considered against the judge's reasoning as a  whole,  I  am
    satisfied that they are material to the outcome.

28. In summary, therefore, the judge made the following errors of law:

    i)      (Issue C) The judge did not consider the weight to be given  to
          the state's interests and failed to factor this in  the  balancing
          exercise in reaching her decision that there  were  insurmountable
          obstacles to family life being enjoyed in Pakistan.

      ii)   (Issue A) The judge failed to consider whether the claimant  had
        established that the only medication that the sponsor tolerates  is
        not available in Pakistan.

      iii)  (Issue A) The judge's finding at para 35, that the  sponsor  may
        face cultural barriers in moving to Pakistan, was not based on  any
        evidence placed before her.

      iv)   (Issue A)  The  judge  did  not  refer  to  specific  background
        material in reaching her finding at para 36.

    I am satisfied that i) is material on its own and  that  ii)-iv)  taken
    together are material on their own and independently of i).

29. I therefore set aside the judge's assessment from and including para 29
    up until and including para  38  of  her  decision.  I  set  aside  her
    purported decision to allow the appeal under  the  Rules.  Her  finding
    concerning the deception issue stands.

30. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision  will  be  able  to  re-make  the  relevant  decision  itself.
    However, the Practice Statement for the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber
    of the Upper Tribunal at  para  7.2  recognises  that  it  may  not  be
    possible for the Upper Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when
    it is satisfied that:

         "(a)     the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)      the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

31. In the instant case, the decision is finely balanced. On the one  hand,
    the judge's finding on  the  deception  issue  stands.  This  therefore
    reduces the fact-finding in the re-making of the decision. On the other
    hand, the claimant  succeeded  in  his  appeal  previously.  Given  the
    sponsor's medical condition and the fact that the claimant succeeded in
    his appeal previously, this  case  falls  within  the  guidance  in  JD
    (Congo) & Others [2012] EWCA Civ 327 concerning the cases in which  the
    appropriate course is to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal,  in
    my judgement.  I am therefore satisfied that  this  case  falls  within
    para 7.2.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that the assessment from paras 29 to  38  is  set  aside.
The judge's assessment in relation to the deception issue shall stand.

This case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  judge  other  than
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Iqbal  to  re-make  the  decision  on  the
claimant's Article 8 claim outside the Rules.



[pic]

Signed                                             Date: 16 August 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
