
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/33813/2015
                                                               IA/33814/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22 September 2017                      |On 29 September 2017             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                 mr Virendra kumar simrya (First Appellant)
                    Mrs vinita simrya (Second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr R Claire, Counsel instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The First Appellant is a citizen of India born on 4 December 1979.  His
    wife, also a citizen of India, was born on 12th  November  1981.   They
    appealed the decisions of the Secretary of State made on  19th  October
    2015 to refuse the First Appellant's application for leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant under the points-based
    system.  The Second Appellant's appeal is entirely dependent upon  that
    of the First Appellant.

 2. There were two matters  before  the  judge  at  first  instance,  Judge
    Rayner, who heard this appeal on 12th December 2016  at  Taylor  House.
    The first was whether or not the Certificate of Sponsorship relied upon
    in the application was genuine, and the second was whether or not if  a
    finding was made favourable to the  First  Appellant  that  the  appeal
    could succeed in any event  with  reliance  upon  that  Certificate  of
    Sponsorship which contained a number of errors and  therefore  was  not
    valid.  There was a third issue which related to human rights, but that
    is not pursued before me.

 3. Judge Rayner resolved the deception or fraud point  in  favour  of  the
    First Appellant, but having found that the Certificate  of  Sponsorship
    was invalid from its inception, dismissed the appeal having  regard  to
    the Immigration Rules. However, no-one has suggested before me, nor was
    it suggested in the grounds that an invalid Certificate of  Sponsorship
    could be relied upon, but rather the First Appellant complains now that
    the Secretary of State ought to have given to the First  Appellant  the
    opportunity, given that the Certificate of Sponsorship was not obtained
    by fraud or deception, to obtain another Certificate.

 4. In the event, not content with the decision of Judge Rayner, by  Notice
    dated 17th January 2017 the appellant made application  for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds run to eight  paragraphs,
    but in short  the  point  which  was  pursued  before  me  was  one  of
    evidential flexibility and the unfairness on the part of the  Secretary
    of State, it was contended, not to have given the First  Appellant  the
    opportunity to remedy the situation which he  faced;  namely  that  the
    Certificate of Sponsorship was in relation to a company which,  by  the
    date of decision, no longer existed, putting aside any  issue  relating
    to the numbers etc. which were noted upon the face of the document.

 5. On 12th July 2017 Judge Shimmin granted  permission,  thus  the  matter
    comes before me.  Mr Claire for the Appellants was not able  to  assist
    me as to whether or not the point now being relied  upon  was  in  fact
    raised before the judge.  It is to  be  remembered  that  although  the
    judge at first instance is concerned with whether or not the  Secretary
    of State made a decision which was lawful, I am concerned with  whether
    or not the judge at first instance  erred,  but  that  is  a  different
    consideration.  The judge at first instance is obliged to make findings
    and deal with issues which are put before him.  It is of note  that  at
    paragraph 28 of the decision the judge says:

         "It was not suggested to me that the respondent was under a duty to
         carry out  any  enquiries  of  Mr  Simrya  before  considering  the
         application".

    Those words taken together with Mr Claire's very candid admission  that
    he cannot recall whether or not the point was taken  before  the  judge
    leads me to the conclusion that the point  was  not  taken.   In  those
    circumstances it cannot be said that the judge erred.

 6. However, that the point was not taken before the judge is not material,
    because this appeal would not have succeeded in any event.  The  burden
    of proof was upon the Secretary of State to establish  whether  or  not
    there had been fraud or deception.  That  was  resolved  in  the  First
    Appellant's favour, but that did not relieve the First  Appellant  from
    proving  his  case.   He  was  required  to  prove,   on   balance   of
    probabilities, that  as  at  the  date  of  decision  he  had  a  valid
    Certificate of Sponsorship.  He did not have one.  He points through Mr
    Claire to unfairness, but there was no unfairness in my judgement.   Mr
    Simrya, it would appear, made all sorts of efforts to advance his  case
    and I refer to paragraph 24 of the decision in which  the  judge  noted
    the active  way  in  which  Mr  Simrya  was  pursuing  the  Respondent,
    including involving a member of Parliament which, it was said, he would
    have been unlikely to have done if the Certificate was a fraud.  It  is
    of note however, that the judge was far from entirely impressed by  the
    evidence of Mr Simrya because he said it was far from compelling and he
    could have done more to explain how the  false  particulars  had  found
    their way  into  the  Certificate  of  Sponsorship  (here  I  refer  to
    paragraph 25).  Be that as it may, the matter was resolved in the First
    Appellant's favour on the deception point.

 7. It is a general maxim applicable in all jurisdictions unless  there  is
    some legal basis for the contrary that he who asserts must  prove.   If
    the Certificate of Sponsorship was one upon which the  First  Appellant
    was entitled to rely, then it was for him to prove it.  He  was  unable
    to do so.  Ought then the Secretary of State, in  any  event,  to  have
    taken steps to inform the First Appellant that the prospective employer
    was no longer in a position to issue a Certificate of Sponsorship?  The
    answer to that question, in my judgement, is "No"; it was for the First
    Appellant to make the assertion that at the time of  the  decision  the
    prospective employer was in a position to  offer  employment;   he  was
    relying on the document, it was he who was looking for that  work,  and
    it was he  who  should  have  kept  in  touch  with  those  prospective
    employers to satisfy himself that at all material  times  there  was  a
    Certificate of Sponsorship before the Secretary of State, such that  if
    that company was no longer in a position to offer a Certificate he, the
    First Appellant, would have informed the Secretary of State prior to  a
    decision being made.

 8. I am reinforced in that view by what appears at the end of paragraph 28
    of the decision which relates to the policy guidance of  the  Secretary
    of State which at paragraph 184 states:

         "A Certificate of Sponsorship can be withdrawn or cancelled at  any
         time by either  the  Home  Office  or  your  sponsor.   Where  your
         application relies on a Certificate of Sponsorship  that  has  been
         either withdrawn or cancelled, your application will be refused".

    Paragraph 287 states:

         "If you submit an application using a  Certificate  of  Sponsorship
         that is invalid, the application will be refused.  You must  get  a
         new Certificate of Sponsorship from your sponsor".

 9. That reads to me that either it is incumbent upon the  First  Appellant
    to do the same within the currency of an existing application, or  make
    a fresh application, but I do not find anywhere any obligation  on  the
    Secretary of State to make the enquiry that is being  suggested.   This
    is not a case, for example, where in a series of bank statements  there
    is one missing.

10. In all the circumstances, this appeal fails and fails because the point
    was not taken before the First-tier Tribunal, but I  thought  it  right
    that the parties should be aware that the appeal would have  failed  in
    any event.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

