
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/33492/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 12 October 2017                    |         On 21 November 2017         |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                             THE HON. LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                    UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILLIAN JACKSON

                                   Between

                                     YD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Hooper, Counsel instructed by Bindmans LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a  national  of  Algeria  born  3 January  1997.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom in July 2012 as an unaccompanied  minor.
    He claimed asylum  on  18 July  2012  on  the  basis  that  he  feared
    persecution  if  returned  to  Algeria  on  the  basis  of  his  sexual
    orientation.

2.   On arrival he gave an account that he had been brought up by  his  aunt
    and uncle, his parents having died in a car crash when he was  6 years
    of  age.   His  uncle  was  violent  towards  him.   The   relationship
    subsequently broke down so that the appellant had to leave his  uncle's
    house and live on the street.  After some months he moved in  with  the
    family of a boy whom he met.  However, the boy's mother discovered  the
    appellant and the boy having sex and the appellant returned to live  on
    the streets.  He was told by his youngest cousin that the boy's  mother
    had informed the appellant's uncle, who wanted to kill  him.   He  fled
    via Spain to the United Kingdom.

3.   The appellant's asylum application was refused on 8 July 2013.  Due to
    his age he was granted  leave  to  remain  for  under  12 months.   In
    June 2014 he made an application for further leave to remain which was
    refused on 13 October 2015 with a right of appeal on both  asylum  and
    human rights grounds.  He lodged an appeal on 26 October 2015.

4.   The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal judge (the judge) for  a
    hearing on 13 October  2016  who  dismissed  the  appeal  by  decision
    promulgated on 16 November 2016.

5.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant himself and  a  witness  HH
    who had been in a relationship with the appellant for about two years.
    They lived at separate addresses.

6.   The judge found that both the appellant and HH were credible  regarding
    their sexual orientation and relationship.  He also found the appellant
    credible in relation to the reasons why he  fled  from  Algeria.    The
    judge found that there would be a real risk to the appellant of violent
    and persecutory ill treatment from the appellant's uncle and  from  the
    parents of the boy with whom he had relationship in Algeria.   However,
    the judge, applying the Country Guidance case 00 (Algeria) [2016] UK UT
    0 0065 (IAC) found that the appellant would not be at risk on return to
    Algeria because he could relocate within that country without suffering
    persecution.   The  appellant  appealed  that  decision  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

7.   Before us, Miss Hooper advanced five broad grounds  of  appeal.   The
    first contends that the judge materially erred in  law  in  misapplying
    the judgment of the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran)  2010  UKSC 31  and  in
    failing to address argument that  00  (Algeria)  was  wrongly  decided.
    Secondly, it is contended that the judge erred in  applying  that  case
    despite evidence presented which cast  doubt  on  the  safety  of  that
    guidance.  Thirdly it is said that the judge erred  in  the  manner  in
    which he approached the relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
    partner HH.  Fourthly he erred in  finding  there  were  no  particular
    circumstances that  would  make  internal  relocation  unreasonable  or
    unduly harsh.  Fifthly it is said that the judge erred in finding there
    were no significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's  reintegration  in
    Algeria and that there were no compelling circumstances to consider his
    case on Article 8 grounds outside the Rules.

Ground 1

8.   The first ground in effect is a challenge to the Country Guidance  case
    00 (Algeria). However, as Mr Kotas submitted, the judge was obliged  to
    follow that guidance unless very strong  grounds  supported  by  cogent
    evidence were adduced justifying departure from it  (see  SG  Iraq  and
    SSHD 2012 EWCA Civ 940 paragraph 47).  We do not  consider  that  in
    failing to depart from 00 (Algeria) the  judge  can  be  said  to  have
    materially erred in law.  We note that it is a recent case having  been
    decided in September 2015 and that no appeal was taken against it.  The
    Tribunal heard extensive expert and other evidence about the conditions
    in Algeria which was subjected  to  detailed  analysis  and  assessment
    resulting in the guidance set out in paragraphs 171-190.  We deal with
    the contention in Ground of Appeal 2 that there  was  evidence  casting
    doubt on the safety of that guidance  below.   In  essence  we  do  not
    consider that there was any  evidence  that  would  warrant  the  judge
    departing from 00 (Algeria).

9.   At the heart  of  the  criticism  of  the  Tribunal's  decision  in  00
    (Algeria) is the contention that the  Tribunal  applied  too  narrow  a
    definition of persecution.  It is said that self-repression  of  sexual
    orientation  as  a   reaction   to   social   stigma,   ostracism   and
    discrimination can amount  to  persecution  or  a  violation  of  human
    rights.  So, if applicants for asylum require, for their own protection
    against  such  reactions,  to  exercise  self-restraint   by   avoiding
    behaviour which would identify sexual orientation, that is  capable  of
    constituting persecution.  Reference is made to what Lord Roger said at
    paragraph 78 of HJ (Iran) that what is protected is the  right  of  gay
    people to be as free as their straight equivalents to live their  lives
    in the way that is natural to them, without the fear of persecution.

10.  We do not consider these criticisms to be well-founded.   The  Tribunal
    had full regard to the Supreme Court's  decision  in  HJ (Iran).   The
    Supreme Court highlighted a distinction to be made when considering the
    question whether someone living discreetly as a gay person  amounts  to
    persecution.  Social pressures do not amount  to  persecution  and  the
    convention does not offer protection against them.  However, as  stated
    at paragraph 82,  if  a  material  reason  for  the  applicant  living
    discreetly on his return would be a fear  of  persecution  which  would
    follow if he were to live openly as a  gay  man  then  the  application
    should be accepted.   There  is  nothing  in  00  (Algeria)  that  runs
    contrary  to  that  approach.   The  Tribunal  carefully  assessed  the
    evidence and found that it was  not  established  that  gay  people  in
    Algeria would be subjected to any  harm  of  sufficient  intensity  and
    duration capable of amounting to persecution.  Further, it found,  upon
    the evidence advanced to it, that gay people in  Algeria  generally  do
    not live openly as such and, for example,  do  not  show  affection  in
    public, not only because  of  social  pressures  but  because  in  that
    country  such  public  manifestations  are  disapproved   of,   whether
    conducted by heterosexual or homosexual couples.  Thus  restraints  are
    imposed in Algeria on straight people as well  as  gays.     Ms  Hooper
    argued that homosexual couples are required to deny the fact and nature
    of their relationships and to lie about their sexual identity or  their
    partner unlike heterosexual couples and  that  "living  discretely"  in
    that sense together with the discrimination and harm which the Tribunal
    found to exist against gays in Algeria amounted  to  persecution.  Lord
    Hope of Craighead referred at paragraph 12  of  HJ  (Iran)  to  article
    9(1)(a) of the  Qualification  Directive  which  states  that  acts  of
    persecution must be "sufficiently serious by their nature or repetition
    as to constitute a  severe  violation  of  basic  human  rights".   The
    Tribunal set  out  at  paragraph  10  that  definition  of  persecution
    contained in the Directive and proceeded to consider all  the  evidence
    as to the ways  in  which  gay  people  are  treated  in  Algeria.   It
    concluded that the evidence of that treatment whether by the  State  or
    by others could not  constitute  such  violations.  Thus  no  "fear  of
    persecution" could be said to exist.  We agree with the  analysis.   We
    reject the contention that the Tribunal's own findings as to  the  sort
    of responses to which gays may be subjected in Algeria can be  said  to
    amount to persecution.  This amounts  to  disapproval,  the  threat  of
    prosecution, ill-treatment at the hands of family members, and  adverse
    reaction from certain sectors of the public including  the  possibility
    of physical attack.  On the evidence presented to  it,  the  Tribunal's
    approach cannot be said  to  be  erroneous.   That  judgement  was  one
    reached after careful scrutiny of the evidence which the Tribunal heard
    and we are not prepared to depart from it.

11.  The Upper Tribunal also dealt with the argument  advanced  before  them
    based upon what was said in XYZ v Minister  Voor  Immigratie  En  Asiel
    (Case C-199/12 2 C 201/12) paragraphs 70 and 71.  This is repeated in
    this ground of appeal.  At paragraph 14 the Upper Tribunal rejected the
    argument that the Court of Justice  of  the  European  Union  had  gone
    further than the Supreme  Court  in  HJ  (Iran)  in  stating  that  the
    requirement to conceal sexual orientation could  in  itself  amount  to
    persecution.  As the Tribunal pointed out, the CJEU made it plain  that
    the requirement of persecution remained.

Ground 2

12.  In Ground 2 it is contended that the judge erred  in  concluding  that
    there was no reliable evidence to establish that a gay man,  identified
    as such, faces a real risk of persecutory ill  treatment  from  persons
    outside his own  family.   This  ground  is  again  predicated  on  the
    contention that 00 (Algeria) was wrongly decided but reference is  made
    to certain evidence said to postdate it which ought  to  have  led  the
    judge to depart from it.  The first  is  the  Country  Information  and
    Guidance  Algeria:   Sexual  Orientation   and   Gender   Identity   of
    February 2016 issued by the Home Office (pages 26-68 of the appellant's
    bundle).  The material referred to at pages 39  and 41  predates  the
    Tribunal's determination.  While there are  some  references  later  in
    that document which postdate the Tribunal's decision, there is  nothing
    in these that would constitute the sort of cogent  evidence  justifying
    any departure from the  Country  Guidance.  The  skeleton  argument  at
    paragraph 44 draws attention to the document relied on for evidence  in
    paragraph 7.1.3 of this document which sets  out  the  punishments  for
    criminal  offences  including  homosexual  acts  in  the  Penal   Code.
    Paragraph 7.1.3 states that a journalist wrote  an  article  in  August
    2014 in which it was reported:

         "Not only is it possible  to  live  a  homosexual  life,  with  its
         meeting places, bars and cabarets in Algiers, Oran and Bejaia,  but
         many Algerian homosexuals practice homosexuality; at school, during
         military service and in the dorm etc."


    The article being referred to is entitled "Sex, youth and  politics  in
    Algeria" and starts with a quote from a lesbian resident  of  Oran  who
    said:


         "The lives of homosexuals  are  much  more  simple  and  joyful  in
    Algeria".


     The author goes on to state that:


         "dating  opportunities  and  homosexual  pleasures  are  far   more
    numerous"

     Views to this effect  support  the  findings  of  the  Tribunal  in  OO
(Algeria).

 13. Reference  is  also  made  to  the  Country  Reports  on  Human  Rights
    Practices for 2015 from the United States Department of State.  However
    this does not differ materially the previous year's  report  which  was
    before the Tribunal.  Indeed there is an addition in the 2015 report to
    the effect that "activists said that the government  did  not  actively
    condemn LGBTI behaviour" although it is said to  be  complicit  in  the
    hate speech propagated by conservative and religious organisations.

14.  Reference is also made to the  document  entitled  "Violations  against
    LGBTIQ in Algeria" at page 199 and 214 of the appellant's bundle.  This
    is an undated document but must have  been  issued  sometime  prior  to
    October 2016 since it states that that is when their  next  report  is
    due.  Its main purpose, according to the introduction and context is to
    document violations and hate speech in written and audio  visual  media
    outlets or  as  spoken  by  political,  religious  or  artistic  public
    figures.  The report due in October 2016 will, it states, focus on  the
    translation of these expressions into acts of violence.  No such report
    of October 2016 was supplied to us.  In any event there is reference at
    page 210 to a YouTube and Facebook video which was uploaded 16 November
    2015.  The date of the incident is not recorded.  The video is said  to
    show a violent verbal and physical assault on an  Algerian  transgender
    woman who was taken by two individuals  in  a  car  and  intentionally
    dropped in a working class neighbourhood and was subjected to  insults,
    blows and spitting in her face.

15.  At paragraph 162 of 00 (Algeria) the Tribunal acknowledged  that  such
    physical attacks cannot be excluded.  They point out that  there  is  a
    dearth of information and evidence relating to such attacks.  We do not
    consider  that  the  existence  of  a  video  apparently  uploaded   in
    November 2015 which shows an incident about which there is no  further
    detail justifies a departure from Country Guidance.

16.  A further branch of this ground  maintains  that  the  judge  erred  in
    finding that, if the appellant chose to live discreetly in Algeria that
    would be because of respect to  social  laws  and  a  desire  to  avoid
    attracting disapproval all  of  which  fell  below  the  threshold  for
    persecution.  It is contended that the appellant's  case  was  that  he
    would be forced to act discreetly because  otherwise  he  would  be  in
    danger.  However, the Tribunal in 00(Algeria) had found that  any  risk
    of danger which the people in the appellant's situation would face fell
    below the threshold for persecution.  We  do  not  consider  the  judge
    erred in this respect.

Grounds 3 and 5

17.  Ground 3 contends that the judge erred at paragraph  27  in  assessing
    the effect of the appellant's relationship with his partner HH.  It  is
    accepted they do not live together but it is said that his partner, who
    is British, would not leave the  UK  to  live  with  the  appellant  in
    Algeria so the relationship would be severed.  Both are young and it is
    not in any event financially or practically viable  for  them  to  live
    together at the current time.  HH's family do not know that he is  gay.
     In her skeleton argument, Ms Hooper submits that the break up of  this
    relationship and the  inability  to  conduct  such  a  relationship  in
    Algeria  would   constitute   very   significant   obstacles   in   his
    reintegration there.  This factor is linked to the judge's treatment of
    the appellant's private life at paragraphs 27  and  30  and  raised  in
    ground of appeal  5.   It  is  said  that  the  interference  with  the
    appellant's private life was a factor "militating against his removal".



18.  It is clear from the appellant's  witness  statement  dated  6  October
    2016 at paragraph 5 that he and HH had only known each other for 1� to
    2 years.  They were at the time no longer a couple  but  continued  to
    have a casual sexual relationship.  In these circumstances it cannot be
    said  that  the  appellant's  relationship  with  HH  was  a   material
    consideration in the assessment of the private life  of  the  appellant
    which the judge was considering at paragraph 27.  It was accepted that
    the  appellant  had  some  private  life  within  the  UK  but,  as  is
    acknowledged in the grounds of appeal at paragraph 8, the private life
    developed in this regard while  his  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom was precarious.   We do not consider any material error of  law
    is demonstrated in this respect.

19.  Ground of appeal 5 contends that the judge erred in finding that there
    would be no  very  significant  obstacles  to  his  reintegration  into
    Algeria in terms of Rule 276ADE.  The appellant would not  be  able  to
    continue his relationship with HH.  He cannot  return  to  his  family,
    Algerian laws  declare  homosexuality  illegal,  he  is  likely  to  be
    homeless  on  return  and  will  face   discrimination   in   obtaining
    employment. At paragraph 27 the judge points out that the appellant and
    HH are not living together  in  the  UK  and  there  is  no  basis  for
    supposing they would do so in Algeria.  The factors listed in paragraph
    50 of Ms Hooper's skeleton argument are not specifically dealt with but
    there is no obligation on the judge to set out all such considerations.
     At paragraph 30 he refers to the findings made in applying the country
    guidance as the basis for concluding that no very significant obstacles
    would arise in re-integration.  Those  include  the  finding  that  the
    appellant would not live openly as a gay person for reasons other  than
    a fear of persecution.  He  had  also  found  that  the  appellant  was
    capable of adapting to life in Algeria (see  our  discussion  below  on
    ground of appeal 4).  We do not accept that the  judge's  treatment  of
    the appellant's claim under Rule 276ADE discloses any error of law.  Ms
    Hooper also argued  that  the  judge's  treatment  of  the  appellant's
    position outside the Rules was defective in failing to have  regard  to
    these considerations.  The judge specifically considered whether  there
    were any compelling circumstances which might justify finding a  breach
    of his Convention rights outwith the rules at paragraph 31.   He  found
    none. We consider that he dealt with all the  applicable  and  relevant
    considerations which arose in the context of the appellant's Convention
    rights in his assessment of the appellant's case prior  to  this  point
    and that he made no error of law  in  concluding  that  there  were  no
    residual  compelling  circumstances   which   would   amount   to   any
    disproportionate interference with those rights.

Ground 4

20.  Ground 4 contends that the judge erred in finding that it would not be
    unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate internally  within  Algeria.
    The first reason given is that,  since  the  appellant  would  have  to
    supress or conceal his sexual orientation wherever he lived in  Algeria
    that would necessarily make relocation unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh.
    However, that is contrary to what the Tribunal found in  00  (Algeria).
    Secondly it is said that there was no evidential basis for the  finding
    at paragraph 30 that the appellant could adapt to any place he decided
    to relocate to.  The judge states at paragraph 30 that  the  appellant
    had now been in the UK for 4 years and had a way of life  which  would
    enable him to do so adapt.  This is against  the  background  that  the
    appellant had been born and brought up in Algeria and had not left that
    country until he was 15.  Since arriving in Britain 4 years ago, he had
    completed a hairdressing course and gained experience  in  hairdressing
    salons. He had thus not only lived independently in a  foreign  country
    for a significant period of time during his  formative  years  but  had
    demonstrated self-reliance and initiative.  Upon  the  evidence  before
    him the judge was entitled to come to the view that there  was  nothing
    in the appellant's circumstances which would make relocation in Algeria
    unduly harsh.

    Notice of Decision

    The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.




                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

