

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33998/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 June 2014                                |On 3 July 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                                 MS KARAM BI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Martin, Counsel, instructed by Marks & Marks,
                  Solicitors
For the Respondent:   Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Claim History


1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
   Birk  (the  Judge)  promulgated  on  1  February  2014,  dismissing  the
   Appellant's appeal on all grounds against the  Respondent's  refusal  to
   grant leave to remain under paragraphs 317 and 276ADE of the Immigration
   Rules. Before the Judge it was submitted that the appeal  was  based  on
   paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules because the  Appellant  was  over
   the age of 65 and was the aunt  of  the  Sponsor  who  was  present  and
   settled in the UK; and on Article 8 ECHR.


2. The application was refused by the Respondent for the reasons set out in
   the letter to the Appellant dated 18 July 2013 (the RL). Under paragraph
   317, the Respondent did not accept that:  :
        a. the Appellant was over 65 years of age;
        b. the Sponsor was her nephew or that his wife was her daughter;
        c. the Appellant was widowed and that she had no ties in Pakistan;
        d. her sponsor supported her financially in Pakistan;
        e. the Appellant is wholly or mainly financially dependent  on  the
           Sponsor or that she had no close relatives  in  her  country  to
           whom she could turn for financial support; and
        f. that she is living alone in Pakistan  in  the  most  exceptional
           compassionate circumstances.

3. It was refused under paragraph 276ADE because the  Appellant  could  not
   establish that she had lived continuously in the  UK  for  at  least  20
   years and, because her period of residence was considerably less than 20
   years, she was not able to establish that she had severed all ties  with
   Pakistan, including social, cultural and family ties.


4. As to background, the Appellant came to the UK as a visitor  on  17  May
   2012, with a five year family multi visit visa permit. On  9  July  2012
   the Appellant applied for leave to remain as the 'parent, grandparent or
   dependent relative of a person present and  settled  in  the  UK'.  This
   application was made on the basis that the Appellant's husband, on  whom
   she was dependant, passed away whilst she  was  in  the  UK.  The  Judge
   accepted that the Appellant's husband had passed away whilst she was  in
   the UK [22].


5.  The  Judge found that the Appellant was not over 65 years of age [17  -
   19]; that whilst the Appellant was currently cared for by the   Sponsor,
   this did not  establish  that  she  was  wholly  or  mainly  financially
   dependent on him [20]; that she had family ties in Pakistan that had not
   been broken [21], that she had a property to return to in Pakistan  [22]
   and that there was no evidence before her that the  Appellant's  medical
   condition could be  not be managed in Pakistan [22].


6. The grounds of application are that the Judge erred in law by failing to
   interpret 'dependence', 'without close relatives to turn to' and 'living
   alone in the most exceptional compassionate circumstances' in accordance
   with the law because:


        a. She made a paradoxical finding as to dependence. She found  that
           whilst the Appellant  was  currently  being  maintained  by  the
           Sponsor, this did not establish that she was 'wholly or  mainly'
           financially dependent on him;
        b. She found that the Appellant had siblings in  Pakistan  to  whom
           she could turn but  failed  to  consider  that  they  were  some
           distance away  with  their  own  families  and  she  incorrectly
           assumed that they would be  willing  to  provide  financial  and
           other support to the Appellant; and
        c. She 'undervalued'  the  Appellant's  circumstances  in  Pakistan
           because she suffers from epilepsy, she came to the UK and in her
           absence, her husband passed away,  she  would  be  returning  to
           Pakistan  without  his  financial  and  emotional  support.  Her
           circumstances    amounted    to    exceptional     compassionate
           circumstances.


7. Permission was granted on all grounds.


8. The Respondent, in a rule 24 Response, opposed the appeal, submitting in
   summary  that  the  Judge  directed  herself  appropriately   and   made
   sustainable findings of fact.

The Hearing


9. At the hearing before me, I raised with Mr Martin and Mr Smart the issue
   of which rules were applicable at the date of decision, bearing in  mind
   that it was stated in the RL that the date of  application  was  9  July
   2012 and the Immigration Rules were changed significantly for  all  such
   applications by HC 565 (the new Rules).


10. The date of application was stated in the RL  to  be  9  July  2012.  My
   concern was that it  is  not  possible  for  an  applicant  to  make  an
   application under paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules on or  after  9
   July 2012, as provided by paragraph A277 of  the  new  Rules.  Mr  Smart
   stated that his understanding was that it was still open  to  applicants
   to apply under paragraph 317 of the old Rules. However,  paragraph  A277
   specifically provides:


         "From 9 July 2012 Appendix FM will apply  to  all  applications  to
         which Part 8 of these rules applied on or before 8 July 2012 except
         where the provisions of Part 8 are preserved and continue to apply,
         as set out in paragraph A280."


11. No reference is made within paragraph 280 (a) or 280  (b)  to  paragraph
   317.


12. Under  paragraph  280  (c),  paragraph  317  is  only  available  to  an
   applicant if an application was made before 9 July 2012  but  which  was
   not decided as at 9 July 2012 or where an applicant had previously  been
   granted entry clearance or leave to enter under part  8  before  9  July
   2012 and had extant leave under part 8 at the date of  application.  The
   Appellant was in the UK as a visitor, and entry clearance  or  leave  to
   remain had not been granted to her under part 8.


13. Paragraph 280 (d) did not assist her because the  Sponsor  on  whom  she
   claimed to be dependent was not a full time member of the armed forces.


14. In view of these provisions, Mr Smart stated that he would need to  take
   instructions. I rose notifying the parties that I  would  need  to  hear
   submissions on this issue before proceeding to determine whether or  not
   the Judge had materially erred in law.


15. On resuming the hearing, Mr Smart confirmed  that  my  understanding  of
   the provisions of paragraph A277 and paragraph 280 was accurate and that
   applicants who did not come under those provisions could not rely on the
   provisions of paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules.


16. As to the date of application, I stated  that  paragraph  34(g)  of  the
   Immigration Rules clearly established that when an application  is  made
   by post, the date of application  is  the  date  of  postage.  Mr  Smart
   provided the special delivery envelope in which the application was made
   and, although the date was difficult to read, the postmark  appeared  to
   be 9 July 2012. Mr Martin also examined the postmark and  accepted  that
   that is what the postmark appeared to be. He  also  added  that  as  the
   Appellant had  stated  in  her  witness  statement  that  she  made  her
   application on 9 July 2012, he was in no position to dispute it.


17. To provide the context for the error of law  hearing,  to  sum  up,  the
   Appellant made her application on 9 July 2012 and she was therefore  not
   able to rely on the provisions of paragraph 317 for a grant of leave  to
   remain. Her application for leave to remain as a dependent relative  (my
   emphasis) should therefore only have been considered under Appendix  FM.
   However, as correctly pointed out by Mr Smart, applications for leave to
   remain by dependent relatives could only be considered under Appendix FM
   if the applicant had extant leave as a dependent  relative  pursuant  to
   the provisions  of  paragraph  E-ILRDR.1.2.  I  would  also  note  that,
   pursuant to Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1 not  free  standing)  [2014]  UKUT
   00063 (IAC) (see  headnote),  the  adult  dependent  relative  rules  of
   Appendix FM do not  provide  for  a  consideration  of  the  Appellant's
   application under the provisions of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM.


18. This left Mr Martin in some difficulty as  the  grounds  of  application
   only  attacked  the  findings  of  fact  under  paragraph  317  of   the
   Immigration Rules, on the basis that the Judge erred in law  by  failing
   to interpret 'dependence', 'without close  relatives  to  turn  to'  and
   'living alone in the most exceptional  compassionate  circumstances'  in
   accordance with the law.


19. His submissions were as follows:  it was understandable that  the  Judge
   considered the Appellant's application under paragraph 317  because  the
   Respondent had also considered it on that basis and the concentration on
   it influenced the weight she attributed to the various factors under it.
   The focus of the hearing was  paragraph  317  and  Article  8  was  only
   considered as a 'backstop'; it was not argued as carefully as  it  might
   have been if the main concentration had been on Article 8.  If  she  had
   applied paragraph 317 correctly, it would have been used as a  tool  for
   analysing the position under Article 8. The Appellant did not have close
   relatives  she  could  turn  to.  He  submitted  that  the  grounds   of
   application did not ignore the  possibility  of  a  challenge  on  Human
   Rights grounds particularly as the Respondent took into account  matters
   she should not have taken into  account,  that  is  she  considered  the
   application under paragraph 317. The Appellant therefore had the  option
   of arguing today that the appeal should be allowed exceptionally outside
   the Immigration Rules. Mr Martin submitted that in summary, if paragraph
   317 goes, all the Appellant's direct descendants  are  in  the  UK,  her
   husband passed away whilst she was in the UK and her  situation  changed
   radically. If she returned to Pakistan, she would be living on her  own,
   she would be relying on relatives in the UK for financial  support,  and
   she suffered from a medical condition which required 24 hour care.


20. I asked  him  if  his  submission  was  that  the  Judge's  findings  at
   paragraph  22  were  unsustainable.  He  stated  that  they   were   not
   sustainable; the Appellant's husband had provided sufficient support for
   her when he was alive but he was no longer there. If she  returned  now,
   she would be relying on the support of members of the  family  who  were
   living in a different country.


21. I asked Mr Martin if there had been any evidence before the  Judge  that
   the Appellant's husband was economically active as this information  was
   not provided in the witness statements of the Appellant and the  Sponsor
   which were before the Judge. He said that he did not know and it was not
   stated on the death certificate. However, she had been residing with her
   nephew and his wife for the last two  years  and  had  been  financially
   supported by them.


22. Mr Smart submitted that he disagreed with Mr  Martin's  submission  that
   the Article  8  assessment  was  before  me.  The  Respondent  made  two
   decisions; one under paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules and  another
   under Article 8. The Judge gave reasons for her decision under paragraph
   317 and under Article 8. The only challenge was under paragraph 317  and
   the grounds of application did not refer to Article 8. He submitted that
   it was not now open to me  to  consider  a  challenge  under  Article  8
   because it had not been first put to the First-tier  Tribunal  and  been
   refused and then subsequently renewed before me in the Upper Tribunal. I
   could not now vary the grounds of application so that  Article  8  could
   also be raised. Mr Smart submitted  that  Ved  and  another  (appealable
   decisions; permission applications;  Basnet)  [2014]  UKUT  00150  (IAC)
   applied; the Upper Tribunal had considered in  Ved  the  application  of
   paragraph 21 of the Upper Tribunal (procedure)  Rules  2008  and  stated
   that grounds could only be raised if they  had  first  been  raised  and
   refused by the First-tier Tribunal.


23. He also submitted that Ferrer  (limited  appeal  grounds;  Alvi)  [2012]
   UKUT 00304(IAC) did not assist the Appellant. In that  case,  the  Upper
   Tribunal confirmed that the First-tier Tribunal, in granting permission,
   should be clear as to which grounds of appeal  were  accepted  as  being
   arguable and if the intention was to grant on limited grounds only, this
   should be made clear within the grant of  permission.  However,  it  was
   accepted by the Upper Tribunal in Ferrer that what should happen is that
   the First-tier Tribunal should identify the  strongest  grounds  in  the
   grant and let this form a backdrop to the hearing, rather than grant  on
   limited grounds.


24. Mr Smart further submitted that although the Respondent  considered  the
   Appellant's  application  under  paragraph  317,  the  Respondent   also
   considered the application in detail  under  paragraph  276ADE  (on  the
   basis of the Appellant's private life). Factual assessments were made by
   the Respondent and these were not affected by a refusal under  paragraph
   317. The decision of the Respondent was in accordance with the  law.  He
   submitted that the Judge considered Article 8 properly at paragraph  24,
   applying the jurisprudence in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules -  correct)
   [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC), Green (Article 8 - new  Rules)  [2013]  UKUT  245
   (IAC) and R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin). She found  that  the
   Appellant's circumstances were not exceptional  for  a  grant  of  leave
   outside the Rules. Even if,  therefore,  I  allowed  a  challenge  under
   Article 8, her findings under Article 8 were open to her on the evidence
   before her. As to Mr Martin's submission that the Judge's  finding  that
   the Appellant failed to meet paragraph 317 coloured her assessment under
   Article 8, the argument was also that she  did  not  properly  interpret
   paragraph 317 in accordance with the law. If Article 8 was  indeed  open
   to consideration, we would also have to weigh against the Appellant that
   she had used deception because it was not accepted by the Judge that her
   date of birth was 1 January 1947 rather  than  the  date  given  in  all
   previous documents, this being 1 January 1965, a finding which  was  not
   challenged in the grounds. The Respondent may also wish to raise whether
   paragraph  320(7A)  would  be  applied  in  refusing   the   Appellant's
   application.


25. Mr Martin submitted that he had nothing he  wished  to  add  by  way  of
   reply.


Analysis and reasons


26. As stated above, my consideration of this application is  on  the  basis
   that the Appellant cannot rely on the provisions of paragraph 317 of the
   Immigration Rules.


27. I find that although the Respondent did consider her  application  under
   paragraph 317 and issue a decision under it, this decision  was  not  in
   accordance with the law but only on the basis that these provisions were
   no longer applicable for persons  in  the  position  of  the  Appellant.
   However, a decision was  also  made  under  paragraph  276ADE  and  this
   decision was not infected by the unlawful decision as provided in Ahmadi
   v SSHD [2012] UKUT 147 and confirmed in Adamally and Jaferi (section  47
   removal decisions: Tribunal  Procedures)  [2012]  UKUT  00414  (IAC)  at
   paragraph 14. The Respondent's decision under  paragraph  317  does  not
   infect the decision made by  the  Respondent  under  the  provisions  of
   paragraph 276 ADE.


28. I accept Mr Smart's submissions in relation to Ved and Ferrer.  In  the
    absence of an application first to the First-tier  Tribunal,  I  cannot
    entertain a renewed application before me today on the basis of Rule 21
    of  The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (the  Upper
    Tribunal Rules) which provides:


         21 (1)  Where permission to appeal  to  the  Tribunal  against  the
         decision of another tribunal is required, a person may apply to the
         Tribunal for permission to appeal to the Tribunal  against  such  a
         decision only if-


                  a) they have made an application for permission to  appeal
                     to the tribunal which made the decision challenged; and


                  b) that application has  been  refused  or  has  not  been
                     admitted.


29. Furthermore, the possibility of waiving the requirements  under  Rule  7
   of the Upper Tribunal Rules was considered in Ved, and the view  of  the
   Upper  Tribunal  was  that  it  was  difficult  to  envisage   in   what
   circumstances the Upper Tribunal would  waive  the  requirement  for  an
   application to be made first to the First-tier  Tribunal.  In  the  case
   before me, the Appellant has been represented throughout and even if all
   parties erroneously relied on paragraph 317, Article 8 was argued and if
   it was not vigorously pursued before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  this
   is not reason enough not to raise it in the grounds of application.


30. I find that there is no appeal before me under Article 8  and  I  cannot
   consider  it.  The  submission  that  the  Judge   did   not   interpret
   'dependence', 'without close relatives to turn to' and 'living alone  in
   the most exceptional compassionate circumstances' in accordance with the
   law (ie, in accordance with the jurisprudence under  the  provisions  of
   paragraph 317), can no longer stand because the Judge was not  bound  to
   consider such jurisprudence in making her findings.  Whilst  it  may  be
   correct that a focus on the provisions and jurisprudence under paragraph
   317 may have resulted in different findings, the fact that there was  no
   such focus does not now render the Judge's findings  unsustainable.  Had
   the Judge applied the law  correctly,  she  would  have  been  bound  to
   dismiss the appeal under paragraph 317 because  of  the  change  in  the
   Immigration Rules on 8 July 2012.


31. The submission that paragraph 317 should have been used as a  'tool'  to
   assess the position under Article 8 lacks  merit.  The  new  Immigration
   Rules provide the Secretary of State's position  on  the  weight  to  be
   attached to the public interest in Article 8 applications and  switching
   the basis of stay from a visitor to a dependent relative  is  prohibited
   to prevent abuse of the visitor route. Had the Judge used paragraph  317
   as a tool to make her assessment under Article 8, she would in fact have
   misdirected herself in law.


32. Looking at the findings that were disputed in the grounds, on  the  face
   of it there appears to be some merit in the submission  that  the  Judge
   made a   paradoxical finding in that she accepted that the  Sponsor  was
   caring for the Appellant but at the same time she said  that  she  could
   not find that the Sponsor  was  financially  dependent  on  the  Sponsor
   wholly or partially. However, this was only relevant, as stated  in  the
   grounds,  as  'prima  facie  acceptance  that  the  Appellant  met   the
   provisions of the Immigration Rules' (paragraph 5 of the grounds), these
   being paragraph 317. In the absence of an ability to rely  on  paragraph
   317, there is no submission that  this  apparently  paradoxical  finding
   undermines her conclusions under Article 8, particularly as there was no
   evidence before the Judge for her to find that  the  Appellant  did  not
   have resources in Pakistan. I appreciate that the  Appellant  stated  in
   her witness statement that she was a housewife all her life and that her
   husband took care of everything. However, the  thrust  of  the  evidence
   before the Judge in the witness statements  of  the  Appellant  and  the
   Sponsor was that it was the health of the Appellant that  was  the  main
   concern and no evidence was provided that financially she would  not  be
   able to manage in his absence; no evidence was provided as to the source
   of his income. Furthermore, it was stated that the  Appellant's  husband
   had provided her with care  because  of  her  epilepsy.  If  she  indeed
   required 24 hour supervision, he would not have been in  a  position  to
   provide this personally if he was gainfully employed. I also  note  that
   the Sponsor did not state that he would be unwilling to  send  funds  to
   her in Pakistan so that she could manage financially; he  simply  stated
   that it would be a problem because at the moment 'it would mean separate
   payments whereas here he can just pay for her' [13].


33. There was no evidence  before  the  Judge  as  to  how  the  Appellant's
   husband managed to provide the Appellant with 24  hour  supervision  and
   her finding that he would not have been able to provide it [22]  is  not
   open to challenge and was not in fact challenged. In the  absence  of  a
   need to consider her findings within the ambit  of  paragraph  317,  her
   findings of fact at paragraphs 21 and 22  are  not  open  to  challenge.
   There was simply insufficient evidence before the  Judge  on  which  she
   could have found differently.


34. Mr Smart correctly identified that  the  Appellant's  application  as  a
   dependent relative could not  be  considered  under  the  provisions  of
   Appendix FM because she had not made an application for entry  clearance
   as an elderly dependent relative. It was therefore necessary to consider
   the application under Article 8 ECHR directly applied, which  the  Judge
   does at paragraph 29. Although she does not refer to Sabir, it is  clear
   that she has not considered the case under Appendix FM  paragraph  EX.1.
   As there was no provision within Appendix FM to consider the Appellant's
   particular circumstances, the Judge goes on to consider  proportionality
   under Article 8 at [29] and it was  not  submitted  in  the  grounds  of
   application that the Judge's assessment under Article 8 was flawed.


35. My conclusion is that whilst the Judge did err in that  she  misdirected
   herself in law as to the provisions of the Immigration Rules in making a
   decision under paragraph 317, her error was not material to the  outcome
   of the Appellant's appeal under Article 8, which was the only ground  of
   appeal on which she could rely, and  the  decision  of  the  Judge  must
   therefore stand.


Decision


36. The determination of Judge Birk contains a material  error  of  law  in
    that she misdirected herself  in  law  as  to  the  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  She could not consider the Appellant's claim  under
    paragraph 317 after the Rules were changed from 8 July 2012,  and  that
    part  of  the  decision  is  therefore  not  in  accordance  with   the
    Immigration Rules. This part  of  the  decision  cannot  be  remade  as
    paragraph 317 is not  available  to  the  Appellant.   This  does  not,
    however, have a material impact  on  the  outcome  of  the  Appellant's
    appeal under Article 8.


37. The Judge's decision under Article 8 was not challenged in the  grounds
    of application, her findings of fact for the purposes of Article 8  are
    not perverse or irrational, and her decision must therefore stand.


38. The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


39. There was no application for an anonymity order before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or before me. In the circumstances of  this  case,  I  see  no
    reason to direct anonymity.





Signed                                  Date

M Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE ORDER

As the appeal of the Appellant was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal and
the outcome has not been changed, no fee order is made.









Signed                                  Date

M Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
