
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34446/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 October 2016                           |On 19 December 2016           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                                  renu renu
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Neale, Counsel, instructed by Abbott Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of India who appeals against a decision  of
      the Secretary of State for leave to remain in the UK on  human  rights
      grounds due to her medical condition.   That  appeal  was  refused  by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow by a decision promulgated on 14 April
      2016.

   2. Mr Neale represented her at the hearing of this appeal today and  very
      helpfully submitted detailed grounds. In short this is a lady  who  is
      very serious ill.  The details of her medical condition are set out in
      the First-tier Tribunal's decision. It is  accepted  by  Judge  Callow
      that the appellant is not fit to be removed from this country by  air.
      Nevertheless he goes on to say that there is no good  reason  why  she
      should not be removed with appropriate medical assistance by  land  or
      sea.

   3. There was no evidence  as  to  how  that  might  be  achieved  and  no
      reasoning to support that conclusion. It is clear on  the  authorities
      that the act of removal of a person may in  exceptional  circumstances
      engage Article 3 and it appears to us that that might very well be the
      case here.

   4. Mr Bramble relied on his Rule  24  repose  but  beyond  that  made  no
      submission.

   5. For the reason stated above we consider that there is an error law and
      accordingly we will allow the appeal.

   6. Mr Neale submitted that the matter should  return  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. That would enable an application to be made  for  legal  aid
      and for a proper medical assessment to be undertaken for submission to
      the First-tier Tribunal. We think that is the right thing to do in the
      circumstances. We note that there were other grounds of  appeal  which
      we have not considered. However given  the  appellant's  deteriorating
      medical condition we consider that it should be a fresh  determination
      on all issues.


   7. Accordingly we shall allow the appeal and remit the case to the First-
      tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.



                                                      LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                                       Date:
