
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34911/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 16th November, 2017                |On 20th December, 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                            Imtiyaz Yusuf Kalidas
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Appellant did not appear and was not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India who was born  on  7th  July,  1987.
    He appealed to the First Tier  Tribunal  against  the  refusal  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 15th September, 2015, refusing  him  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules.  The appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Dr Majid at Taylor House without an oral hearing.

2.   The judge dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The appellant applied  for
    and was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

3.   In dismissing the appellant's appeal, the judge failed to  look  at  or
    consider any evidence and dismissed the appellant's appeal after having
    only  read  the  respondent's  decision  and  reasons  for   it.    The
    determination does not give any indication as to the standard of  proof
    applied by the judge.

4.   Mr Walker quite rightly indicated  that  the  determination  could  not
    possibly stand.

5.   I set aside the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Majid.   I
    accept that it does contain material errors of law, namely the  failure
    to indicate the standard of proof the judge applied.  It is also  quite
    clear that he failed to consider any evidence he did have  before  him,
    being the copy of  the  appellant's  application  and  the  grounds  of
    appeal.

6.   I am satisfied that the appellant has effectively been  denied  a  fair
    hearing and in the circumstances, I direct that the  appeal  should  be
    heard afresh by a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Majid.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley







