
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/34160/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |           Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 9th November 2017                  |           On 28th November 2017      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                              mr nouman sajawal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance by or on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a  citizen  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State of  5th  November
    2015 to refuse to vary his leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant under the  points-based  system.   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Owens dismissed the Appellant's appeal in a decision  promulgated
    on 3rd March 2017.  The Appellant was granted permission to  appeal  to
    this Tribunal by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchinson  on  19th
    September 2017.

 2. There was no appearance by or on behalf of the Appellant at the hearing
    in the Upper Tribunal.  I noted that the notice of hearing  was  served
    on the Appellant  at  the  address  set  out  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal and there had been no communication received  from
    the  Appellant  to  indicate  that  he  could  not  attend.   In  these
    circumstances I considered it appropriate, in accordance with  Rule  38
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008,  to  proceed  in
    the absence of the Appellant.  I heard submissions  from  Mr  Avery  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant entered the UK with
    leave to enter  as  a  student  on  10th  October  2010.   His  further
    application for leave to remain made on 21st December 2011 was  refused
    on 8th March 2012 and an appeal against that was allowed on  the  basis
    that the decision was not  in  accordance  with  the  law.   The  Upper
    Tribunal allowed the Secretary  of  State's  appeal  and  remitted  the
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal.  At  this  point  the  Secretary  of
    State raised an allegation of deception on the part of the Appellant in
    relation to the Appellant's ETS TOEIC  English  language  certificates.
    The second appeal was allowed on the basis that the decision was not in
    accordance with the law on 5th  June  2015.   The  Secretary  of  State
    subsequently issued a new refusal on 5th November  2015  which  is  the
    subject of this appeal.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Owen determined the appeal on  the  basis  of
    the papers in accordance  with  the  Appellant's  request.   The  judge
    considered the evidence in relation to the allegation of deception  and
    found that the Secretary of State had not discharged the  legal  burden
    of proof in  respect  of  the  general  Grounds  of  Refusal  and  that
    paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules had not been made out as the
    judge was not satisfied that the English language  testing  certificate
    was obtained by using a proxy test taker  [23].   Therefore  the  judge
    considered that this ground of refusal fell away and paragraph 245ZX(a)
    does not apply to this Appellant.  There is no challenge to  this  part
    of the decision.

 5. However the judge went on to consider the second issue  raised  in  the
    Reasons for Refusal letter. This was that the CAS  submitted  with  the
    Appellant's application had been assigned by London  Educators  Ltd,  a
    Tier 4 Sponsor which, at the date of the decision on 5th November 2015,
    was not listed on  the  register.   As  such  the  Secretary  of  State
    considered that the Appellant was not in possession of a valid CAS  and
    did not meet the requirements of the  Rules  on  that  basis.   In  his
    decision the judge noted that  it  had  been  argued  in  the  skeleton
    argument submitted on behalf of the Appellant that the Appellant should
    have a further 60 days in which to obtain a  new  Sponsor.   The  judge
    considered the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Patel  (revocation  of
    Sponsor licence - fairness) India [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC).   The  judge
    also considered the latest Tier 4 policy guidance.

 6. The judge noted at paragraph 26 that it is in the interests of fairness
    that, where an Appellant has a  student  application  pending  and  has
    submitted a valid CAS with the application and the  college  loses  its
    licence through no fault of the Appellant and where there are no  other
    grounds of refusal, the Appellant should be afforded  a  60  day  grace
    period in which to make a fresh application.  The judge considered this
    matter at paragraphs 27 and 28 of the decision.  The judge stated  that
    there was no evidence before him as to when the sponsorship licence was
    withdrawn although noted that it was not disputed by the Appellant that
    is this case.  The judge noted that it appeared that from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal of 8th March 2012 that  the  result  of  the
    English language test  had  not  been  produced  at  the  date  of  the
    application and it also appeared from the  evidence  before  the  judge
    that by June 2015 there was no longer a valid CAS.  It was  noted  that
    at that point the Appellant indicated that he  was  anxious  to  pursue
    this appeal in order to refute the allegation of deception which  would
    prevent him from making a further application for a  protracted  period
    of time.  The judge highlighted that there was  no  evidence  that  the
    Respondent failed to act in accordance with their policy  to  give  the
    Appellant a further 60 days in which to find a new college and submit a
    fresh application.  The judge found that it was not sufficient for  the
    Appellant to "simply assert that he should be given a further 60 days".
     In the judge's view the  Appellant  needed  to  demonstrate  that  the
    Respondent did not act fairly in respect of him and had failed to  give
    him an opportunity to make a fresh application and that he was able  to
    meet the remainder of the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.   The
    judge concluded that the Appellant  had  not  submitted  the  necessary
    English language test certificates with the  original  application  and
    had not addressed these issues in any detail in a statement or  in  the
    skeleton argument.  In these circumstances the judge concluded that  he
    was not persuaded on the evidence that the Respondent had failed to act
    fairly and rationally and have regard to her own policy [29].

 7. It is contended in the Grounds of Appeal that the judge made  an  error
    in an approach to this issue.  It is contended that the judge failed to
    follow the  guidance  in  Patel.   It  is  asserted  that  it  is  well
    established that where a Sponsor's licence is lost during the  pendency
    of  an  application  the  applicant  should  be  given  "a   reasonable
    opportunity to find a new Sponsor".  It is contended that in this  case
    given that the refusal under paragraph 322(1A) was not upheld  the  one
    remaining ground on which his application was refused was in connection
    with the sponsoring college's lost licence and therefore the  Appellant
    plainly stood to benefit from a grant of 60 days  leave  to  remain  in
    accordance with the guidance  in  Patel.   It  is  contended  that  the
    judge's reasoning in relation  to  the  failure  of  the  Appellant  to
    produce the English language test certificate was deeply flawed as this
    was not a Ground  for  Refusal  that  was  maintained  in  the  refusal
    decision of 5th November 2015 (the decision the subject of the appeal).
     In any event it is contended that page 2 of the  Reasons  for  Refusal
    letter makes reference to the English  language  certificates.   It  is
    submitted that the judge had committed a procedural error in dismissing
    the Appellant's appeal on grounds that were not  included  in  the  5th
    November 2015 refusal letter  without  first  giving  the  Appellant  a
    chance to address these.

 8. I accept that at page 2 of  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  letter  of  5th
    November 2015 it is clear that the Secretary of State had  the  English
    language  certificates  before  her  when  assessing  the   Appellant's
    application. Therefore I do not think that this issue  is  relevant  to
    the determination of this appeal.  In any event I do not consider  that
    this is a material error.

 9. The primary reason for the dismissal of the Appellant's  appeal  is  in
    relation to the failure to produce a valid CAS.  The  refusal  on  that
    ground is set out at page 4 of the Reasons for Refusal letter and dealt
    with by the judge at paragraphs 27 and 28.  The issue raised  in  Patel
    is whether the Appellant has an opportunity  to  address  issues  which
    could lead to refusal.  It is clear that this ground applies where  the
    only ground for refusal is the lack of validity of the  CAS.   This  is
    because an Appellant could be notified for the first time in a  Reasons
    for Refusal letter that their college is no longer on the register.  In
    this case this was not the only reason  for  the  refusal  in  November
    2015.

10. At paragraph 27 the judge referred to the fact that by June 2015  there
    was no longer a  valid  CAS,  however  it  appears  that  that  was  in
    connection with the failure to produce the English language  test.  The
    Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal are correct in their  assertion
    that by the time of the decision on 5th November 2015 that  appears  to
    have no longer been an issue, the issue instead being that the  Tier  4
    Sponsor was no longer listed on the register.

11. In any event in my view this issue is resolved by the fact that in  the
    Reasons for Refusal letter the Secretary of State gave  another  reason
    for refusal, the allegation  of  deception.  Therefore  throughout  the
    appeal process, whilst  the  allegation  of  deception  was  live,  the
    Appellant was aware that the issue of the Tier 4 Sponsor  was  also  an
    issue and therefore had the opportunity to obtain a further CAS.

12. As the CAS issue was not the only basis for the refusal  there  was  no
    requirement under Patel and the Tier 4 policy to give the Appellant  60
    days in order to apply  for  a  further  CAS.   Therefore  the  judge's
    conclusion was the Appellant had an opportunity to obtain a further CAS
    throughout the period in which this appeal was being pursued. In  these
    circumstances the judge concluded that the Appellant did not require an
    extension by 60 days in order to obtain a fresh CAS [27-28].

13. In these circumstances it was open to the judge to conclude as  he  did
    that the Appellant had not demonstrated that the Respondent did not act
    fairly in respect of him and did not give  an  opportunity  to  make  a
    fresh application.

14. Accordingly it is my view that the judge reached a decision open to him
    on the evidence.  It was open  to  the  judge  to  conclude  that  this
    Appellant did not require an extra 60  days  in  accordance  with  Home
    Office policy so that a fresh CAS could be submitted. I find that there
    is no material error in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 27th November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
