
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34111/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 September 2017                         |On 09 October 2017            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                             Mrs Magull Oryakhil
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Lay, Counsel instructed by Abbott Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fox
    promulgated on 27  January  2017.   The  appellant  is  a  national  of
    Afghanistan. She was born on 9 August 1944 and the  subject  matter  of
    this appeal is a decision of the respondent made on 30 October 2015  to
    refuse her further leave to remain.

2.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal runs to some 57 paragraphs  and
    opens with a recitation of the burden and standard of proof in relation
    to the issues to be decided.  The judge  summarises  the  decision  and
    proceedings, covers the evidence which was received and then summarises
    the parties' submissions. The appellant  was  presented  by  Dr  A  Van
    Dellen of Counsel and Mr J Henry appeared as the Home Office Presenting
    Officer.

3.   The findings of the First-tier Tribunal appear  at  paragraphs  31  and
    following. Those in relation to medical  treatment  and  medical  needs
    record in clear terms the apparent dissonance between what was reported
    in a medical report of a Dr Wasu and  what  was  said  in  evidence  by
    relatives of the appellant.  The judge indicates in paragraph  37  that
    it is  reasonable  to  conclude  that  the  sponsor  has  attempted  to
    embellish the appellant's circumstances to bolster the appeal.

4.   The judge at paragraph 45 turns to consider a letter that  was  put  in
    evidence which derives from a grandchild of the appellant with whom she
    was not residing.  The judge says this:

     "The appellant's family must manage the expectation of  their  children
         and it is a private parental matter to address  any  disappointment
         that may flow from an unmeritorious application for  further  leave
         to remain."

5.   At paragraph 47 the judge states:-

      "For  all  the  reasons  stated  there  is  no  reliable  evidence  to
         demonstrate significant obstacles to the appellant's  reintegration
         in Afghanistan.   The  available  evidence  demonstrates  that  the
         appellant has sought to contrive the appearance  of  infirmity  and
         illness as a barrier to her departure  from  the  UK.   The  appeal
         fails in accordance with the Immigration Rules."

6.   The judge then deals with a consideration of the appellant's Article  8
    rights outside those Rules stating, among other  things,  at  paragraph
    49:-

     "I do not accept  that  the  appellant  has  demonstrated  family  life
         beyond normal  emotional  ties  with  adult  family  members.   The
         appellant initially represented herself as a visitor  upon  arrival
         to the UK.  It was subsequently revealed  that  the  appellant  was
         resident in the US, not Afghanistan, before her arrival in the UK."

7.   At paragraph 51:

         "It is unsustainable to assert that mere age leads to a  conclusion
         of infirmity or incapacitation.  The evidence  relied  upon  cannot
         assist  the  appellant  for  the  reasons  stated  above.   By  the
         sponsor's  own  evidence  the  appellant   has   family   ties   to
         Afghanistan.  For the reasons stated above I do not accept the self-
         serving evidence that those ties are tenuous or unreliable."

8.   At paragraph 52:

     "If I am wrong to find that no family  life  exists,  any  interference
         with Article 8 ECHR is proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued;
         economic well-being of the country  often  expressed  as  effective
         immigration control."

9.   Then paragraphs 56 and 57:

     "[56]    Taking  the  report  at  its  highest  it  recommends  medical
         treatment for a period of 6 to  8  months.   It  is  reasonable  to
         conclude that an  application  for  leave  to  remain  for  private
         medical treatment may be an appropriate remedy.  However there  are
         no exceptional circumstances to warrant  reliance  upon  Article  8
         ECHR outside the Immigration Rules.
         [57] For completeness I consider the  representations  relating  to
         the sponsor's  brother  which  were  raised  but  not  pursued.  No
         reliable evidence was provided within  the  appellant's  bundle  to
         demonstrate a  meaningful  nexus  between  the  appellant  and  the
         sponsor's brother. When the appellant's claim  of  dependence  upon
         the sponsor is considered it is difficult to  see  how  this  issue
         could succeed."

10.  The grounds of appeal as submitted were settled by  Counsel  who  acted
    in the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr  Lay,  who  appears  before  me  today,
    accepts that they are somewhat lengthy and  discursive  and  he  sought
    very helpfully to put together a skeleton  argument  which  provides  a
    clearer focus and the basis for his oral submissions to me.  The thrust
    of the grounds as originally turned upon the relevant  Rule  concerning
    adult dependent relatives (paragraphs E-ECDR.2.4) and the  decision  in
    Britcits [2016] EWHC 956 (Admin) where an appeal to the Court of Appeal
    was pending.

11.  In granting permission to appeal First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Macdonald
    stated:

         "it is difficult to follow paragraphs 35  and  36  of  the  judge's
         decision, even when reading Dr  Wasu's  report.   It  is  therefore
         arguable the judge erred in saying that he was unable to rely  upon
         Dr Wasu as an independent, reliable witness and that permission  to
         appeal was granted on all grounds except the ground that the  judge
         should have stayed the appeal."

12.  The particular criticisms of paragraphs 35 and 36 were not  pursued  by
    Mr Lay this morning  and  I  think  that  was  a  correct  exercise  of
    judgment.  Those paragraphs may not perhaps be worded  as  felicitously
    as they ought, but they are clear and reading the decision holistically
    there can be no criticism of the judge in the way that  he  dealt  with
    his factual findings in relation to genuine and exaggerated symptoms.

13.  What is said by Mr Lay in his refined submissions  is  that  the  judge
    fell into error in not considering this matter properly under Article 8
    outside the Rules. In particular criticism is made for not striking the
    proper balance as to whether there would be very significant  obstacles
    to the appellant settling back in Afghanistan on return.

14.  Though ably argued, I can see no merit in this ground of  appeal.   The
    matter was clearly considered by the judge and his conclusions,  though
    briefly expressed, are more than sufficient to be  dispositive  of  the
    appeal.  I have already recited the relevant passages from  the  First-
    tier judgment.

15.  Mr Lay makes further criticism that the  proportionality  exercise  was
    flawed by the judge giving no or insufficient  regard  to  the  British
    grandchild resident with the appellant and in relation to whom he  says
    that a family life existed and will continue to exist. Mr Lay  concedes
    that it is not clear precisely how this case was run before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

16.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge dealt with the consideration  of  private
    life and family life briefly but adequately. There was nothing wrong in
    the judge concluding as  he  did  that:  "I  do  not  accept  that  the
    appellant has demonstrated family life  beyond  normal  emotional  ties
    with adult family members".  The burden of proof is such  that  he  who
    asserts must prove. If the  appellant  has  failed  to  put  sufficient
    material before the First-tier Tribunal to demonstrate a broader, wider
    or substantive family life, that is not a matter which,  without  more,
    can be reopened and rectified on appeal.

17.   In  any  event  at  paragraph  52  the  judge  proceeds  to   make   a
    proportionality exercise in the alternative on the basis  that  he  was
    wrong in finding that no family life existed.  I fully accept, as  does
    Mr Nath who acts for the Secretary of State, that this matter is  dealt
    with shortly, but in the context of his earlier  fact-finding  exercise
    it is more than plain which factors are laid in  the  balance  for  the
    proportionality exercise and why the judge came to the clear conclusion
    which he did.

18.  In the circumstances,  having  considered  the  grounds  as  originally
    drafted and as recast in the skeleton argument in oral argument,  I  am
    satisfied that there is no any error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal
    decision and in those circumstances this appeal must be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 1) The appeal is dismissed and the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    affirmed.


 2) No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     9 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

