
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
IA/34056/2015

                                                      IA/34058/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 September 2017                           |On 25 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and

                                 NIDA SHAHID
                           MUHAMMAD SHAHID RASHID
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                 Respondents
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr S Akhtar, instructed by S Z Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS



1. The first respondent ("the claimant") is a citizen of Pakistan born on
   16 September 1983. The second respondent is her husband and dependent.


2. The claimant entered the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student on 23 June
   2011 with leave until 30 August 2012.


3. On 30 August 2012 she applied for leave to remain as a Tier 1
   (Entrepreneur) Migrant. In support of her application, the claimant
   submitted, inter alia, a certificate of completion of the test for
   English for international communication ("TOEIC"). The TOEIC certificate
   was provided by an entity called Education Testing Service ("ETS"), which
   conducted the test.


4. The Secretary of State rejected the claimant's application for leave to
   remain on the basis that there was significant evidence that her TOEIC
   certificate was fraudulently obtained by the use of a proxy test taker
   and consequently ETS had declared the test she had taken to be "invalid".




5. The claimant maintained that she had taken the test herself and appealed
   to the First-tier Tribunal where her appeal was heard by Judge Buckwell.
   In a decision promulgated on 9 January 2017 the judge allowed the appeal.




6. Before Judge Buckwell, in order to establish that the claimant had acted
   fraudulently through the use of a proxy test taker, the Secretary of
   State relied upon evidence that has been used in numerous similar cases
   where it has been alleged that a test conducted by ETS was invalid
   because a proxy test taker was used ("the generic evidence"). The generic
   evidence included statements of Mr Millington and Ms Collings (both civil
   servants) concerning the processes by which fraudulent conduct has been
   detected at ETS test centres and a report from Professor French on the
   methodology used by ETS to detect fraudulent activity. In addition, the
   Secretary of State submitted a print out from a spreadsheet (known as the
   "look up tool") showing that the claimant's test had been categorised by
   ETS as invalid.

7. Judge Buckwell found (at paragraph 28) that:

         "Whilst data has been provided with respect to the particular test
         taken by the [claimant] or in her name there is no specific
         statement which in my view relates in sufficient detail to the
         serious allegations made by the [Secretary of State] against the
         [claimant]. I find the generic evidence to be insufficient to
         discharge the [Secretary of State]'s burden."


8. The Secretary of State appealed the decision of Judge Buckwell. The
   grounds of appeal argue that the judge failed to adopt the correct
   approach in respect of the burden of proof by finding that the evidence
   of the Secretary of State was insufficient to discharge her initial
   burden thereby shifting the evidential burden onto the claimant to show
   an innocent explanation.


9. Before me, Mr Tufan observed that the approach to the burden of proof in
   cases where the Secretary of State alleges a proxy test taker was used is
   well established, as set out in SM & Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167. He
   argued that the judge erred because that approach was not followed.


10. Mr Akhtar argued that because the Secretary of State's evidence did not
   deal specifically with the claimant it was deficient. He also maintained
   that the Secretary of State's representative failed to cross examine the
   claimant at the First-tier Tribunal hearing and if she objected to the
   claimant's evidence she should have done so.


Error of Law


11. The burden and standard of proof, where it is alleged that an ETS test
   is invalid, was discussed in SM and Qadir v SSHD (ETS-Evidence-Burden of
   Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229), and is as follows:

12. The legal burden of proving that the test taker used deception lies on
   the Secretary of State albeit that there is a three stage process.

    a) Firstly, the Secretary of State must adduce sufficient evidence to
       raise the issue of fraud.


    b) Secondly, the test taker then has a burden of raising an innocent
       explanation which satisfies the minimum level of plausibility.


    c) Thirdly, if that burden is discharged, the Secretary of State must
       establish on a balance of probabilities that this innocent
       explanation is to be rejected.


13. There is one civil standard of proof (which is the standard to be
   applied). The seriousness of the consequences does not require a
   different standard of proof but flexibility in its application will
   involve consideration of the strength and quality of the evidence. The
   more serious the consequence, the stronger must be the evidence adduced
   for the necessary standard to be reached.


14. In SSHD v Shehzad [2016] EWCA Civ 615 the Court of Appeal concluded
   that the "generic evidence" (comprising in that case of the same
   statements of Ms Collings and Mr Millington submitted in this appeal)
   together with the evidence that the test of individual in question has
   been assessed as "invalid", was sufficient for the Secretary of State to
   meet the initial evidential burden (the first of the three stages)
   thereby shifting the evidential burden onto the test taker to raise an
   innocent explanation (the second of the three stages).  At paragraph 26
   the Court of Appeal in Shehzad concluded that "the in limine rejection of
   the Secretary of State's evidence as even sufficient to shift the
   evidential burden was an error of law".


15. In this case, the Secretary of State submitted the statements of Ms
   Collings and Mr Millington (the generic evidence evaluated in Shehzad)
   along with evidence showing the claimant's test had been assessed by ETS
   as invalid. In addition, the Secretary of State submitted a report by
   Professor French dated 20 April 2016, giving opinion evidence on ETS's
   methodology for detecting fraud.


16. Professor French's expertise was not questioned before the First-tier
   Tribunal and it is noted that the High Court in Gaogalalwe [2017] EWHC
   1709 (Admin), considering the same report, described Professor French as
   a "singularly well qualified expert". Professor French's conclusion was
   that ETS's error rate in identifying fraud was very low.

17. Having regard to Shehzad, as well as subsequent cases such as
   Gaogalalwe, it is clear that the evidence submitted in this appeal by the
   Secretary of State was sufficient to meet the initial evidential burden,
   thereby shifting the burden to the claimant to raise an innocent
   explanation.


18. In finding that the Secretary of State had not satisfied the initial
   evidential burden the First-tier Tribunal has made a material error of
   law.


Remade Decision

19. After delivering my decision to set aside the decision of the First-
   tier Tribunal I invited Mr Akhatar to present the claimant's case for the
   remaking of the decision. Noting the brevity of the claimant's witness
   statement and that it did not cover material that might be expected where
   a party is seeking to establish an innocent explanation, I invited Mr
   Akhtar to pose questions to her in order to elicit information that may
   raise an innocent explanation. He declined to do so, and proposed that Mr
   Tufan should cross examine the claimant.


20. Mr Tufan asked the claimant a range of questions about when and where
   the test was taken. The claimant gave short answers that identified the
   name of the test centre and when the test was taken, without giving any
   elaboration or wider explanation. She explicitly denied that she cheated
   and stated that because of her English language ability at the time the
   test was taken it was easy for her to take the test. Other than the
   assertion that she spoke good English at the time of the test, she did
   not put forward any other explanation, despite being encouraged (and
   given every opportunity) to do so by Mr Tufan.

21. I posed a few questions to the claimant including how she paid for the
   test (to which she responded that she paid in cash) and how she travelled
   to the test centre (to which she said that her husband drove her).


22. I asked Mr Akhtar, again, if he wished to ask the claimant any
   questions. He declined to do so.


23. Mr Akhtar handed me a document on headed note paper from "Stratford
   College of Management" dated 15 May 2012. The document states that the
   claimant has completed a NQF level 7 Post Graduate Diploma in Business
   Administration where her attendance was satisfactory. The document does
   not state if the course was passed, or what grade was obtained. It merely
   states that course was completed and attendance was satisfactory.
   Although the document states the course has been completed it also gives
   a completion date of 23 August 2012, which is over three months after the
   date of the letter.

24. Mr Akhtar submitted that the claimant is an innocent victim and the
   evidence shows she took the test herself.


25. Mr Tufan submitted that the only innocent explanation the claimant has
   put forward is that she currently speaks good English (which is not
   disputed), and that at the time of the test she spoke sufficiently good
   English to not need to engage a proxy test taker. He argued, firstly,
   that the case law makes clear that ability in English is not an answer to
   the accusation of fraud given there could be a range of other reasons to
   cheat on the test.  Secondly, he argued that the evidence before me did
   not in any event establish that in 2012 the claimant's English was strong
   enough to easily have passed the test. The only evidence was the document
   from Strafford College of Management which told us nothing about the
   claimant's English ability in 2012.


26. For the reasons explained in the error of law decision above, the
   Secretary of State, through the evidence of Mr Millington, Ms Collings
   and Professor French taken together with the categorisation of the
   claimant's test as "invalid", has satisfied the initial evidential
   burden, thereby shifting the evidential burden onto the claimant.


27. The claimant maintains that she satisfies the evidential burden of
   showing a plausible innocent explanation because at the time she took the
   test she was taking a management course in the UK and received a diploma
   from the college confirming she completed the course and her attendance
   was satisfactory. She also relies on the fact that she currently speaks
   English at a good level.


28. The claimant's current level of English is irrelevant. Approximately
   five years have elapsed since the test in question was taken, during
   which time the claimant has been living in the UK. It is not possible to
   infer anything about the claimant's ability in English in 2012 from her
   ability in 2017.


29. The document from Stratford College of Management is weak evidence to
   support the contention that the claimant did not use fraud to obtain her
   test. Despite being encouraged to do so by Mr Tufan (and Mr Akhtar being
   given every opportunity to pose questions to her) the claimant did not
   give any detail or elaboration about the course she took, the level of
   English it required of her, how well she did in it, or any other
   information that would indicate the level of English the course required
   in order for her to complete it.

30. Nor did the claimant, either in her written statement or orally before
   me, give an account that would point to there being an innocent
   explanation. She did not, for example, elaborate on the factors noted at
   paragraph 69 of SM and Qadir, such as what she had to gain from being
   dishonest, what she had to lose, her character, the cultural environment
   in which she operated, and whether her academic scores make it illogical
   or unnecessary to cheat.


31. Although the evidential burden on the claimant to establish an innocent
   explanation is low - she need only show the minimal level of plausibility
   - I am not satisfied that she has met the burden, as the claimant's
   innocent explanation amounts to no more than an assertion that because of
   her present ability in English (five years after the test) and that she
   undertook and completed a management course in 2012 she had no motive to
   cheat.

32. If I am wrong, and the evidential burden to show an innocent
   explanation has been met, I find in the alternative that Secretary of
   State has discharged the legal burden. Balancing the evidence of the
   Secretary of State (including in particular the expert report of
   Professor French which was not challenged before me) which points to a
   conclusion that the claimant's test was taken by a proxy test taker,
   against the weak evidence of the claimant to show she did not need to
   cheat, I am satisfied that the Secretary of State has discharged the
   legal burden of proof.


Decision


33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of
   law and is set aside.


34. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeals of the First and Second
   Respondents against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 2
   November 2015.




|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated:  17 September 2017            |













