
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/34491/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 6 May 2015                        |On 12 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                             ISAAC JAMES AKESSEH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Afzhal for IIAS
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Appellant, a national of Ghana was  born  on  4  August  1977.  The
    Appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State dated
    13 August 2014 to refuse to grant an application for a  residence  card
    as a confirmation of his right to reside in the  United  Kingdom  under
    the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pickup  dismissed  the  appeal  and  the  Appellant  now  appeals  with
    permission to this Tribunal.

 3. Permission was granted on 2 February 2015 by Designated  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  Macdonald  on  the  basis  that  that  the  Judges
    findings were 'inconclusive' in relation to  whether  the  sponsor  was
    working at the date of the hearing.

 4. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant sought a  residence
    card on 27 September 2011  which  was  granted.  On  23  May  2013  the
    Appellant was encountered entering the United  Kingdom  via  Manchester
    Airport and refused admission under EEA Regulations. On  16  July  2013
    the Appellant applied for a residence card and on 13  August  2014  the
    application was refused and the previous residence card was revoked.

 5. The Respondent  refused  the  application  because  the  Appellant  had
    claimed that the EEA family member was employed and produced wage slips
    from January to April 2014. On 13 august the Respondent telephoned  the
    claimed employer and he confirmed that the sponsor no longer worked for
    the company. The application was therefore refused on  the  basis  that
    the Appellant had not met the evidential burden  of  establishing  that
    his sponsor was a worker for the purpose of Regulation 6.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dealt with the case on the papers and had
    before him a bundle of documents under cover of a letter from the legal
    representatives dated 12 November 2014 which  consisted  of  a  witness
    statement (pages 1-4) and all of  the  remaining  evidence  related  to
    medical evidence.  The  Judge  also  had  the  Respondent's  bundle  of
    documents on which the Respondent's decision was based.

 7. The Judge made the following findings:

      a) The Appellant claimed in the grounds of appeal that his wife worked
         for CSS on 16.5.2014 but was now working for Bennett  Staff  Bureau
         and  Breanheath  Ltd.  The  Judge  found  there  was  therefore  no
         explanation as to why the application for the residence  card  made
         in July 2014 stated that the sponsor worked for CSS  when  she  had
         left that employment 2 months previously.

      b) The Judge found that there was an inconsistency between the P45 for
         CSS and the wage slips submitted.

      c) The Judge found that there was no evidence of the claimed salary in
         the bank statements produced in that they only showed  one  payment
         that might have been from employment but it was  inconsistent  with
         the salary claimed for the matching period.

      d)  There was no evidence  that  the  sponsor  worked  for  Breanheath
         beyond June 2014.

      e) Only one payslip was produced for Bennett  Staff  Bureau  and  that
         dated to 24.1.2014 and it was not supported by bank statements.

      f) The Appellant and sponsor appeared to be in financial difficulties.

      g) He took into account relevant caselaw in  determining  whether  the
         sponsor  was  pursuing  'effective  and  genuine   activities'   in
         determining whether the sponsor was employed.

      h) He found that there was little evidence of genuine  employment  and
         it was unclear what period that covered.

      i) At the time of the application  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
         sponsor worked for the Employer stated in the application.

      j) Only  after  refusal  did  the  Appellant  submit  other  'entirely
         unsatisfactory ' evidence of employment and he continued 'Even then
         there is only 1 wage slip covering the  period  of  June  2014  and
         nothing to show that the sponsor is currently employed in any shape
         or form.'

 8. At the hearing before me Mr Afzhal sought to argue  that  the  evidence
    contained in the bundle of 30 April 2015 showed that  the  sponsor  was
    working. I pointed out to Mr Afzhal  that this evidence was not  before
    Judge Pickup and Mr Afzhal conceded that this was correct and that  had
    been a mistake.

 9. Ms Johnstone submitted  that  the  Judge  had  considered  all  of  the
    evidence that was before him and was clearly  not  satisfied  that  the
    sponsor was working at the time of the decision. The finding  was  open
    to him. The new evidence relied on by Mr Afzhal should form  the  basis
    of a new application.

Error of Law

10. The Appellant appealed against  a  refusal  of  an  application  for  a
    residence card , an application based on the claim that the Appellant's
    Dutch spouse had been and continued to exercise treaty  rights  in  the
    United Kingdom as a worker.

11. The application which was dated 15 July 2014 was based on the assertion
    that the Appellant's spouse was working for a company called  CSS.  The
    Judge found at paragraph 15 that this was incorrect as the sponsor  had
    left that employment in May 2014 two months before the application  and
    also found that the evidence of the claimed  income  was  inconsistent.
    These were findings open to him on the evidence before him.

12. In the appeal the Appellant stated that his  wife  worked  for  Bennett
    Staff bureau and Breanheath. The Judge examined the  evidence  of  this
    other employment in detail at paragraphs 17 and 18 and identified  that
    in essence there was little evidence to support the claimed receipt  of
    any income. These were findings open to him

13. The Judge made findings that the  Appellant  and  his  spouse  were  in
    financial difficulties which the grounds  suggest  were  irrelevant.  I
    reject that argument: given that the Judge's findings were that neither
    the Appellant  nor  his  wife  were  in  employment  their  financially
    precarious state provided some support for that view.

14. The Judge concluded at paragraph 22 that there was nothing to show that
    the sponsor was at the time of the decision, the relevant date for  his
    decision, employed 'in any shape or form.' I struggle to find  anything
    inconclusive about his finding.  The  Judge  could  not  have  made  it
    clearer that the  Appellant  had  not  met  the  evidential  burden  of
    establishing that his wife was working at the time of the decision. The
    evidence relied on by Mr Afzhal today was not before Judge  Pickup  and
    may for the basis of another application.

15. I find that the reasons given were more than adequate and the Appellant
    cannot be in any doubt about why the appeal was dismissed.

CONCLUSION

16. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

17. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date 6.5.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
