
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34050/ 2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th February 2014                           |On 19th February 2014      |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                              MR BEKZOD ABIDOV
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not Present or Represented
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Batiste)  by  which,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 18th December 2013, he dismissed the Appellant's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse to issue him with a
    residence card as the family member of an EEA national.

 2. The  First-tier  Tribunal  determined  the  case  on  the  papers,  the
    Appellant having paid the fee for  and  opted  for  an  appeal  on  the
    papers. The Judge in paragraph 1 referred to the decision as being made
    under Regulation 17 of the EEA regulations and at paragraph 2  referred
    to Regulation 15 of the EEA regulations. At paragraph 4 the Judge noted
    that the Secretary of State was not satisfied that  the  Appellant  was
    the family member of an EEA national   as  claimed  and  the  id   card
    purporting to be that of the Sponsor and submitted with the application
    had been reported  lost  or  stolen  and  was  therefore  not  reliable
    evidence.

 3. The Judge referred to having before him bundles provided by both sides.
    At paragraph 6 he made findings with regard  to  the  purported  stolen
    identity card. He noted that it was suggested that  the  identity  card
    relied upon to establish  the  nationality  of  the  Sponsor  had  been
    reported lost or stolen and he noted that that was not disputed by  the
    Appellant. He noted that  it  was  claimed  in  the  Sponsor's  witness
    statement that she had sent that document in with the  claim  but  then
    because she had needed urgent travel documents  to  go  Lithuania,  she
    approached the Lithuanian Embassy for a replacement and  was  told  the
    only way to obtain one was to cancel the existing one which she did.

 4. The judge considered that explanation and remarked that he did not have
    the benefit of hearing live evidence from the Sponsor or the Appellant.
    He had no explanation as to why a document reported to be  missing  was
    nevertheless able to be submitted with the application. He  noted  that
    the Sponsor would have had a passport to enable her travel  to  the  UK
    and  therefore  should  have   been   able   to   provide   alternative
    identification   even   if   an   identification    card    had    been
    cancelled/lost/stolen. The Judge indicated on the basis of the evidence
    before him that he could not be satisfied as to the authenticity of the
    account given  the  serious  matters  raised  and  thus  could  not  be
    satisfied that the Appellant was in truth the family member (spouse) of
    an EEA national as claimed.  The  Judge  also  noted  at  paragraph  9,
    although he indicated it was not determinative of the appeal that there
    was very little evidence to support the suggestion that the Sponsor and
    Appellant were in an existing relationship or how long  they  had  been
    so.

 5. Lastly, the judge noted that an argument in relation to Article  8  had
    been raised but also noted that the  decision  to  refuse  to  issue  a
    residence card did not give rise to any interference with Article 8 and
    should a decision be made at some point to remove  the  Appellant  from
    the UK, Article 8 could then be argued.  It is also the case  that  the
    Appellant had made no Human Rights claim, a necessary  prerequisite  to
    arguing it on appeal from within the UK.

 6. In seeking permission to appeal the Appellant's representatives  argued
    that the Judge had erred by  applying  Regulation  15  (the  Regulation
    dealing with permanent residence)  as  opposed  to  Regulation  7  (the
    Regulation dealing with the issue of a residence card). It was asserted
    that the Judge applied the wrong standard of proof namely a balance  of
    probabilities and that he  had  given  weight  to  immaterial  matters,
    namely the relationship between the Appellant and Sponsor which had not
    been put into question. It was also argued  in  the  grounds  that  the
    Appellant's Article 8 rights had not been properly assessed.

 7. Granting permission to appeal, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  agreed
    that it was arguable that the Judge erred in addressing  Regulation  15
    as opposed to Regulation 7 and that it was also arguable that the Judge
    erred in putting into question the relationship between the Sponsor and
    Appellant and in failing to deal with Article 8.

 8. The Appellant and Sponsor chose not to have an oral hearing.  They were
    represented and presumably therefore advised. They chose not to  attend
    or be represented at the hearing before me either.  I did have  written
    submissions from the representatives. However, those submissions amount
    to  no  more  than  a  restatement  of  the  initial  grounds   relying
    particularly on the  Judge's  looking  at  Regulation  15  rather  than
    Regulation 7.

 9. The major reason for this application being refused by the Secretary of
    State and the appeal being dismissed by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    was the fact that an identity document  purporting  to  belong  to  the
    Sponsor and submitted with the application had been reported to be lost
    or stolen. That is the major reason for the refusal  and  therefore  in
    that regard it matters not which regulation of the EEA  Regulations  is
    being considered. The judge  was  entitled,  in  the  absence  of  oral
    evidence to find that there was no credible explanation for the use  of
    that document. In particular, if the Sponsor had to cancel her identity
    document in order to obtain another then she would not have had the one
    reported lost or stolen to submit. Furthermore, it  is  said  that  the
    Sponsor cancelled the identity document; which is not the  same  as  it
    being reported lost or stolen.

10. On the highly unsatisfactory and limited evidence before the Judge  the
    outcome of the Appellant's appeal was inevitable. On the basis  of  the
    Judge's findings in relation to the use of a lost or stolen id card and
    in the absence of evidence of any real relationship, I cannot find that
    the judge erred in failing to deal with Article 8. In any event, as the
    Judge indicated, refusal to issue a residence card cannot  represent  a
    breach of Article 8.

11. The burden of proof reset with an Appellant to show that he  meets  the
    requirements of the EEA Regulations and in this case he  had  not  done
    so.

12. The Judge in this case reached the  only  conclusion  possible  on  the
    basis of the very limited evidence. There is no error of  law  material
    to the outcome and the  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  therefore
    dismissed.



Signed                              Date 17th February 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

