
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34321/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 10th April 2017                  |On 12th May 2017                      |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                    [B A]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Furner, instructed by Birnberg Peirce &
Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 26th February 1980.   His
    appeal against a refusal  to  vary  leave  was  allowed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Abebrese on Article 8 grounds on 23rd May 2016.


2.   The Appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal  was  argued  under
    Article 3 on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant's  mental  health  would
    deteriorate upon return, leaving him at an increased risk  of  suicide,
    and applying J v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA
    Civ 629, the appeal should be  allowed.  Alternatively,  on  return  to
    Nigeria it was reasonably likely the Appellant would require compulsory
    admission and treatment. This treatment would  breach  Article  3.  The
    judge accepted that the Appellant  was  suffering  from  a  severe  and
    enduring mental illness and that he would be at high risk of relapse.

3.   The Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  the  Article  3
    findings only, asserting that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  by


         (1)  identifying the incorrect legal test;
         (2)  applying that incorrect test to the facts of this  case  in  a
             way which materially affected the outcome;
         (3)  specifically the First-tier Tribunal failed to  determine  the
             arguments made to it that removal would breach  Article  3  of
             the  European  Convention  of  Human  Rights  because  of  the
             heightened risk of suicide and because of  the  conditions  of
             return, neither of which mandated the D test.

4.    Permission  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Page,   on
    30th September 2016, on the grounds that it was arguable the judge had
    materially erred in law in his consideration of the Appellant's medical
    condition under Article 3. It was arguable that the  judge  applied  an
    exceptionality threshold, he did not properly apply the  relevant  case
    law and he failed to take into account the six factors set out in  J  v
    SSHD.

5.   In her Rule 24 response, dated 27th October 2016,  the  Respondent  did
    not oppose the Appellant's application for  permission  to  appeal  and
    invited the Tribunal to determine the appeal and consider  whether  the
    Appellant succeeded under Article 3.  The Secretary of  State  intended
    to argue at the remaking of the appeal that the Article 3 element still
    ought to be dismissed.

6.   The matter came before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Peart  on  14th
    November 2016. He found that the judge had erred in law for the reasons
    given by the Appellant and agreed by the  Respondent.  The  matter  was
    listed for an oral hearing in order to reassess Article 3. There was no
    challenge to the First-tier Tribunal judge's Article 8 findings or  his
    factual findings. Therefore the issue in this  appeal  is  whether  the
    Appellant would be at risk  of  Article  3  treatment  if  returned  to
    Nigeria today.


The hearing

7.   Mr Furner for the Appellant relied on five  bundles  of  documents.  A1
    and  A2  were  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and   contained   the
    Appellant's two witness statements. A1 contained a lot of  evidence  in
    relation to the Appellant's Article 8 claim, which is not  relevant  to
    this appeal. A2 contained medical evidence and background material.  A3
    comprised 152 pages and contained the expert evidence; three reports of
    Dr Bell and the  Appellant's  medical  records.  A4  was  a  bundle  of
    background material of 116 pages and A5 was an authorities bundle.

8.   Mr Furner relied on his skeleton argument dated  6th  April  2017,  the
    referenced chronology, which was before the First-tier Tribunal, and an
    Amnesty International Report dated 3rd April 2017.  The  Appellant  was
    called to give evidence confirming his name and address, and relying on
    his statements of 27th May 2015 and 11th March 2016 as his evidence-in-
    chief.

9.   In cross-examination, the Appellant  confirmed  that  he  was  fit  and
    well. He had been mentally  unwell  in  the  past  and  that  had  been
    treated. He was still under mental health care, but he had  moved  into
    the care of his GP with whom he had prime contact. He was feeling a lot
    better and was taking his medication regularly, two in the morning  and
    two at night. He had now stopped  taking  Prozac.  He  was  taking  his
    medication on his own and his GP had made  a  comment  on  how  he  was
    likely to progress; he would remain stable. That is what the  Appellant
    depended on now.

10.  The Appellant was asked to comment on the  Respondent's  view  that  he
    could return to Nigeria. He stated that he did not have  anyone  there.
    His father had died and his mother's family had not wanted her to marry
    his father and therefore she was left on her own, but she too  had  now
    died. There was treatment and  medical  care  in  Nigeria  but  it  was
    difficult to access. The Appellant stated that anyone behaving like him
    would end up on the streets. There was no such mental health  treatment
    in Nigeria. He was still seeing his partner and children in  Manchester
    and he had last seen them three weeks ago when he stayed for two weeks.


Submissions

11.  Mr Tarlow relied on the  refusal  letter  dated  7th  August  2013  and
    submitted that the Appellant had been unwell in the  past  but  he  had
    received treatment. Mr Tarlow referred me to Dr Bell's third  statement
    at page 34 of A3, paragraph 24:

         "[BA] continues to suffer from psychiatric disorder. Currently, his
         condition is reasonably stable  however  he  will  need  continuing
         careful  management  and  should  be  regularly  reviewed  by   the
         appropriate psychiatrist service, perhaps once every three  months.
         In between the psychiatric reviews he can continue to be managed by
         his general practitioner with whom you has a good relationship.  It
         needs to be understood that the core of good psychiatric management
         rests  on   the   establishment   of   secure   enduring   trusting
         relationships with the relevant medical personnel and the fact that
         this has been established here suggest that as long as this context
         is not disturbed he is likely [to] remain stable for  a  while  and
         also be able to alert the relevant personnel if he senses his state
         is deteriorating."


12.  Mr Tarlow also relied on paragraphs 10, 14, 17 and 22 in which Dr  Bell
    states:


         "10. The mental health team are no longer involved but he knows how
         to contact them in a crisis."


         "14. His appetite is good, he cooks rice and eggs for himself as he
         has little money but enjoys his food when he visits his family, his
         weight is steady."


         "17. [BA] was not obviously severely depressed or manic.  I  learnt
         however that he sometimes cries. These episodes are precipitated by
         his deep regret that he cannot provide support for his children. He
         wants to work and be  a  provider  for  his  family.  There  is  no
         evidence of suicidal ideation and he feels life is worth living. He
         believes that he will be able to remain in the UK in light  of  the
         outcome of the  most  recent  Tribunal  and  that  is  doubtless  a
         positive factor  which  tends  to  promote  the  stability  of  his
         condition and protect against deterioration."


         "22. [BA] remains a Christian and is  a  member  of  the  Christian
         Apostolic Church.  He only goes to church on Sundays and meets some
         acquaintances there.  He is not close  to  them  and  they  worship
         together.  He knows the pastor but not well.  He  believes  God  is
         helping him."


13.  I pointed out paragraph 25 to Mr Tarlow which states:


         "He is highly likely to suffer a  deterioration  in  his  condition
         from time to time as this is the natural course  of  the  disorder.
         The  most  important  factor  in  terms  of  predicting   breakdown
         deterioration  would  be  the  appearance  of  any  major  external
         stressor.  This  type  of  psychiatric  disorder  is  very   likely
         sensitive to such stresses. One of the most significant stresses in
         this regard would arise if there is any alteration or disruption to
         his current social context including any action to remove him  from
         the country."

14.  Mr Tarlow submitted that the Appellant's condition  was  cyclical;  the
    Appellant gets better and worse but his condition is treatable.  It  is
    clear from the earlier reports that he was less well then, than  he  is
    now. Mr Tarlow  submitted  that  treatment  is  available  in  Nigeria,
    although it may not be as easily accessible as in the UK. He relied  on
    GS and EO v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA  Civ
    40 and submitted that there was a very high threshold  in  relation  to
    Article 3 health  cases  and  this  had  still  not  been  met  by  the
    Appellant.

15.  Mr Furner submitted that there was a high  threshold  in  health  cases
    and in Article 3 suicide cases, which was apparent from the case of J v
    SSHD. However, there was a second argument, namely that on  return  the
    Appellant would be  subject  to  serious  harm.  The  threshold  was  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood: NO (Afghanistan) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 876.



16.  Mr Furner submitted that the Appellant was in a period of stability  at
    the  moment.  However,  the  referenced  chronology  showed  that   the
    Appellant  was  first  arrested  in  March  2010  and  detained   under
    immigration powers in April 2010. He was sectioned  in  June  2010  and
    transferred to hospital in July 2010. An entry in his  medical  records
    in October 2010 indicated that the Appellant's  case  was  one  of  the
    worst cases his treating clinician had ever  seen.  The  Appellant  was
    released on temporary admission on 20th October 2010 his condition  was
    stable on medication. He remained stable for some time.

17.  On 17th April 2014, the Appellant's condition was assessed  as  stable.
    However, on 30th April 2014 the Appellant was sectioned  for  a  second
    time. He was arrested by the police on 29th April 2014 after acting  in
    an extremely disturbed and unpredictable manner in the area outside his
    flat. He was  running  around  holding  a  cable  and  shouting  in  an
    aggressive manner. Care  records  confirmed  that  it  took  ten  staff
    members to administer tranquilisers  given  the  Appellant's  disturbed
    state. He became so agitated and starting punching the  walls  and  the
    door, stripped naked and urinated on the  floor  and  then  started  to
    smear the urine on the wall and on his back.  He was then committed for
    compulsory psychiatric inpatient treatment for a period of six months.

18.  Mr Furner submitted that there had  been  a  period  of  stability  for
    three and a half years after the first section, but within a period  of
    twelve days (17th to 29th April), because of the upcoming  appeal,  the
    Appellant had a breakdown with no warning. The Appellant was discharged
    on 4th September 2014 but was again sectioned on  27th September  2014
    when he was arrested after knocking on a neighbour's door while  naked.
    He was discharged on 20th November 2014 and thereafter his  appeal  was
    allowed. The chronology was important because it showed that it was not
    possible to infer that any period of stability would last.

19.  Mr Furner  referred  me  to  Dr  Bell's  first  report  in  A3  of  the
    Appellant's bundle, at paragraphs 46 and 47 which state:

         "46. When I saw [BA] in 2013 he also  appeared  reasonably  stable.
         However he showed clear features  of  disorder,  particularly  some
         disorganisation   of   his   thinking,   tangentiality   and   over
         expansiveness which are all typical of Bipolar Disorder in the more
         hypomanic phase (that is manic features which are not severe enough
         to warrant a diagnosis of full  blown  mania)  -  Bipolar  Disorder
         being the diagnosis at that time  given  to  him  by  his  treating
         clinicians.  He was receiving a regime of  psychotropic  medication
         which appeared to be keeping things reasonably stable.


         47. It is clear however from the more recent records that [BA]  has
         to be kept under psychiatric supervision and that  this  should  be
         kept  up  indefinitely  given  the  high  likelihood   of   relapse
         especially when he is under severe stress. It is  likely  that  the
         psychiatric services will make use of the facilities  of  Assertive
         Outreach and the home treatment team. Periods of apparent stability
         should not be confused with a condition which is in remission as is
         demonstrated in the records for [BA]. Periods of stability  can  be
         followed  quickly  and  without  warning  by  a   precipitate   and
         potentially life threatening episodes of psychosis. These are  most
         likely to be brought on by changes in his environment."


20.  Mr Furner relied on  Dr  Bell's  report,  at  paragraph  52,  that  the
    Appellant "is a  vulnerable  individual  who  will  be  susceptible  to
    relapses and such relapses are likely to be caused  by  major  external
    stresses. If he receives leave to remain  this  will  remove  a  potent
    stressor and is likely to be an important  factor  in  stabilising  his
    condition.  I consider however that he is likely to remain  vulnerable
    to relapse, even in the UK and without the threat of removal,  for  the
    rest of his life."

21.  The Appellant required involuntary admission on  several  occasions  in
    the past and is very  likely  to  require  this  again  in  the  future
    (paragraph 66) and at paragraph 67:


         "It is clear from the records I have seen and to a degree  from  my
         own observations of [BA] that he  can  present  in  an  objectively
         bizarre and aggressive fashion when he is seriously  unwell.  I  am
         concerned that his behaviour while unwell would be likely  to  draw
         hostile attention in an  environment  where  ignorance  and  stigma
         about mental illness  are  prevalent  and  certainly  if  [BA]  was
         confronted with hostility and stigma I would be concerned that this
         could trigger a further deterioration in his condition."

22.  Mr Furner then referred to the third report of Dr Bell at  page  31  of
    A3 at paragraph 25. He submitted that this encapsulated the  situation.
    This evidence established that the Appellant would  be  at  risk  of  a
    psychotic breakdown on return to Nigeria. This may not be immediate but
    was likely. The Appellant was likely to need involuntary treatment.  In
    fact, in Dr Bell's opinion, it was very likely this would be the  case.
    It was clear from the medical records how the Appellant behaves when he
    goes through one of these episodes. He is aggressive, loud, he goes out
    in public, takes off his clothes and spreads bodily fluids. He would be
    likely to come to the attention of the police in that state. When  this
    happens in the United Kingdom the Appellant is sectioned. The  question
    is what would happen if he returned to Nigeria.

23.  Mr Furner referred to page 37 of  bundle  A4,  the  Country  Report  on
    Human Rights Practices for 2016,  United  States  Department  of  State
    which states: "Mental healthcare  services  were  almost  non-existent.
    Officials at the small number of  prisons  used  private  donations  to
    provide separate mental health facilities  for  prisoners  with  mental
    disabilities. All prisoners with disabilities stayed with  the  general
    inmate   population   and   received   no   specialized   services   or
    accommodations."




24.  Mr Furner referred to the Lunacy Act  1958  which  was  in  effect  the
    applicable Mental Health Act  in  Nigeria.  A  report  entitled  Mental
    Health Legislation and Involuntary  Commitment  in  Nigeria,  Call  for
    Reform  by  Andrew  Hudson  Westbrook  published  in   the   Washington
    University Global Studies Law Review, volume 10, issue 2 (at page 78 of
    A4) states:

         "Many families that find their relatives' mental health issues  too
         difficult  or  expensive  to  handle  at  home  simply   pass   the
         responsibility to the prisons creating a class of persons known  as
         civil lunatics. Instead of  obtaining  treatment  at  hospitals  or
         mental health institutions  these  civil  lunatics  are  jailed  in
         asylums  within  prisons  generally  receiving  no  treatment.  The
         current law in Nigeria allows any building to house an  asylum  and
         contains no requirement for treatment of inmates."

25.  Mr Furner relied on the Amnesty International Report, 3rd  April  2017,
    and submitted that the conditions in asylum facilities  were  appalling
    and the examples given in the report showed that  civil  lunatics  were
    chained to the railings and left. There were no human rights monitoring
    and no appeal provisions. The Lunacy Act did not limit the duration  of
    detention when the full  procedural  process  is  followed.  Under  the
    Lunacy Act 1958 there were no provisions for the length  of  detention,
    consent or appeal.

26.  Mr Furner relied on paragraph 77 of the  Amnesty  International  Report
    which refers to the Westbrook Report and states: "Westbrook goes on  to
    emphasise the lack of any provisions in  the  1958  Act  pertaining  to
    treatment  of  people  subject  to  involuntary   confinement,   as   a
    particularly remarkable feature of the legislation. It should  also  be
    noted though that the legislation  also  lacks  any  appeal  provisions
    against decisions made under it or any consideration of  issues  around
    consent to treatment."

27.  Mr Furner submitted that the assessment of  the  Appellant  started  at
    paragraph 69 of the Amnesty International Report. Paragraphs 17  to  81
    were particularly relevant and, on the basis of what is stated therein,
    Mr Furner submitted that what could happen in theory under  the  Lunacy
    Act did not  happen  in  practice.  A  person  was  often  compulsorily
    detained and then the procedures were complied with later. At paragraph
    81 of the Amnesty International Report it states:


         "While the procedural elements  authorising  involuntary  committal
         set out  above  continue  to  be  used  their  application  is  not
         universal. The procedures have been reported to us have  been  both
         complex and longwinded and as a result subject  to  corruption  and
         inefficiency. To the extent that they are used,  it  is  frequently
         only retroactively once committal has taken place  for  some  time.
         The likelihood of the procedures being used is reportedly increased
         substantially by the presence of family members who are  initiating
         the committal or when the committal followed arrest by  the  police
         and the officers followed formal procedure."




28.  Mr Furner submitted that, should the Appellant come  to  the  attention
    of the police because of his behaviour, he would be held in prison.  It
    was possible that he could be held in a mental health hospital  and  he
    referred me to paragraph 89 of the Amnesty International  Report  which
    states:

         "As with healthcare generally in Nigeria mental healthcare and drug
         treatment is provided at the patient's cost.  In practice  this  is
         most often borne by the family of the patient.  Estimates  provided
         to Amnesty International by an  experienced  Nigerian  psychiatrist
         interviewed for this report were that admission would  cost  around
         N100,000 while diagnosis and medication would cost a further N50  -
         100,000."

29.  Mr Furner submitted that the minimum wage  was  N18,000  and  therefore
    admission itself was five times the  minimum  monthly  wage.  What  was
    overwhelmingly likely to happen in the Appellant's  case  was  that  on
    return his condition would deteriorate and he would  require  treatment
    under the Lunacy Act or arbitrarily outside it.  Dr  Bell  was  of  the
    opinion that it was  very  likely  that  he  would  require  compulsory
    treatment. The Appellant's condition was characterised as remission and
    relapse even in the UK.  The Appellant would need compulsory  treatment
    at some point in the UK in the future. The current psychiatric  picture
    was false. This was a hypothetical issue if the Appellant  is  returned
    today. Psychiatric evidence shows  that  the  Appellant  knows  he  can
    remain in the UK as his appeal has been allowed. His fear had therefore
    gone, but if he was returned his current stability was not a  guide  to
    resilience, there had been three and  a  half  years  before  the  most
    recent breakdown.

30.  The conditions in which the Appellant  would  be  detained  in  Nigeria
    would breach Article 3. There was an absence of monitoring, an  absence
    of appeal rights, an absence of treatment  and  the  Appellant  had  no
    family to assist him. His return to Nigeria  would  result  in  serious
    harm and a breach of Article 3. This case was not about  the  inability
    of the state to provide treatment, it was  about  the  treatment  under
    Nigerian statute which would actively result in a breach of  Article  3
    and the threshold was a reasonable degree of likelihood. There  was  no
    need to  look  at  the  adequacy  of  treatment  because  the  positive
    treatment by the Nigerian authorities would result in Article  3  harm.
    The facts of the case of NO (Afghanistan) were similar to this one  and
    Mr Furner invited me to allow the appeal on Article 3 grounds.


Findings and conclusions

31.  The Appellant is 37 years old and he has a partner and  three  children
    in the UK. His partner  is  pregnant  with  their  fourth  child.   Her
    immigration appeal was allowed by the  Upper  Tribunal  on  trafficking
    grounds and she is awaiting a grant of leave from the  Respondent.  The
    judge concluded that it would not be  proportionate  or  reasonable  to
    expect the Appellant's family  to  leave  the  country  with  him.  The
    Applicant would be returned to Nigeria alone.

32.   The  Appellant  has  been  diagnosed  with  either  schizophrenia   or
    schizoaffective psychosis and  he  required  compulsory  admission  and
    treatment under the Mental Health Act on three occasions while  in  the
    UK;  most  recently  on  27th  September  2014.  The  medical  evidence
    demonstrates that the Appellant has  been  diagnosed  to  have  serious
    medical and mental health illness for which he has had treatment over a
    number of years. The Appellant's condition is such that even after long
    periods of stability he can still have a breakdown and suffer a  period
    of psychosis without any warning. The  trigger  factors  appear  to  be
    external stresses and changes in environment.

33.  The Appellant is suffering from a severe and  enduring  mental  illness
    and he would be at high risk of relapse. If this were  to  happen  then
    his self-care and safety would also be put at risk. If the Appellant is
    removed to Nigeria there would be grave and  severe  consequence  as  a
    result of that removal.

34.  The Appellant has been in the UK since 2007 and  has  not  returned  to
    Nigeria during that time. He would be returned to Nigeria  without  any
    family support and, whilst he is currently stable in the UK and able to
    administer his own medication, a change in environment could trigger  a
    psychotic episode and could result in the Appellant becoming  loud  and
    aggressive and bringing himself to the attention of the authorities. If
    that were to occur it is likely that he would be arrested and  detained
    under the Lunacy Act 1958.

35.  The Amnesty International Report states in conclusion:

         "119. We consider that the Appellant would face a series  of  risks
         as a result of his serious mental illness if he were to be returned
         to Nigeria.  Our assessment of risk is based on the expert  medical
         evidence regarding the severity of his condition and the likelihood
         of a substantial decline in his mental stability probably resulting
         in a mental health crisis.  It is also based on his  known  history
         of behaviour when experiencing such a crisis.


         120.     If the Appellant were to be returned alone that is without
         being accompanied and assisted by his family we consider  that  the
         single most likely risk to  him  will  be  abandonment  and  street
         homelessness. This is  because  there  is  little  or  no  outreach
         infrastructure to monitor and support people suffering from serious
         mental health illness outside of family support and  little  or  no
         broader  social  infrastructure  in  terms  of  supported  or  even
         subsidised housing.  Moreover while we do not doubt that in such  a
         scenario the Appellant's UK resident family would wish to  continue
         to assist the Appellant, we have  taken  into  account  the  expert
         medical evidence which suggests that when unwell and  deteriorating
         towards crisis the Appellant would  struggle  to  maintain  contact
         with his support network and would otherwise struggle to engage  in
         self-beneficial behaviour. As such  homelessness  would  inevitably
         carry with  it  the  well-known  risk  of  rights  abuse  that  are
         associated with such a situation including vulnerability to  abuse,
         exploitation and violence. It appears likely that these risks  will
         be  increased  if  the  Appellant  were  experiencing   a   serious
         deterioration in  his  mental  state  given  the  strength  of  the
         prevailing social stigma and lack of understanding regarding mental
         illness. Appropriate medical experts would be able  to  comment  on
         what effect street homelessness in Lagos conditions would  have  on
         the Appellant's psychiatric condition and his physical health  more
         broadly.


         121. Secondly we consider that the Appellant would face a real risk
         of adverse contact with the Nigerian police. The risk  would  arise
         immediately upon arrival at the airport if, as per medical  advice,
         the Appellant found the  process  of  forced  removal  sufficiently
         distressing to induce a serious relapse  in  his  condition.  There
         would be an ongoing risk of such adverse contact on the streets  of
         Lagos especially in the event of such a relapse.  In this regard we
         also note that the Appellant has a history of behaving aggressively
         towards others including police  officers  when  unwell.  A  factor
         which we consider exacerbates the risk  adverse  contact  with  the
         Nigerian police would in turn carry with it the real  risk  firstly
         of indefinite  detention  under  the  Lunacy  Act  1958  or  on  an
         arbitrary basis outside of that legal  framework  and  secondly  of
         serious physical mistreatment by police officers.  While  there  is
         evidence of  police  officers  delivering  seriously  mentally  ill
         individuals to the emergency unit at  Lagos  Psychiatric  Hospital,
         the incidents of this occurring are proportionality very small.  It
         therefore appears more likely that the detention by police officers
         would result in the Appellant either being held in police cells  or
         in the prison estate. Conditions in  these  instances  are  notably
         extremely poor and in some instances life threatening. Given  their
         known history of conduct and institutional culture as well  as  the
         Appellant's particular behaviours and vulnerabilities  we  consider
         that the Appellant's arrest by the Nigerian police will carry  with
         it at least a real risk of  mistreatment  sufficiently  serious  to
         constitute torture and/or inhumane treatment."

36.  On the basis of the  factual  findings,  the  opinion  in  the  Amnesty
    International Report and the opinion  of  Dr  Bell,  the  Appellant  is
    likely to suffer a breakdown at some point on return to Nigeria whether
    that be at the airport or some time later. He is likely to come to  the
    attention of the police if he has such a breakdown and he would not  be
    able to access the psychiatric hospital in Lagos because he  is  unable
    to afford treatment there. Accordingly, it is likely that he  would  be
    held in prison where the conditions for this particular Appellant  with
    his particular condition would result in treatment in breach of Article
    3. I find that Mr  Furner  has  established  the  second  limb  of  his
    argument.

37.  In relation to the Article 3 suicide risk Mr Furner did  not  make  any
    submissions before me although the matter was covered in  his  skeleton
    argument.  The relevant test is that set out in J v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 629 in which the Court of Appeal gave the following guidance:

         "26. First the test requires  an  assessment  to  be  made  of  the
         severity of the treatment which it is said that the Appellant would
         suffer if removed.  The ill treatment must necessarily  be  serious
         such  that  it  is  an  affront  to  the  fundamental  humanitarian
         principles to remove an individual to a country where he is at risk
         of serious ill treatment.


         27. Secondly a causal link must be shown to exist between  the  act
         or  threatened  act  of  removal  or  expulsion  and  the  inhumane
         treatment relied on as violating the applicant's Article 3 rights."


         28. Thirdly in  the  context  of  a  foreign  case  the  Article  3
         threshold is particularly high simply because it is a foreign  case
         and it is even higher where the alleged inhumane treatment  is  not
         the direct or indirect responsibility of the public authorities  of
         the receiving state  but  results  from  some  naturally  occurring
         illness whether physical or mental.


         29. Fourthly an Article 3 claim  can  in  principle  succeed  in  a
         suicide case.


         30. Fifthly in deciding whether there is a real risk of  breach  of
         Article 3 in a suicide case the question of importance  is  whether
         the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving  state  upon
         which the risk of suicide is said to be based is objectively  well-
         founded.  If the fear is not well founded that will tend  to  weigh
         against there being a real risk that removal will be in  breach  of
         Article 3.


         31. Sixthly a further question of considerable relevance is whether
         the removing and/or receiving state  has  effective  mechanisms  to
         reduce the risk of suicide.  If there are effective mechanisms that
         too will weigh heavily against an applicant's  claim  that  removal
         will violate his or her Article 3 rights.

38.  The submissions in the  skeleton  argument  are  that  the  Appellant's
    removal would entail a heightened risk  of  suicide  and,  although  he
    cannot show that he is objectively at risk, his subjective fear is real
    and overwhelming. Moreover while there is plainly  some  mental  health
    treatment available in Nigeria, it would neither be effective to reduce
    the risk nor practically accessible to the Appellant. It  is  submitted
    that the Appellant passes the high test set out in J  v  SSHD  and  his
    appeal should be allowed on Article 3 grounds.

39.  In relation to the fourth factor in J v SSHD  it  was  submitted  that,
    although the Appellant was not currently suicidal, in  the  context  of
    the deterioration  which   inevitably  would  occur  if  the  Appellant
    returned to Nigeria, there would be an increased risk  of  suicide  and
    acts of self-harm. Dr Bell considered that even if  the  Appellant  did
    not actively commit suicide he would be likely to eventually succumb to
    inanition or death through  self-neglect.  Dr  Bell  indicated  that  a
    return to Nigeria would be very likely to  precipitate  a  relapse  and
    that the Appellant's current stability was very likely to be because he
    does not perceive himself as  being  imminently  at  risk  of  removal.
    However learning of an imminent removal  would  be  a  major  traumatic
    event sufficient itself to cause relapse.

40.  It was submitted, in terms of the  fifth  factor,  that  the  Appellant
    could not show an objective risk of ill treatment. However, the  courts
    had established that a real subjective fear may be of equal  importance
    and that the absence of an objective  risk  may  be  of  little  or  no
    relevance if the condition is characterised by  fundamental  distortion
    of thinking and perception.

41.  Dr Bell comments at paragraph 50 (page 13 of A3) that:  "I  have  noted
    above that [BA]'s condition appears to be particularly sensitive to his
    environmental situation.  In my view the fact that [BA] is under threat
    of return to Nigeria acts as a major stressor which  is  likely  to  be
    having a serious detrimental effect upon his mental state  and  may  be
    preventing some degree of recovery. I believe that [BA] is subjectively
    very frightened about being returned to  Nigeria  -  but  this  is  for
    reasons I have not been able to fully understand  and  which  I cannot
    objectively assess.  I am satisfied that this fear is real to  him  and
    this fear of return is an important contributory factor to  his  mental
    state. I note in particular that  his  dramatic  deterioration  in  the
    early part of 2014  leading  to  being  sectioned  in  April  2014  was
    specifically linked by his treating clinicians to the then  approaching
    immigration appeal. That seems entirely plausible to me, and consistent
    with what I would expect based upon my interviews with him."

42.  At paragraph 60, Dr Bell states: "In my judgment  the  Appellant  would
    not be able to  cooperate  with  local  psychiatric  services  for  the
    reasons given more fully below that is because  I  believe  [BA]  would
    upon return deteriorate so severely that he would be unable to maintain
    relationships even with his own family were  they  to  follow  him  and
    would likely succumb to serious self-neglect and eventual inanition."

43.  It was submitted that the Appellant  essentially  has  no  prospect  of
    accessing mental health treatment. If the Appellant returned to Nigeria
    he is reasonably likely to deteriorate to such a  state  that  he  will
    either actively commit suicide or kill himself through self-regret.  It
    was submitted that in those conditions his removal would be  in  breach
    of Article 3.

44.  It is accepted that the Appellant cannot show an objective risk of  ill
    treatment. The medical evidence indicates that the Appellant would  not
    be at risk of suicide on return, rather that he would  be  at  risk  of
    killing himself through  self-neglect.  I  find  that  the  Appellant's
    behaviour is such that he is likely to come to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities and therefore he would be unlikely  to  die  through  self-
    neglect and inanition.

45.  I am of the view that the Appellant, even on the evidence of  Dr  Bell,
    has failed to show that his fear of  ill  treatment  in  the  receiving
    state upon which the risk of suicide is said to be based is objectively
    well founded. The threshold test under J v SSHD  is  particularly  high
    and the Appellant's Article 3 suicide claim fails in that respect.





Summary

46.  The Applicant would not be at risk of Article 3 treatment because of  a
    heightened risk of suicide. He would, however, be at  risk  of  inhuman
    and  degrading  treatment  in  breach  of  Article  3  because  of  the
    conditions of return.

47.  The medical evidence indicates that  the  Appellant  is  vulnerable  to
    relapse even in the UK and without the threat of removal.  His  removal
    to Nigeria is likely to trigger a relapse and his behaviour  will  draw
    hostile attention. His treatment by the authorities  in  detaining  him
    under the Lunacy  Act  1958  would  amount  to  inhuman  and  degrading
    treatment. There is a reasonable degree of likelihood that he would  be
    detained in a prison, there  would  be  no  treatment  for  his  mental
    health, his situation would deteriorate, the  length  of  detention  is
    indeterminate, there is no right of appeal and there is no  requirement
    for him to consent to treatment. Accordingly, I allow  the  Appellant's
    appeal on Article 3 grounds.


Notice of decision

The Appellant's appeal is allowed on Article 3 grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 11th May 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal, I have considered making a fee award and  have
decided to make a fee award of any  fee  which  has  been  paid  or  may  be
payable.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 11th May 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
