
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34194/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 September 2014                          |On 23 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD MOBEEN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Awan, Solicitor from Mayfair Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal against a decision of the  respondent
    to refuse the appellant leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier
    4 (General) Migrant under the points-based system.

 2. According to the Decision and Reasons dated 5 August 2013 the appellant
    had

         "failed to provide certificates in  support  of  your  application,
         there is also a gap of more than 28 days between the  end  of  your
         current leave which expired on 25 May 2013 and the  start  date  of
         your new course which commenced on 12 August 2013  as  detailed  on
         your Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS)  dated  2  August
         2013.

         It has therefore been decided that you do not meet the requirements
         and no points have been awarded for your CAS."

 3. Essentially the First-tier Tribunal agreed with the Secretary of  State
    and dismissed the appeal.

 4. The  grounds  supporting  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal
    complain that the Tribunal had not followed the decision of  the  Court
    of Appeal in Qi (Pakistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 614.  There the Court
    of Appeal determined that an application made while the  appellant  had
    leave was not to be refused because the proposed course did  not  start
    within 28 days of the lapse of the leave the appellant  enjoyed  before
    he made his application because that leave was extended by operation of
    section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971. The course did commence  within
    28 days of the lapse of the thus extended leave. The essential point is
    that the appellant was in the United Kingdom with leave and that  leave
    lapsed on 25 May 2013.  Before 25 May  2013  he  applied  to  attend  a
    course that started on 12 August 2013 which was a gap of more  than  28
    days after 25 May 2013. It was the appellant's case that his leave  had
    been extended by reason of his making the application  and  the  course
    did start within 28 days of the decision being made on 5 August 2014.

 5. When I read the papers before the hearing I thought that the  appellant
    was correct on this point and I was a little surprised to find the Rule
    24 notice suggesting to the contrary. However, the notice did not refer
    to any authority and did not comment on the decision in Qi.  Mr  Tarlow
    conducted himself professionally but  was  not  able  to  construct  an
    argument that the decision of the Court of Appeal in Qi  was  explained
    incorrectly in the grounds or otherwise did not support the result that
    the appellant urged.

 6. However this did not solve the appellant's difficulties.   He  had  not
    proved his competence in the English language in the required way.   It
    is completely irrelevant that he may  have  excellent  command  of  the
    English language. The requirement is to produce the certificate and  he
    did not.

 7. Mr Awan tried hard to persuade me that the need for a  certificate  was
    satisfied by similar requirements being set out in the  form  CAS.   He
    drew my attention to paragraph 245AA(d) of HC  395  which  permits  (it
    does not oblige)  the  respondent  to  contact  the  applicant  or  his
    representative  to   request   the   correct   documents   if   certain
    circumstances apply.   The  appellant  relied  on  245AA(d)(iii)  which
    applies  when  the  document  does  not  contain  all   the   specified
    information but the missing information was verifiable  from  documents
    already submitted.

 8. Mr Awan argued that this applies because it was apparent from  the  CAS
    that the appellant had the necessary language skills. However,  and  as
    Mr Awan correctly drew to my attention,  paragraph  245AA(c)  makes  it
    plain that documents will not be requested where a  specified  document
    has not been submitted, for example an English language certificate  is
    missing.

 9. I am satisfied that subparagraph (d) of paragraph 245AA is not intended
    as a way of getting round  the  requirement  to  produce  a  particular
    document but is a possible lifeline in a small number  of  cases  where
    the "right" document has been produced but there is  something  "wrong"
    with it.  The Rule does not bear the meaning urged on me and  does  not
    assist this appellant.  He was required to produce the document and did
    not.

10. Mr Awan referred in his submissions to the case  of  Pokhriyal  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1568. I misheard the case name and, at the  request  of
    my clerk, Mr Awan kindly send me the correct citation by e-mail with  a
    copy to Mr Tarlow. I did not find that this helped  the  appellant.  It
    concerned an appellant  who  relied  on  a  certificate  that  was  not
    satisfactory. The Court of Appeal decided that  the  respondent  should
    have given the appellant a chance to make good the deficit but it  does
    not show that the respondent should have asked for a  certificate  that
    was not included.

11.  Mr Awan also submitted that the case  had  not  been  considered  with
    reference to Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  but
    as he was not able to show how the  appeal  could  possibly  have  been
    allowed responsibly with reference to that Article this  did  not  take
    matters any further.

12. It is immensely frustrating for appellants who think  they  could  have
    satisfied the requirements  of  the  Rules  if  they  had  been  better
    organised in the presentation of their application to  find  they  have
    not only been refused permission but that  the  error  that  cannot  be
    corrected on appeal.  I find this is such a case and there is nothing I
    can do to assist him.

13. I find that the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  err  in  one  part  of  the
    determination but it was still right to dismiss the appeal.

14. No material error has been established.   It follows that I dismiss the
    appeal against the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 22 October 2014                |










