
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/34902/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 July 2017                       |On 27 October 2017                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                             AASIM AHMED PIRZADA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETATRY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, of Counsel instructed by Malik Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  I
    Ross ("FtTJ") promulgated on 29 November 2016 in which he dismissed the
    appeal of the Appellant against a decision of the Respondent  dated  25
    November 2015.

2.    The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  28  October  1975.  He
    has a lengthy immigration history which I summarise briefly as follows.
    He entered the United Kingdom on 6 March 2004 with a visa as a  student
    valid until 30 April 2005. Thereafter, he made an  in-time  application
    for an extension of leave to remain subsequently granted until 30  June
    2008. He then made an application for variation of leave under the  EEA
    Regulations and  this  was  refused  as  a  forged  document  had  been
    submitted with the  application.  In  consequence,  the  Appellant  was
    sentenced to 5 months imprisonment and was served a notice  of  removal
    on 24 September 2008. On 8 October 2008  he  made  an  application  for
    leave to remain as a student which  was  successful  with  leave  being
    granted to 31 July 2010 and subsequently extended to 30 August 2011. On
    27 August 2011 the Appellant applied for leave to remain outside of the
    Immigration Rules ("the Rules"), which was refused on 22 September 2011
    and his subsequent appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was dismissed  and
    upheld by the Upper Tribunal on 16 May 2012. Following a further appeal
    to the Court of Appeal the proceedings were disposed of  by  a  Consent
    Order; in consequence the  Respondent  subsequently  granted  leave  on
    discretionary grounds to 22 May 2014.

 3.   On 21 May 2014 the Appellant applied for leave to  remain  outside  of
    the Rules which was refused; however, he successfully appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal against this decision to the extent that the  judge
    found the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law, and
    issued a direction that she consider and make a decision  on  the  long
    residence claim taking into account the Appellant's conviction  and  to
    grant a period of discretionary leave to allow  him  to  obtain  a  CAS
    letter. Further leave to remain was thus granted from 8 July 2015 until
    8 November 2015. A refusal of the claim followed on  24  November  2015
    and it is this decision which was the subject of the appeal before  the
    FtTJ.

4.    It is prudent at this stage to recount the  Respondent's  reasons  for
    refusal. The Respondent reviewed the history of the Appellant's various
    applications and then referred to the provisions of paragraph  276B  of
    the Rules. The reasons are disjointed and could have been set out in  a
    more coherent manner, but she determined that  the  Appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements on  two  bases:  first,  there  was  a  break  in
    continuous lawful residence in consequence  of  his  imprisonment  (see
    page 4 of  the  refusal)  and,  second,  in  view  of  the  Appellant's
    conviction his presence in the UK was undesirable (see page  3  of  the
    refusal). In such circumstances  the  Respondent  determined  that  the
    Appellant failed to satisfy  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276B(i),
    (iii) and (v) of the Rules.

5.    The Respondent also gave some consideration to  the  Appellant's  case
    with respect to Appendix FM and, more particularly, paragraph 276ADE of
    the Rules. In respect of paragraph  276ADE  it  was  decided  that  the
    Appellant could not satisfy sub-paragraph (i) because he did  not  meet
    the suitability criteria with  reference  to  paragraph  S-LTR  1.6  of
    Appendix FM.  It  was  also  determined  by  the  Respondent  that  the
    Appellant did not satisfy the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(vi),
    that is to say in respect of significant obstacles  to  integration  in
    his country of nationality. In  conclusion  the  Respondent  determined
    that there were no exceptional circumstances  to  warrant  a  grant  of
    leave outside of the Rules.

6.    The particular factual issue that was at the core of the  Respondent's
    decision and informed  the  unfavourable  outcome  on  the  Appellant's
    application in respect of paragraph 276B was the  break  in  continuous
    lawful  residence  and  his  previous   conviction.   Inevitably   that
    contentious factual issue dictated the course of the appeal and  indeed
    much of the focus of the  consideration  of  evidence  and  submissions
    before the FtTJ. Suffice to say for  present  purposes  that  the  FtTJ
    found against the Appellant on these as well as other points. The  FtTJ
    noted following an agreement by the Appellant's then counsel  that  the
    sole issue in the appeal was whether the Appellant satisfied  the  long
    residence provisions of the  Rules.  Before  the  FtTJ,  while  counsel
    conceded that there was a break in continuous lawful residence  from  1
    July 2008 until 8 October 2008, as a  consequence  of  the  Appellant's
    imprisonment, counsel relied  on  the  Respondent's  guidance  and  the
    requirement to consider  evidence  of  exceptional  circumstances  that
    prevented an application being made within 28 days of overstaying.

7.    The FtTJ's findings are set out briefly at [13] to [20], but is  clear
    that there is some mis-numbering as there is no paragraph [17] to [19].



8.    In view of counsel's concession, the FtTJ  found  that  residence  was
    broken due to the Appellant's imprisonment and further  found  that  he
    was without leave from 16 May  2012  to  22  January  2014.  The  FtTJ,
    without specific reference to the terms of the guidance, concluded that
    the  Appellant's  inability  to  make  an  application   due   to   his
    imprisonment could never amount  to  an  exceptional  circumstance.  He
    proceeded and found, "in relation to the refusal on character grounds,"
    that the Respondent properly exercised her discretion in  refusing  the
    application in view of  the  Appellant's  deception  evidenced  by  his
    conviction which showed "a  contempt  and  blatant  disregard  for  the
    immigration system."

9.    The FtTJ was of the view that there were no arguably good grounds  for
    leave to remain to be granted outside of the  Rules,  but  went  on  to
    consider the position outside of the Rules in two short paragraphs.  He
    had regard to section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002. He noted the Appellant spoke English  and  that  he  was  not
    financially independent and that such  factors  did  not  outweigh  the
    public interest. The  FtTJ  accordingly  found  that  the  refusal  was
    proportionate.

10.   The Appellant sought to  challenge  the  FtTJ's  conclusions  in  this
    regard. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge McDonald on 9 June 2017.

11.   I am satisfied that the central submissions advanced by  Mr  Malik  on
    behalf of the Appellant are correct to the following extent  such  that
    the decision should be set aside.

12.   Mr Singh was right to concede that ground  one  is  well-founded.  The
    FtTJ plainly erred in finding that the Appellant was without leave from
    16 May 2012 to  22  January  2014.  Mr  Malik  helpfully  set  out  the
    Appellant's  immigration  history  in  chronological   order   with   a
    corresponding explanation of the legalities of the periods in  question
    following the in-time application made on 27 August 2011. There  is  no
    dispute that following the refusal of that application  and  the  final
    determination of the appeal on 16 May 2012 by the Upper Tribunal,  that
    there was a subsequent appeal to the Court of Appeal which was disposed
    of by a Consent Order resulting in a subsequent grant of  leave  on  22
    January 2014. There  is  no  dispute  that  in  the  circumstances  the
    Appellant's leave continued  by  virtue  of  section  3C(2)(c)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971. While the FtTJ was not assisted by the incomplete
    immigration history  in  the  Respondent's  refusal  letter,  the  full
    history was discernible from other documentation as noted by  the  FtTJ
    at [11].

13.   While the error is  apparent,  Mr  Singh  submitted  that  it  is  not
    material to the FtTJ's consideration of  the  appeal  under  the  Rules
    because the FtTJ  correctly  found,  following  a  concession  made  by
    counsel, that continuous leave  had  been  broken  by  the  Appellant's
    imprisonment. Mr Malik did not seek to suggest that that concession was
    either right or wrong, but he contended that the point was  erroneously
    taken against the Appellant as the Respondent did not  contend  in  the
    refusal  that  continuous  leave  had  been  broken.  I   reject   that
    submission. Whilst the Respondent could have set out her  reasons  with
    greater clarity, I consider that she did take the point at page 3 and 4
    of the refusal. Therein she referred to the definition  of  "continuous
    residence" by reference to the Rules and concluded that "the  Secretary
    of State considers the period you spent in prison to have  broken  your
    lawful  residence  in  the  UK."  While  she  did  not  use  the   word
    "continuous", in my judgement, it is clear on a holistic reading of the
    refusal that that is what she meant. I do not accept therefore that the
    FtTJ took the issue of his own volition thus giving rise to unfairness.



14.   Mr Malik next contended that the FtTJ erred at [14] by  proceeding  on
    the basis that the Appellant was  refused  on  character  grounds  when
    there was no such reference to that in the refusal. While Mr  Malik  is
    correct to point out that there is no express  reference  to  paragraph
    276B(ii) of the Rules in the refusal, I consider that  it  is  apparent
    from the terminology used therein that the point was being taken by the
    Respondent when she stated at page 3 thereof following a recital of the
    Appellant's  conviction  that,  "Therefore  based  upon  your  personal
    history including character and  conduct  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    satisfied it is undesirable for you to  remain  the  UK."  I  therefore
    reject this submission as well.

15.   While I agree with Mr Malik that the FtTJ erred  in  failing  to  take
    into account in  relation  to  the  exercise  of  discretion  that  the
    Respondent granted leave on four occasions  following  his  conviction,
    but in view of my conclusions above the error cannot be material to the
    FtTJ's assessment of the application under the Rules.

16.    Thus,  while  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  FtTJ  erred  in   his
    consideration under the Rules, I am satisfied that the  FtTJ  erred  in
    concluding that the refusal was proportionate. There is no dispute that
    the FtTJ was required as  part  of  a  two-stage  process  to  consider
    Article 8 outside of the Rules. The FtTJ's consideration of the Article
    8 issues is really confined to two short paragraphs which I  summarised
    earlier. On its face it does  not  follow  the  careful  approach  that
    jurisprudence requires. It might also be noted that there is no express
    finding in respect of private life - whether as to its existence or its
    quality.

17.    Essentially  there  is  an  assessment   of   the   public   interest
    considerations which were conclusive of the question of proportionality
    with no account being taken of the relevant associated factors personal
    to the Appellant either in relation to  his  immigration  history,  the
    Secretary of State's view of his conviction following subsequent grants
    of leave and having no regard to the Appellant's length of residence or
    to the ties developed over a period of 12 years. I  reject  Mr  Singh's
    submission that the Article 8 assessment is sustainable on  account  of
    the Appellant's precarious private life and his conviction  as  neither
    is determinative of the question of proportionality and by reference to
    the latter he falls into the same error as the FtTJ, in that, it  fails
    to take cognisance of the fact that leave was  granted  post-conviction
    on four occasions.

18.   In these circumstances, while I do not say that the ultimate  decision
    reached by the FtTJ is wrong, it is the manner and route by which  that
    conclusion has been reached that is flawed.

Notice of Decision

19.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of
    law and is set aside. I agree with representatives that the appropriate
    disposal is remittal to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  by  a
    judge other than FtTJ I Ross.

No anonymity direction is sought or made.






Signed:                                            Date: 6 October 2017




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral


