
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34082/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19th September 2014                          |On 8th October 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                            mr Zeeshan Ajmal Khan
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 5th January  1980.   The
    Appellant had arrived in the UK on 31st May 2007 with  entry  clearance
    as  a  student  valid  until  31st August  2009.   The  Appellant  was
    subsequently granted leave to remain as  a  Tier  4  Student  on  three
    further occasions with valid leave until 27th July 2013.  On  9th  July
    2013 the Appellant applied to vary his leave  as  a  dependant  on  his
    partner and this was refused by the Secretary of State  on  8th  August
    2013.  Prior to this on 3rd August 2012  the  Appellant's  partner  had
    succeeded in his appeal before the First-tier Tribunal under Article  8
    on the basis of his family life with the Appellant  as  a  gay  partner
    when the partner had applied as a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant
    dependant of the Appellant.  On 3rd June 2013  the  Respondent  granted
    the Appellant's partner 30 months' leave to remain based on his  family
    life with the Appellant.

 2. The Appellant appealed against the refusal of the  Secretary  of  State
    and the appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro sitting at
    Hatton Cross on 17th June 2014.  In a determination promulgated on 11th
    July 2014 the Appellant's appeal based on Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention of Human Rights was dismissed.

 3. On 27th July 2014 the Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 31st July 2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cox  granted
    permission to appeal.  In granting permission the judge noted that  the
    grounds in essence  contended  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  apply
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v Devaseelan (Tamil)  [2002]
    UKIAT 00702 to the Appellant's civil partner's  previous  determination
    and in making findings devoid of evidential  basis  and  therefore  the
    decision was perverse in relation to the possibility  of  their  living
    together in either Pakistan or Mauritius.  Judge Cox found that in  the
    circumstances there was arguable merit in both Grounds of Appeal.

 4. On 8th August 2014 the Secretary of State in a short Rule  24  response
    merely indicated an intention to oppose the Appellant's appeal and that
    the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal directed herself appropriately.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Mr Iqbal.  Mr Iqbal is familiar with this case having  appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of State is  represented
    by her Home Office Presenting Officer Ms Everett.

The Facts

 6. The Appellant is a homosexual and is in a homosexual relationship  with
    his partner Pravinsigh Boodoo.  Mr Boodoo is not the  subject  of  this
    appeal.  He attends the hearing merely as Mr Khan's partner.  It is not
    disputed that  they  are  in  a  homosexual  relationship.   Mr  Boodoo
    attended and gave oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  in  the
    Appellant's appeal.  He is a Mauritian national who came to the  UK  in
    2005 and whose immigration history is set out above.  The Appellant and
    his  partner  met  through  a  dating  website  and  have  been  in   a
    relationship since August 2009.  They have been living  together  as  a
    couple since June 2011 and entered into a civil partnership in December
    2011.  Their relationship is not challenged by the Secretary of  State.



Submissions/Discussion

 7. Mr Iqbal points out that when Mr Boodoo applied  for  leave  to  remain
    instead of being given leave in line with the Appellant  he  was  given
    three years' leave giving him leave beyond the date that Mr  Khan  held
    under his current visa.  Consequently when Mr Khan's leave  expired  he
    applied on the basis  of  his  relationship  with  Mr  Boodoo.   It  is
    emphasised to me that it was the Secretary of State that  granted  this
    leave.  Mr Boodoo's appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Miles at Hatton Cross on 25th July 2012.  That appeal  was  allowed  on
    3rd August 2012 under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  of  Human
    Rights.  Following that successful appeal on 3rd June  2013  where  the
    Secretary of State because of Mr  Boodoo's  circumstances  granted  him
    leave within the Immigration Rules under D-LTRP.1.1 of Appendix FM.  As
    a result Mr Boodoo's  biometric  residence  permit  was  endorsed  with
    limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom initially for 30  months.
    It is clear from the letter that further applications  could  be  made.
    It is the submission of Mr Iqbal that the judge has failed to give  due
    and proper consideration in her determination to the decision of  Judge
    Miles and the subsequent leave to remain granted to Mr Boodoo.

 8. Ms Everett submits that the  evidence  has  never  been  tested  as  to
    whether the Appellant can return to  Pakistan  or  particularly  as  to
    whether or not the Appellant and Mr Boodoo  can  return  to  Mauritius.
    She submits that the judge has addressed  all  the  issues  and  whilst
    acknowledging the scenario is unusual submits that there is no material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. Certain  factual  issues  are  of  relevance  from  the  determination.
    Firstly at paragraph 25 it is confirmed  that  the  Respondent  in  her
    letter of refusal did not deal with the Appellant's asylum  application
    because paragraph 339NA states that before a decision is taken  on  the
    application for asylum the applicant should be given the opportunity of
    a personal interview on his application but that the  Appellant  failed
    to do so.  There is consequently no extant asylum  application  pending
    before the Secretary of State.   Secondly  at  paragraph  26  Mr  Iqbal
    indicated that he would not be pursuing the claim pursuant to Article 3
    of the European Convention of  Human  Rights  and  consequently  merely
    relies on the Appellant's Article  8  rights  to  family  life  in  his
    appeal.

12. The Grounds of Appeal are based on two contentions.  Firstly  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to apply the  principles  set  out  in
    Devaseelan, namely:

         "If before the second Adjudicator the  Appellant  relies  on  facts
         that are not materially different  from  those  put  to  the  first
         Adjudicator and proposes to support the claim by what is in essence
         the same evidence as that available to the Appellant at  that  time
         the second Adjudicator should regard the issues as settled  by  the
         first Adjudicator's determination and make  his  findings  in  line
         with that determination rather than allowing the matter to  be  re-
         litigated."

13. I do not consider that the judge has failed to look at  that  scenario.
    Mr Boodoo was granted leave to remain as the partner of Mr Khan  during
    the tenure of Mr Khan's then current visa.  That factor  is  recognised
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The second contention made  is  that
    the judge's findings are perverse.  Again I do not find that to be  the
    situation.  The judge was looking at the position as to whether or  not
    the Appellant was entitled to  succeed  under  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  The judge had due consideration to the decision  in
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640
    (IAC).  Thereinafter the law has developed further.

14. The Tribunal in Gulshan made clear and  has  repeated  subsequently  in
    Shahzad  (Article  8:  legitimate  aim)  [2014]  UKUT  00085  (IAC)  at
    paragraph (31):

         "Where an  area  of  the  rules  does  not  have  such  an  express
         mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) ([29]-[31]  in  particular)
         and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT
         640 (IAC) should be followed: i.e. after applying the  requirements
         of the rules, only if  there  may  be  arguably  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them."

15. The Court of Appeal in MM (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985 at paragraph 128 went on to state:

         "Nagre does not add anything to the debate save for  the  statement
         that if a particular person is outside the  Rule  then  he  has  to
         demonstrate, as a preliminary to a consideration outside  the  Rule
         that he has an arguable case that there may  be  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside the  Rules.   I  cannot  see  much
         utility  in  imposing  this  further  intermediary  test.   If  the
         applicant cannot satisfy the Rule, then there either is or there is
         not a further Article 8 claim.  That will have to be determined  by
         the relevant decision maker."

16. The judge made  findings  that  she  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    Appellant's circumstances were consequently not compelling.  Whether  I
    or another judge would have reached that decision is not the issue that
    is before me.  Providing the decision is not  perverse  and  I  do  not
    consider it to be so, the question is whether  or  not  the  judge  has
    materially erred in law and I am satisfied that she has not.   In  such
    circumstances the Appellant's appeal fails.

17. It is perhaps appropriate within this  determination  to  add  a  final
    paragraph.  I acknowledge that the situation in which Mr Boodoo and the
    Appellant now find themselves is unsatisfactory and indeed  Ms  Everett
    acknowledged this on behalf of the Secretary of State.  Ms Everett  was
    unable to explain the basis upon which the limited leave to remain  was
    granted in 2013 to Mr Boodoo.  What however is clear is that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was correct in  effectively  stipulating  that  the
    issue has never been tested as to whether or not the Appellant  and  Mr
    Boodoo can return and exercise family life either in  Mauritius  or  in
    Pakistan.  Neither Judge Miles' determination  nor  Judge  O'Garro  has
    been promulgated on this basis because the argument before them was  an
    attempt to maintain family life in the UK based on current visas issued
    within the UK albeit not necessarily to  the  Appellant  that  appeared
    before them but to the other party.  I acknowledge that there  must  be
    benefit in this matter in there being continuity.   It  is  telling  in
    this determination that it appears  that  neither  Appellant  has  ever
    sought to pursue an asylum claim based on their homosexuality and their
    relationship.  That of course is a matter for them.

Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  a  material
    error of law and the appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

19. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
