











UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34526/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|on 21 March 2016                  |on 15 April 2016                         |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between
                               Mr Surjit Singh
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr F Bajwa, Bajwa and Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of India, born on  19  November  1987.  He
      appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Wyman promulgated on 16 September 2015,  dismissing  his  appeal
      against the decision of the respondent refusing his application for  a
      residence card under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006
      Regulations").


   2. It was not disputed that the appellant's sponsor was exercising Treaty
      rights in the UK. The Judge accepted, as demonstrated by the documents
      they submitted, that the couple  are  married  and  have  been  living
      together at the same address.  However, she stated at [52] that living
      together is not the same thing  as  being  in  a  genuine,  subsisting
      relationship.


   3. She noted that directions had  been  issued  in  March  2015  for  the
      respondent to serve on the appellant a  transcript  of  the  interview
      held on 8 August 2014, but  this  has  never  been  provided.  It  was
      asserted  that  the  recording  equipment  was  faulty  and  that  the
      transcripts were not available [64].


   4. The Judge based her findings primarily  on  the  questions  that  were
      asked at the appeal hearing itself and, to a limited  extent,  on  the
      questions asked in March 2014. A hand written note of  the  interviews
      that took place on the date of marriage had been produced.


   5. The Judge accepted that the sponsor "believes in this marriage"  [72].
      She attended the detention centre every  day  "which  is  a  proof  of
      affection." However, she did not believe that the appellant  held  the
      same views about their marriage; he had entered into this relationship
      in an attempt to remain in the UK [72]. She accordingly dismissed  the
      appeal.


   6. On 9  February  2016,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Page  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal. He stated that it was  not  clear  why
      the Judge was not satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  in  a  genuine
      marriage but that his wife was. The Judge ignored photographs  of  the
      appellant and his  wife  together,  showing  a  genuine  relationship.
      Further, the issues raised by the appellant about the reasons why  the
      interview records of their substantive interviews  were  not  produced
      should be further explored.  It may be that if the Judge  had  granted
      an adjournment, better evidence could have been provided to assist the
      appellant.


   7. Mr Bajwa,  who  appeared  for  the  appellant  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, submitted that neither of the interviews had  been  provided
      save for one set of handwritten notes, which were barely legible,  and
      which had been faxed to the appellant's solicitors the day before  the
      hearing.


   8. Mr Bajwa informed the Tribunal that he had requested an adjournment on
      the grounds that the substantive interview was missing, and  that  the
      handwritten notes were barely legible, and not in interview form. That
      application was refused.


   9. He submitted that the adjournment should  have  been  granted  on  the
      grounds of fairness and the Judge could then  decide  to  what  extent
      there were discrepancies in their answers.


  10. The respondent accepted that the appellant and his  wife  were  living
      together. The Judge accepted that the marriage was  genuine  from  the
      sponsor's point of view but not from  the  appellant's.  He  submitted
      that it was difficult to reconcile that finding in the  light  of  the
      photographic evidence that was produced  and  given  at  the  hearing.
      Evidence of the genuineness of their marriage included a set of photos
      which were dated by the camera showing several photos for each day for
      a period of six months. These covered birthdays, Christmas  and  other
      functions which were comprehensive. It would be difficult  for  anyone
      to fly in the face of such evidence that the marriage was not genuine.
      Over 300 photographs of the couple were produced from the day they met
      onwards.


  11. The respondent's Rule  24  response  contended  that  the  appellant's
      grounds are  opportunistic  and  advanced  in  disagreement  with  the
      negative outcome. The Judge properly considered the evidence and  made
      sustainable adverse credibility findings. It was open to the Judge  to
      conclude that on the totality of the  evidence  before  him  that  the
      couple are not in a genuine and subsisting relationship and  that  the
      marriage was one of convenience.


  12. Mr Duffy acknowledged that there had been deficiencies in the  Judge's
      assessment of the appellant's case.


Assessment


  13. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.


  14. The appellant's solicitors had only been provided  with  an  illegible
      copy of the interview notes the day before the hearing. The appeal had
      been listed for a  date  in  March  2015  but  was  adjourned  on  the
      application of the appellant's representatives as there was no copy of
      either of the two sets of interview notes given to the Home Office.


  15. The Judge proceeded to find that there  were  discrepancies  based  on
      answers given before the Tribunal and found that they had been  living
      together.


  16. It is accepted that there may have been minor inconsistencies in their
      answers, but these were few and were in any event  "answered"  by  the
      photographs despite the witnesses' memory  of  events  in  court.  The
      asserted discrepancies related to their  identification  of  different
      films. However, they indicated that they had watched  different  films
      on different occasions.


  17. Moreover, as noted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Page,  there  is  no
      reference at all to the photographs on the file. No findings were made
      about these photographs which were  a  substantial  component  in  the
      appellant's evidence. That evidence should have been a factor  in  the
      assessment of the genuineness of the marriage.


  18. In the circumstances, I set aside the decision. The parties  submitted
      that this was an appropriate  case  for  remittal  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Hatton Cross) for a fresh decision to be made by  any  other
      Judge. I accept that submission.  The extent of judicial fact  finding
      which is necessary  in  order  for  the  decision  to  be  re-made  is
      extensive.


      Notice of Decisions


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law and is set aside.


      The case is remitted to Hatton Cross for a fresh decision to  be  made
      on the issue as to whether or not  the  appellant's  marriage  to  his
      sponsor constitutes a marriage of convenience under  Regulation  2  of
      the 2006 Regulations.


      The hearing date is 8 July 2016. A Lithuanian interpreter is required.




      No anonymity direction is made.










      Signed                             Date 4 April 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

