
[pic]
Upper Tribunal         Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        IA/34869/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 1 July 2014         On 3 July 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                            Carol Dulnuan Accatan
                        (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr N Butt of West Ham Solicitors.
For the Respondent:            Mr G Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Wallace promulgated on 12 February 2014,  dismissing  the  Appellant's
      appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 1 August 2013 to refuse
      to vary leave to remain and to remove the Appellant from the UK.


Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of the Philippines born on  10  May  1980.
      She arrived in the UK on 2  July  2009.  Her  immigration  history  is
      summarised at paragraph 4  of  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. She was most recently granted leave to remain as  a  Tier  4
      (General) student on 12 February 2013 valid until 19 June 2013. On  18
      June 2013 the Appellant applied for a further variation of leave as  a
      Tier 4 student. Her application was refused for reasons set out  in  a
      combined Notice of Immigration  Decision  and  'reasons  for  refusal'
      letter dated 1 August 2013, which also communicated  the  decision  to
      remove the Appellant pursuant to section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum
      and Nationality Act 2006.


   3. The Appellant appealed to the IAC. She  elected  to  have  her  appeal
      determined without a hearing 'on the papers'.


   4. The Appellant's appeal was dismissed by the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
      reasons set out in the determination promulgated on 12 February 2014.


   5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,
      which was  granted  on  12  May  2014  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Cruthers, who also extended time for lodging the application.


Consideration

   6. The Appellant's application was refused under  the  Immigration  Rules
      essentially  because  she  did  not  submit  with  her  application  a
      Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS). The First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge upheld the Respondent's decision in this regard.


   7. Although the Appellant has sought  to  challenge  the  decision  taken
      under the Rules in  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal,  by
      pleading that the Respondent had not exercised a discretion under  the
      Immigration  Rules  "justly  and  fairly",  and  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge had fallen into similar error,  such  Grounds  did  not
      find favour with Judge Cruthers in granting permission to appeal,  and
      are not pursued before me by Mr Butt who  very  properly  acknowledged
      that the Appellant could not succeed under the Rules in  circumstances
      where she had no CAS to support her application.


   8. Judge Cruthers granted permission in  respect  of  human  rights-based
      grounds, observing "articles 6 and 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
      Human Rights ("ECHR") are raised, in unparticularised terms, in the 23
      August 2013 covering letter to the  appellant's  appeal  notice",  and
      opining that it was "arguable that the judge erred by  not  addressing
      human rights law  issues  in  her  determination".  Nonetheless  Judge
      Cruthers sounded a note of caution: "The  appellant  should  not  take
      this  grant  permission  as  any  indication  that  the  appeal   will
      ultimately be successful: it seems unlikely that this is the  sort  of
      appeal that could succeed on a human rights law basis".


   9. Human rights grounds were indeed raised in the covering letter  of  23
      August 2013: "The decision is unlawful because  it  incompatible  with
      Appellant's rights under Article  8  of  the  ECHR.  The  decision  is
      unlawful  under  Article  6  of  the  ECHR".  Absolutely  no   further
      particulars were given in respect of  Article  8.  A  document  headed
      Application for Extension of Time pleaded Article 6.


  10. Under cover of letter dated 23 November 2013 the  Appellant  submitted
      more detailed Grounds of Appeal, together with a Witness Statement and
      supporting documents. The Grounds of Appeal invoke Article  8  on  the
      basis that "the Appellant is living and studying in the UK legally and
      lawfully as law-abiding person since 2009", adding that  she  had  not
      involved herself in any illegal activity, and had fully complied  with
      the immigration conditions as a bona fide student. It is  also  stated
      that she "has already been paying large amounts towards  tuition  fees
      every year" and that the Respondent's decision was "a clear  violation
      and interference into [her] personal life": the decision deprived  her
      of the opportunity to continue studies,  and  would  impact  upon  the
      academic and social  ties  established  in  the  UK.  The  Appellant's
      witness  statement  did  little  more  than  rehearse   the   relevant
      immigration and application history: beyond referring to the  fact  of
      study, it did not  particularise  any  private  life.  The  supporting
      evidence was confined to issues relating to the application under  the
      Rules.


  11. Mr Butt essentially relies upon Judge  Cruthers'  identification  that
      Judge Wallace failed to  address  the  human  rights  grounds  in  her
      determination.


  12. Mr Jack tentatively submits that it may be implied that the Judge  did
      not address directly the human rights grounds because they lacked  any
      merit. In any event, it is submitted on behalf of the Respondent  that
      the Judge made findings to the effect that the evidence before him was
      unreliable, and accordingly the Appellant had failed  to  establish  a
      relevant foundation that might support an Article 8 claim; further  or
      alternatively there was no substance to  the  matters  raised  by  the
      Appellant.


  13. As noted above, there was no supporting evidence in respect of private
      life beyond the educational documents relied upon by the Appellant  in
      the context of her application and appeal under  the  Rules.  Further,
      there was no information provided in the Appellant's witness statement
      relevant to private life beyond her educational pursuits.


  14. As regards the educational documents, the Judge did indeed  find  them
      to be  contradictory,  inconsistent,  and  lacking  (determination  at
      paragraph 19), and also found there to be a lack of explanation as  to
      where the Appellant had been studying (paragraph 18).


  15. In such circumstances I accept Mr Jack's submission that there was  no
      sound evidential basis upon which an Article 8  claim  could  be  made
      out.


  16. Further and in any event, in light  of  the  decisions  in  Patel  and
      others [2013]  UKSC  72  (see  in  particular  per  Lord  Carnwath  at
      paragraph 57), and Nasim and others  (Article  8)  [2014]  UKUT  00025
      (IAC) (in particular that a person's human rights are not enhanced  by
      not committing criminal offences or not relying on public funds),  and
      in  the  absence  of  evidence  of  any  circumstances  that  set  the
      Appellant's case apart from others, I am satisfied that the  Appellant
      could not have succeeded on her appeal on human rights grounds on  the
      basis of wishing to pursue the opportunity to complete studies in  the
      UK.


  17. Accordingly, whist it is unsatisfactory that the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge did not expressly address the Article 8 grounds  raised  by  the
      Appellant, and that such a failure amounts  to  an  error  of  law,  I
      decline to  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  because
      dismissal of the appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  would  have  been
      inevitable.


Decision

  18. The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
      stands.





Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     1 July 2014
