
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34364/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 April 2018                              |On 10 May 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 satnam tank
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss L Turnbull, Counsel, instructed by Louis
Kennedy Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant  to  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Telford (the judge), promulgated on 4 December 2017,  in
    which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision of  17  November  2015.   The  Respondent's  decision  was  in
    relation to an application under Tier 1 of the Immigration  Rules  made
    on 12 December 2012.  The reason why matters have taken so long in this
    case is that the initial application had been  refused  in  2013,  that
    refusal then being successfully appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  in
    2014.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Rothwell had allowed the appeal to the
    limited extent that the original decision was not  in  accordance  with
    the law because financial evidence had not been  considered  and  there
    was an issue with the service of a curtailment decision.  In due course
    a fresh decision was made by the Respondent, and it is this  which  was
    appealed and came before the judge in due course.  The  core  issue  in
    the Respondent's latest decision letter related to the  genuineness  of
    the Appellant's entrepreneurial application under  Tier  1.   In  short
    terms the Respondent clearly  stated  that  she  did  not  believe  the
    Appellant was  a  genuine  entrepreneur  with  reference  to  paragraph
    245DD(h) and (i) of the Rules.

The judge's decision

 2. The appeal had been listed for oral  hearing,  not  least  because  the
    Appellant's  previous  representatives  had  asked  for  this  and  the
    requisite fee had been paid.  Notwithstanding this, the Respondent  did
    not provide a Presenting Officer and  the  Appellant  did  not  attend.
    There was  no  explanation  for  his  non-appearance.   The  judge  was
    satisfied that both parties had been properly notified of  the  hearing
    and he proceeded  to  decide  the  appeal.   Without  setting  out  the
    evidence in any detail the judge notes  the  existence  of  bundles  of
    evidence from both the Appellant and the Respondent [5].   At  [8]  the
    judge states in robust terms that the evidence showed the Appellant  to
    be  "entirely  unprepared  for  beginning,  running  or  developing   a
    business."  The proposed business partner was no longer  available  and
    it is said that the relevant money was not available.  At [9] the judge
    states in summary terms that the Appellant was not  successful  in  the
    appeal in relation to the Rules or under Article 8.  At [10]  and  [11]
    the judge, again in fairly robust terms, concludes that  the  Appellant
    was not a genuine entrepreneur in any way, had no "real money"  to  put
    into any business, and that his  lack  of  knowledge  of  the  proposed
    business partner and circumstances were such that the claim must  fail.
    In relation to Article  8  the  lack  of  relevant  evidence  from  the
    Appellant is noted.  It is concluded that there was no family  life  in
    the United Kingdom, and that any private life here  was  tenuous.   The
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 3. It must be said that the grounds are rather  vague  and  discursive  in
    their nature.  On my reading of the papers before me they appear to  be
    copy and pasted from a witness  statement  provided  by  the  Appellant
    previously.  In essence, they just about raise the issue of an  alleged
    failure to take evidence into account and a lack  of  adequate  reasons
    for findings and/or conclusions reached by the judge.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  P  J  M
    Hollingworth on 8 March 2018.  Grant of permission focuses entirely  on
    the Article 8 claim outside the scope of the Rules.

The hearing before me

 5. Prior to the hearing the Appellant's representatives  had  submitted  a
    bundle of evidence, indexed and paginated 1-96, pursuant to Rule 15(2A)
    of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules.  I admitted this into  evidence,
    although it is entirely irrelevant to the question of whether the judge
    erred in law or not.  What is clear is that the bundle referred  to  by
    the judge in his decision is that  indexed  and  paginated  1-22.  This
    bundle included the Respondent's decision, a witness statement from the
    Appellant dated 28 November 2017, the previous decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Rothwell, and a previous statement  from  the  Appellant
    dated 2013.

 6. At the outset Miss Turnbull indicated that  she  wished  to  amend  the
    grounds of appeal.  When pressed on the point she then  clarified  that
    she was really seeking to condense and clarify the existing ground  and
    was not in fact seeking to add in anything  new.   On  this  basis  and
    without objection from Mr Jarvis the hearing proceeded.  Miss  Turnbull
    submitted that the judge had failed  to  take  relevant  evidence  into
    account and had not provided proper  reasons.   Miss  Turnbull  had  to
    recognise that Judge Rothwell had not made any judicial finding on  the
    existence  of  funds  or  the  genuineness   of   the   entrepreneurial
    application.  However she submitted  that  the  judge  had  simply  not
    considered  financial  evidence  sent  in  by  the  Appellant  to   the
    Respondent.  I pointed out that if financial evidence sent  in  by  the
    Appellant had not been included in the Respondent's bundle it is likely
    that the Appellant and/or his legal  representatives  would  have  been
    aware of this before the hearing and could  have  included  it  in  the
    Appellant's own bundle.  In  relation  to  the  Article  8  issue  Miss
    Turnbull asserted that there was evidence on  the  Appellant's  private
    life.  When asked what this had consisted of, she stated that it was in
    the Appellant's new bundle at which point I  told  her  that  that  was
    irrelevant.  I was concerned with the evidence which was in fact before
    the judge.

 7. For his part Mr Jarvis noted that Judge Rothwell had only  allowed  the
    appeal to a limited extent.  There were no  judicial  findings  on  any
    relevant matter.  He noted that the Appellant had chosen not to  attend
    the hearing before the judge.  It was also the case that due to the age
    of the Appellant's last application the old section 85(5) of  the  2002
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  applied.  Therefore,  the
    only evidence that the judge could have taken  into  account  was  that
    submitted with the application or at the most that provided before  the
    Respondent's decision was made.  Any subsequent change of circumstances
    would have been immaterial.  Mr Jarvis submitted  that  there  were  no
    material errors of law.

 8. Miss Turnbull made no reply.

Decision on error of law

 9. As I announced to the parties at the hearing,  there  are  no  material
    errors of law in the judge's decision.

10. It is right that he expressed himself in brief  and  robust  terms  but
    that does not of itself  disclose  any  error  of  law.   He  did  make
    reference to the evidence before him,  albeit  in  very  summary  form.
    What is important here is the nature of that  evidence.   It  is  quite
    clear to me that the  relevant  evidence  was  that  contained  in  the
    interview record and the Appellant's two  witness  statements.   Having
    read this for myself it is immediately apparent that it  was  extremely
    poor, to say the least.  The Respondent was of  similar  view  and  had
    relied upon the lack of genuineness to  refuse  the  application.   The
    judge did likewise.  On the basis of the  evidence  that  he  did  have
    before him it was open to him to conclude that the Appellant was not  a
    genuine entrepreneur for the reasons briefly stated in [10] and [11] of
    his decision.  A reading of the interview record  in  combination  with
    the two statements shows  that  the  Appellant  had  very  little  idea
    whatsoever as to any business plans, the circumstances of his  proposed
    business partner, or indeed any other aspect of setting up or running a
    business in the United Kingdom.  The issue about the  funds  is  really
    beside the point.  Even if the Appellant had  in  fact  had  access  to
    relevant funds, this would not have in any way  been  determinative  in
    his favour. Indeed, there is not even  the  remotest  possibility  that
    this factor  could  have  trumped  the  considerably  adverse  evidence
    relating to the genuineness of the application as a whole.

11. In any event, there was  no  relevant  financial  evidence  before  the
    judge.  If the Appellant had in fact  sent  in  such  evidence  to  the
    Respondent previously it would have been clear to him and/or his  legal
    representatives that it was not included  in  the  Respondent's  bundle
    prior to the hearing.  The Appellant could  and  should  have  provided
    such evidence himself.  There is no explanation as to why the Appellant
    simply failed to engage with the  appeal  in  this  way.   It  is  also
    notable that he chose not to attend the hearing, something that clearly
    did him no favours whatsoever.

12. In relation to Article 8 there was essentially no evidence at  all  for
    the judge as to the Appellant's private life as noted at  [12]  of  the
    decision.  The thin bundle says virtually nothing  about  any  ties  in
    this country.  In light of the lack of evidence and the  relevant  case
    law, this part of the  Appellant's  case  was  almost  bound  to  fail.
    Certainly, the judge was entitled to conclude  that  removal  would  be
    proportionate in all the circumstances.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain any errors  of  law
and it shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]                  Date: 4 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 4 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
