
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34984/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25th August 2015                  |On 1st September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                SHABBIR ALAM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E MacKay, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on  25th  September  1973.
    He applied for a residence card under Regulation 8 of  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006 on the basis  of  a  durable  relationship  with
    Radostina Genchevar  Murtaza,  born  on  25th  March  1987,  who  is  a
    Bulgarian national.

 2. By letter and notice dated 15th August 2014 the respondent refused that
    application, saying at page 2 that it could not be  accepted  that  the
    appellant was in a durable relationship  with  his  EEA  sponsor  while
    "still married to another individual", and going on to say  that  there
    was insufficient documentary evidence to show the claimed  cohabitation
    of two years.

 3. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Quigley
    dismissed his appeal by  determination  promulgated  on  12th  December
    2014.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, on the
    following grounds:

         "The judge held that  despite  having  a  child  together  who  for
         reasons significantly disputed by the parties has been  taken  into
         social work care and  the  apparently  undisputed  evidence  of  an
         extensive period of cohabitation and there being  no  evidence  ...
         that either party intended that to end the judge  held  the  couple
         are not in a durable relationship.  That finding is  perverse.   No
         reasonable judge could have come to  that  conclusion  withstanding
         the facts of the couple having a child they each  intends  to  live
         with.

         The judge places significant weight on failure of the appellant  to
         seek a divorce from the wife who he has  been  separated  from  for
         many years ... the judge left out of account that many who separate
         do  not  divorce  (ever)  and  that  'durable  relationships'  i.e.
         cohabitating couples do not always eventually marry.  To proceed on
         a different basis is an error in law.

         The judge at paragraph 31 concludes that the appellant  has  sought
         to downplay his relationship with his wife by not referring to  her
         in a Home Office application form.  Another possibility is that the
         appellant had no connection with his wife in Pakistan that required
         him to name her on the form.  The judge failed to explain  why  she
         interpreted the evidence in the way she did.  That is the provision
         of inadequate reasons.

         The judge finds  at  paragraph  31  that  she  doubts  whether  the
         appellant intends  to  marry  his  partner.   That  is  irrelevant.
         Whether both the couple intend to marry and whether they intend  to
         live together in the long term are  different  (often)  independent
         questions.  The judge conflated those questions  and  so  erred  in
         law."

 5. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was that  the  sponsor  had
    considered obtaining  a  divorce  from  her  husband,  but  there  were
    difficulties  over  obtaining  his  agreement  to  sign  papers.    The
    appellant had not taken any steps towards divorce.

 6. The appellant and sponsor  have  a  child,  Sarah  Alam,  born  on  8th
    February 2013.  That appears to have been made clear at the time of the
    application to the respondent, although it  is  not  mentioned  in  the
    refusal decision.

 7. The information available up to the time of the hearing in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was that the  child  was  in  social  work  care  due  to
    concerns that a brain injury had been caused deliberately  by  a  care-
    giver; a proof was pending before the Children's Reporter  on  16th  to
    27th March [apparently of 2014]; the parents had contact with the child
    three times per  week  for  a  minimum  of  three  hours;  and  if  the
    allegations were not established, the child would return to their full-
    time care.  No further information was provided to  the  judge  at  the
    hearing about the child.

 8. Further to the grounds, Mr McKay acknowledged that it might go too  far
    to say that lack of evidence of pursuit of a divorce, or  of  intention
    to marry, was entirely irrelevant, but he argued that such factors were
    not conclusive and that the judge looked to them to  the  exclusion  of
    all else.  There had been undisputed evidence regarding  the  existence
    of the child, the appellant's relationship with the older child of  the
    sponsor, parenting agreements, utility bills, and  so  on.   The  judge
    mentioned some of that evidence and noted that the  Presenting  Officer
    in the First-tier Tribunal acknowledged that there were  few  anomalies
    in oral evidence between the appellant and the sponsor.  That  was  not
    reflected in the outcome.  The determination should be set  aside.   On
    the basis  of  the  evidence  which  had  been  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, it should be reversed.  That would require the  Secretary  of
    State to make a fresh decision, exercising her discretion in  light  of
    the findings.

 9. Mrs Saddiq submitted that the respondent raised the  issue  of  whether
    the sponsor is a qualified person in terms of the Regulations, but  the
    judge failed to touch on  that  significant  point.   On  checking  the
    papers, however, Mrs Saddiq acknowledged that this is not raised in the
    refusal letter.   It  may  be  reflected  in  the  notes  kept  by  the
    Presenting Officer in the First-tier Tribunal on the respondent's file,
    but it is not reflected in the determination and is not dealt  with  in
    the Rule 24 response.

10. Mrs Saddiq went on to argue that the judge was entitled to rely on  the
    absence of any divorce proceedings in respect of the appellant's spouse
    in Pakistan and the absence of any mention of her  on  his  application
    form.  He had been cross-examined about these matters at  the  hearing,
    and the judge had plainly not been satisfied  with  his  answers.   The
    appellant and sponsor were both still married to other parties.   There
    had not been sufficient evidence of cohabitation for periods sufficient
    to justify a finding of a durable relationship.   Having  a  child  was
    relevant but not in  itself  conclusive.   There  was  no  evidence  of
    significant or genuine co-parenting  of  the  child.   The  appellant's
    child of his first marriage had lived with him in the UK for a  period.
    That also cast doubt on whether his relations with another partner were
    genuine.  The sponsor had not given a full and frank disclosure of  the
    circumstances, for example he did not say whether there was  more  than
    one child of his marriage.  The judge's findings had been open to  her,
    adequate reasons were given, and the determination  should  stand.   If
    error were to be found, there would have to be  a  pre-hearing  of  the
    oral evidence.  The evidence was not  such  the  Upper  Tribunal  could
    simply substitute another decision.

11. Mr MacKay in response said that the case had  proceeded  throughout  on
    the assumption that the  sponsor  was  a  qualified  person  exercising
    treaty rights.  The point had never been taken so that  could  not  now
    count against the appellant.  There had been evidence  of  co-parenting
    of the child in the form of a social  work  letter  addressed  to  both
    parties and a letter from the solicitors involved  in  the  family  law
    case.  In essence, the judge had made too much of a  single  factor  in
    reaching her conclusion, and it could not safely stand.

12. I reserved my determination.

13. It is too late now to raise the  question  whether  the  sponsor  is  a
    qualified person for purposes of the application.

14. Parties did not focus either in the FtT or in the UT on the meaning  of
    a durable relationship, or what it takes to prove one.  The term is not
    defined in the Regulations.  It has been generally  accepted  that  the
    criteria in comparable provisions of the Immigration Rules  are  to  be
    taken as "rules of  thumb"  -  YB  [2008]  UKAIT  00062.    MacDonald's
    Immigration Law and Practice 9th ed., vol.1, 6.131, says:

         'Home Office Guidance ... specifies a range  of  requirements  that
         are normally to be satisfied,  including  a  period  of  two  years
         cohabitation in a relationship akin to marriage which has subsisted
         for  at  least  two  years,  and  an  intention  to  live  together
         permanently, although "each case must be considered on its  merits"
         and accepts that a durable relationship may  exist  notwithstanding
         that the specified factors are not satisfied.'

15. Within that rough framework, the existence of  a  durable  relationship
    was a question primarily of fact for the judge to decide.

16. The refusal letter went too far in giving at one point the  appellant's
    legally subsisting marriage  as  a  sufficient  reason  in  itself  for
    finding that he was not in a durable  relationship  with  the  sponsor.
    There may, as the grounds point out, be a durable relationship  between
    persons both of whom are married to other parties.  However,  it  would
    go too far the other way to hold that legal ability  and  intention  to
    marry are irrelevant.  Although not part of the  essential  definition,
    such matters will very often bear on whether there is in fact a durable
    relationship.

17. The argument for the appellant  seeks  to  have  it  that  while  legal
    ability  and  intention  to  marry  are  of  little  significance,  the
    existence of a child is conclusive, or nearly so.  That does  not  come
    close to a rule either.  The existence of a child, and the relationship
    of the parties with that child, will  always  be  important,  no  doubt
    often crucial, but children are born of fleeting as well as of  durable
    relationships.  There was evidence here of a child and some evidence of
    contact but it was limited and notably it  was  not  expanded  upon  or
    updated at the hearing.

18. This is not a case, as the grounds would have it, which on the evidence
    presented could have  gone  only  in  favour  of  the  appellant.   The
    appellant fails to make out perversity.

19. The judge did not  conflate  the  issues  of  intention  to  marry  and
    intention to live together; she took the first as one way, but not  the
    only way, of measuring the second.

20. It is not an error of law that another judge might have interpreted the
    evidence differently and come to  another  conclusion.   The  remaining
    question posed by  the  grounds  is  whether  the  judge  gave  legally
    adequate reasons for coming down on the side she did.

21. The judge summarised the evidence before  her.   She  did  not  make  a
    specific finding on whether there had been two years' cohabitation, but
    it was the durability not the length to date of the relationship  which
    concerned her.  She prefaces her final discussion at paragraph 29  with
    the statement that she has "considered carefully all the evidence"  and
    at the end of paragraph 31 says that her finding is "on  the  basis  of
    all the evidence both oral and documentary".  A recital of  considering
    the evidence is not by itself enough to prove that it  has  been  done,
    but in this case I think it is clear that the judge took on  board  all
    the evidence and then naturally concentrated her analysis on the points
    which concerned her.

22. I do not think that the judge over-concentrated  on  one  factor.   She
    found that  notwithstanding  the  other  surrounding  evidence  on  the
    balance of probability the appellant's intentions towards  the  sponsor
    are not as he says.  She did not consider that evidence  of  seeking  a
    divorce would by itself decide the case.  On the application  form  (at
    page 31 of 37) the appellant was asked to tell the respondent about any
    family, friends or other connections  with  Pakistan.   The  judge  was
    entitled  to  take  the  absence  of  divorce  proceedings,   and   the
    appellant's coy approach on the application form, as shedding light  on
    his state of mind and intentions which were crucial to  the  durability
    of the relationship.

23. I note in passing that if on up to date evidence the  appellant  has  a
    case for a right to reside in the UK under  European  law,  it  remains
    open to him to make a further application.

24. The appellant has not shown that the making of  the  decision  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law, so  the  determination  shall
    stand.

25. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




                           [pic]
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                           28 August 2015
