
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/34421/2015
                                                               IA/34422/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2017                     |On 13 November 2017                  |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      MOHAMED IRUFAN MOHAMMADU SULTHAN
                       FATHIMA SAHINA NAINA MOHAMMADU
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Jafar, instructed by Liyon Legal Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The first respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen of Sri
   Lanka. The second respondent is his wife and dependent.


2. On 28 August 2014 the claimant applied for indefinite leave to remain in
   the UK on the basis of 10 years' continuous lawful residence. On 9
   November 2015 the application was refused on the ground that the claimant
   had previously obtained leave to remain by deception.


3. In a previous application (for leave to remain as a Tier 4 student), the
   claimant had submitted, inter alia, a certificate of completion of the
   test for English for international communication ("TOEIC") provided by
   Education Testing Service ("ETS"). The test was taken at Portsmouth
   International College on 21 February 2012. The Secretary of State
   rejected the claimant's 2014 application for indefinite leave to remain
   on the basis that she considered there to be significant evidence that
   the TOEIC certificate in respect of the test taken on 21 February 2012
   was fraudulently obtained by the use of a proxy test taker and
   consequently ETS had declared the test he had taken to be "invalid".


4. The claimant maintained that he had taken the test himself and appealed
   to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was heard by Judge
   Hodgkinson. In a decision promulgated on 24 February 2017 the judge
   allowed the appeal. The Secretary of State is now appealing against the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


5. Applying SM & Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167, the First-tier Tribunal found
   that the evidence submitted by the Secretary of State satisfied the
   initial evidential burden of proof to show deception had been deployed.
   However the Tribunal found the claimant to be credible, describing his
   oral evidence as being "entirely consistent with content of his [written]
   statement" and a finding was made that the claimant would have no logical
   reason to jeopardise his career by cheating in an English language test.
   At paragraph [27] the judge concluded that "the [claimant] has adduced
   evidence which establishes a prima facie innocent explanation for the
   alleged deception and that the evidence currently available falls
   materially short of discharging the relevant legal burden upon the
   [Secretary of State] in establishing such deception."


6. In reaching his conclusion, the judge made a number of comments and
   findings about the evidence relied upon by the Secretary of State. This
   included:
     a) At paragraph [22] the judge described as anomalous that the
        claimant's test scores were declared invalid over two years after
        the test was taken when ETS's policy indicated that scores were
        retained for only two years; and
     b) At paragraph [26] the judge stated, in respect of the report by
        Professor French adduced by the claimant to show that the
        methodology and approach to identify fraud was robust and errors
        were infrequent, that it had never been tested and arguably lacking
        in detail.


7. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal contend that the judge failed
   to assess correctly the burden of proof in line with SM & Qadir and
   failed to appreciate the initial evidential burden was established. It is
   also argued that had the judge properly considered the Secretary of
   State's evidence, it would have been clear deception had been
   demonstrated.


8. Before me, Mr Jarvis did not seek to pursue the grounds set out in the
   Grounds of Appeal. He commented that he would have difficulty challenging
   the decision for the reasons in the grounds as he accepted that the First
   tier Tribunal had correctly approached the burden of proof and had in
   fact found the initial evidential burden had been satisfied. He instead
   applied for permission to amend the grounds to challenge (a) the First-
   tier Tribunal's finding about test scores not being preserved for more
   than two years; and (b) the First-tier Tribunal's analysis of Professor
   French's report.  The new grounds of appeal differ fundamentally to those
   in the written Grounds of Appeal. Mr Jarvis made clear that if permission
   to amend was not granted he would have to accept that the Secretary of
   State's appeal could not succeed.


9. Rule 5(3)(c) of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008 permits the amendment
   of a document. This is subject to the Upper Tribunal's case management
   powers which must be exercised to promote the overriding objective of
   dealing with the case justly and fairly.


10. In my view, it would be incompatible with the overriding objective to
   permit the Secretary of State to raise a fundamentally different ground
   of appeal (for which permission has not been granted) at the substantive
   hearing when there was ample time to make the application at an earlier
   time, thereby leaving the claimant no chance to consider it and where the
   only justification for the delay is that Mr Jarvis only recently had
   sight of the file.


11. As explained in Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions affecting children;
   onward appeals)[2013] UKUT 00197(IAC) at [16]:


         "What should have happened in this case, is that if the appellant
         wanted to fundamentally depart from the grounds of appeal on which
         permission was obtained he should have lodged an application to
         amend the notice of appeal in good time and secured that a copy of
         such a notice was served on the respondent.....any application to
         fundamentally change the grounds should be made as soon as
         practicable with some explanation of why a legally assisted person
         did not include the amended grounds in the original notice."


12. Accordingly, I refuse the Secretary of State's application to amend the
   grounds of appeal and the Secretary of State is limited to the grounds
   set out in the written grounds of appeal.


13. Following SM and Qadir, the legal burden of proving that the test taker
   used deception lies on the Secretary of State albeit that there is a
   three stage process.


   a) Firstly, the Secretary of State must adduce sufficient evidence to
   raise the issue of fraud.


   b) Secondly, the test taker then has a burden of raising an innocent
   explanation which satisfies the minimum level of plausibility.


   c) Thirdly, if that burden is discharged, the Secretary of State must
   establish on a balance of probabilities that this innocent explanation is
   to be rejected.

14. The grounds argue that the judge erred by failing to recognise the
   first stage had been satisfied. The difficulty with this contention, as
   acknowledged by Mr Jarvis, is that the judge clearly found that the
   Secretary of State had adduced sufficient evidence to raise the issue of
   fraud (ie he found the first stage was met). The Judge proceeded to
   consider the claimant's innocent explanation (the second stage) and
   whether the legal burden had been discharged (the third stage). The judge
   has approached the case in accordance with SM and Qadir, and has properly
   applied the burden of proof. Accordingly, the Secretary of State cannot
   succeed under the (un-amended) grounds of appeal and her appeal is
   dismissed.

Decision


A. The appeal is dismissed.

B. The judge has not made a material error of law and the decision of the
First-tier Tribunal stands.
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated:  10 November 2017             |
















