

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/34847/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester                |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 27th March 2015                  |On: 21st May 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mercy Kadewa
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Barton, SABZ Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Respondent is a national of Malawi born 21st August 1979. On  the
       1st December 2014 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Herwald) allowed her
       appeal against a decision to refuse to vary her leave to  remain  and
       to remove her  from  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  s47  of  the
       Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006. The Secretary  of  State
       now has permission to appeal  against  that  positive  determination,
       granted by Judge Keane of the First-tier Tribunal on the 27th January
       2015.

    2. The case before Judge Herwald concerned whether or not Ms Kadewa  met
       the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  relating  to  continuous
       lawful long residence.  It was accepted that Ms Kadewa  had  come  to
       the UK as a visitor in December 2001 and had  thereafter  varied  her
       leave so as to be granted further leave to remain as a  student,  and
       subsequently as a highly skilled migrant.    She  had  remained  here
       ever since. Her application for indefinite leave was however  refused
       by the Secretary of State on the grounds that there was a  period  in
       which she had not had lawful leave  to  remain:  the  refusal  letter
       identified this period as 30th September 2005 to 23rd February 2009.

    3. Judge Herwald heard, read and accepted evidence from Ms Kadewa  about
       what had happened during the period in question. She had valid  leave
       to remain as a student when, on the 27th April 2005, she had made  an
       application for further leave to  remain  in  the  same  capacity[1].
       Her solicitors chased the Home Office[2] but she heard nothing  until
       November of that year when she received a "holding reply"[3].  On the
       18th August 2006 the Home Office wrote to  Ms  Kadewa  informing  her
       that her application had been "considered and granted"  on  the  26th
       May 2005 and that her passport had been returned  to  her  via  Royal
       Mail[4]. The letter suggested that she take the matter up with  them.
       On the 30th August the Home Office wrote again, to inform  Ms  Kadewa
       that the Royal Mail accepted responsibility for losing her  passport,
       and that she could apply for compensation from them. The same day the
       Home Office wrote to the High Commission of the  Republic  of  Malawi
       explaining that the passport had been lost  by  the  Royal  Mail  and
       respectfully asking that they deal with any application by Ms  Kadewa
       for a replacement as a matter of urgency.  Yet another letter of  the
       same date informed Ms Kadewa that the leave she had been  granted  in
       May 2005 had expired on the 30th September 2005 had expired and  that
       she should "make arrangements to  leave  this  country"  as  soon  as
       possible.

    4. The Malawian authorities did not issue a new passport until the  20th
       November 2006. Judge Herwald accepted Ms Kadewa's oral evidence  that
       she did not receive it until some time in 2007. On the 5th July  2007
       she made a new application. Her solicitors set out the  full  history
       of the matter and pointed out that none of it was Ms Kadewa's  fault.
       The Home Office did  not  respond.  Ms  Kadewa's  solicitors  made  a
       further application with representations on the 7th November 2008; Ms
       Kadewa was subsequently  granted  leave  to  remain  which  was  then
       renewed on three occasions.

    5. As can be seen from that history Ms Kadewa was technically became  an
       overstayer on the 30th September 2005. It can also be seen  that  the
       Home Office accept that she cannot have known about that at the time,
       since  as  far  as  she  was  concerned  her  application  was   then
       outstanding. She was not informed that her leave  had  been  granted,
       and lapsed, until the 30th August 2006.   She could not at that point
       do anything at all about it. She had no passport, no endorsement  and
       was therefore not in a position to make a further  application,   nor
       even to lodge an out-of-time appeal  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
       That this was so was apparently accepted by  the  HOPO  who  appeared
       before Judge Herwald, a Ms Horren. She accepted that Ms Kadewa  could
       only reasonably be held culpable for the  delay  between  her  having
       received her passport "sometime" in the first part of 2007 and making
       the new application in July of that year: see paragraph 19(a)&(d)  of
       the determination.  This concession considerably narrowed the gap  in
       continuous lawful leave.   Of that remaining gap Judge Herwald  found
       as follows:

           "The Secretary of State opined that this was a significant break
           in her lawful residence, but I note from the refusal letter that
           the Secretary of State has a  discretionary  power  to  waive  a
           breach of the Immigration Rules and in this case one wonders why
           she did not do so, given that  the  reasons  why  the  Appellant
           might have become an overstayer were plainly and  obviously  not
           down to her, but to a greater extent down to the Home Office and
           its apparent policy of lengthy delay"

       This reference to delay was, as I read  it,  to  the  period  between
       April 2005 when Ms Kadewa had  made  her  application  and  the  18th
       August 2006 when the solicitors finally  receive  a  reply  to  their
       chasing letters. The determination goes on:

           "It is impossible to ignore the potent argument put  forward  in
           the  Grounds  of  Appeal  as  to  legitimate   expectation.   By
           repeatedly granting further periods of leave it  could  be  said
           that the Home Office had created a legitimate  expectation  that
           her presence in the UK had been lawful and  continuous  for  the
           requisite period, but even if I am wrong in that  regard,  I  am
           not satisfied that the Home Office has in this case acted fairly
           in all the circumstances.."

    6. The determination concludes: "I am not persuaded that the Home Office
       acted fairly, and I am persuaded that the Secretary of State   should
       have exercised her  discretion  differently.  For  the  avoidance  of
       doubt, had the Appellant not succeeded under the Immigration Rules, I
       would have been persuaded that given the length of time she has spent
       in this country, and the possibility of a  settled  partner  in  this
       country (which issue  was  not  necessarily  argued  before  me)  the
       Appellant would have succeeded under Human  Rights  Provisions".  The
       appeal is thereby allowed under the Rules.

    7. The Secretary of State now appeals  the  decision  on  the  following
       grounds:

        i) The Appellant has remained in the United Kingdom  without  leave
           between 30 September 2005 and 23rd February 2009.  As  such  her
           period of continuous  lawful  residence  was  considered  to  be
           broken at that point.  Even  if  the  loss  of  the  Appellant's
           passport and the  leave  contained  within  it  was  taken  into
           account, the Appellant was aware that she was in the UK  without
           leave from 30th August 2006 yet did not  attempt  to  regularise
           her status until the 5th July 2007. That is  a  period  of  more
           than 28 days.

       ii) The Respondent maintains that the Appellant cannot  satisfy  the
           requirements of the Immigration Rules.

       My Findings

    8. Before me Ms Barton expressed some surprise  that  the  Secretary  of
       State was appealing this decision. Mr  Harrison  very  candidly  said
       much the same.

    9. The ground of appeal initially suggest that the  Secretary  of  State
       seeks to go behind the concession made by Ms Horren on the day,  that
       the break in question is in fact much shorter than  that  claimed  in
       the refusal letter. The grounds then protest that the period  between
       30th August 2006 (when she discovered that her leave had lapsed)  and
       the 7th July 2007 (when she made her application) is "longer than  28
       days".  Quite what the point is of  that  statement  of  fact,  I  am
       unsure. As Mr Harrison agreed, there was not a lot  Ms  Kadewa  could
       have done until she got her new  passport  "sometime  in  2007".  The
       period under consideration was therefore narrower still.

   10. This was not the period considered by the Secretary of State when she
       declined to exercise  her  discretion  in  Ms  Kadewa's  favour.  The
       refusal letter  is  concerned  with  a  break  in  continuous  lawful
       residence of 3 year and 4 months, a period which both Ms  Horren  and
       Mr Harrison agreed the Secretary of State could not  rationally  rely
       upon.  There was no evidence before Judge Herwald that the  Secretary
       of State had given consideration to exercising her discretion  in  Ms
       Kadewa's favour in respect of the weeks between her receiving her new
       passport and making her new application. In  those  circumstances  he
       was entitled to make the criticisms  he  does  of  the  Secretary  of
       State's approach.  The factors he  highlights  as  relevant  to  that
       consideration are the fact that the passport was lost, that there was
       considerable delay on the part of the Home  Office  in  dealing  with
       this matter and that in making three successive grants of  leave  the
       Home Office had given Ms Kadewa a  legitimate  expectation  that  her
       period of overstaying was to be overlooked and that indefinite  leave
       would eventually be granted. In respect of this  last  point  I  note
       that this has not been challenged. It was a finding that was open  to
       Judge Herwald on the evidence before him and is highly pertinent.  Ms
       Kadewa has always been self-funding, investing  considerable  amounts
       of money in her education in this country, and then taking up work as
       a highly skilled migrant. She continued to do that in the  legitimate
       expectation that she would be eventually granted indefinite leave  to
       remain in the UK.

   11. The fault, if it can be found, lies in the  concluding  line  of  the
       determination. The appeal is allowed "under the  Immigration  Rules",
       when in fact the reasoning suggests that it should have been  allowed
       as "not in accordance with the  law"   and,  in  light  of  paragraph
       19(e), on human rights grounds.   It was not open to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to allow the appeal under the Rules outright, since  success
       under paragraph 276A depended on the Secretary of  State  considering
       whether to exercise her  discretion  in  respect  of  the  period  of
       overstaying in the first few months of 2007, taking into account  the
       factors highlighted by this determination.    Following  the  finding
       that this had not been done and that the Secretary of State  had  not
       acted fairly in her consideration of this matter, the  proper  course
       would have been to allow the appeal as "not in  accordance  with  the
       law".  I set aside and re-make the decision to that extent.

   12. As for human rights it is true that the reasoning in 19(e) is  scant,
       but I am satisfied that  it  is  sustainable.  The  reference  to  Ms
       Kadewa's partner was to unchallenged  evidence  before  the  Tribunal
       that she was a long-term relationship with a Malawian  national  with
       indefinite leave to remain. The central point being made however  was
       that  this  appeal  should  have  succeeded   "under   human   rights
       provisions" because there was, in light of the earlier findings about
       unfairness, very little weighing on the Secretary of State's side  of
       the scales in  respect  of  proportionality.  It  could  not  in  the
       circumstances be shown that Ms Kadewa's removal from the UK would  be
       necessary in pursuit of the legitimate aim of protecting the economy.
        She speaks perfect English, is entirely financially  self-sufficient
       and apart from the brief period that was the focus of the appeal  had
       always had lawful leave  in  the  UK.  Judge  Herwald  had  made  his
       findings about  the  fairness  of  holding  that  against  Ms  Kadewa
       perfectly clear. The grounds make no challenge  to  the  findings  in
       paragraph 19(e). I therefore re-make the decision to the extent  that
       I would also allow it on human rights grounds.

       Decisions

   13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law
       in that the finding that the appeal  should  be  allowed  "under  the
       Immigration Rules" is set aside.

   14. The determination is upheld save that paragraph 20 should now read:

       "The appeal is allowed as the decision of the Secretary of State  was
       not in accordance with the law.

       The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds".

   15. I was not asked to make a direction as to anonymity and on the  facts
       I see no reason to do so.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                1st May 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] See page 100 of Ms Kadewa's First-tier Tribunal bundle
[2] Page 99
[3] Page 98
[4] Page 97

