
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34729/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 November 2015                  |On 22 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MATHILDE BASINKIANI KASONGO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss L Appiah, Counsel, instructed by Phil Silvers
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Claimant to this appeal is a national of the Democratic Republic of
    Congo [DRC].  She was born on 20 April 1938 and  is  therefore  now  77
    years of age.  She arrived in the United Kingdom on 25 February 2012 on
    a visit visa with six months' leave valid until 26 July  2012.   On  23
    June 2012 she made an application to vary her leave to remain but  this
    application was refused just over a year later on 28 June 2013.

 2. There were then technical issues in respect of the defective notice  of
    decision with the consequence that the appeal was  remitted  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Fletcher-Hill back to the Home Office in  order  to
    be remade. On 22 August 2014, the decision was made  refusing  to  vary
    the Claimant's leave to remain in the United Kingdom and to remove  her
    by way of Section 47 directions.  The Claimant appealed  against  these
    decisions on 2 September 2014 and her appeal came before Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Head-Rapson for hearing on 23 March 2015.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 27 May 2015 the Judge allowed  the  appeal
    having heard evidence from the Claimant  and  her  two  sons  who  were
    Sponsors in the case.  The Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to
    appeal against this decision on 10 June 2015 on two grounds.  The first
    was that the Judge did not engage with the substantive requirements  of
    the adult dependent relative Rules in Appendix FM and it was  submitted
    that insufficient weight was given to the need for immigration  control
    by lack of regard for the public policy reasons for replacing  the  old
    Rule 317 with the new adult dependent relative Rules  in  Appendix  FM.
    The second ground asserted that the judge erred materially  in  law  in
    accepting the credibility of a document produced at  the  hearing  with
    reference to the case of Tanveer Ahmed [2002] Imm AR 318.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on
    12 August 2015 on the basis that it was arguable  that  the  Judge  had
    failed to engage fully with the substantive requirements of  the  adult
    dependent relative Rules  under  Appendix  FM  and  the  public  policy
    reasons for those Rules and that it was arguable that the  Judge  erred
    in law in applying the wrong standard  of  proof  with  regard  to  her
    reference to Tanveer Ahmed [2002] Imm AR 318 as this was not an  asylum
    case.

 5. The Judge granting permission to appeal took three other points of  his
    own volition but these were neither  raised  nor  relied  upon  at  the
    hearing before me and I do not propose to address them,  except  as  to
    say that I do not consider that they would be sufficient  to  undermine
    the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Head-Rapson.

    Hearing

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Staunton made submissions on behalf of  the
    Secretary of State and relied upon the grounds of  appeal  as  drafted.
    Miss Appiah responded and she submitted firstly, that in respect of the
    elderly dependent Rules that the judge did not have them in mind,  that
    she was not obliged to where her decision was fully reasoned  and  even
    if she should have looked at the elderly dependent Rules  paragraph  56
    of her decision is clearly reasoned in  terms  of  her  proportionality
    assessment.  In  respect  of  the  Tanveer  Ahmed  point,  Miss  Appiah
    submitted that in  fact  the  judge  did  not  essentially  accept  the
    document in question and that is clear from the terms of that paragraph
    itself, paragraph 36 of the decision, where she says  "I  am  satisfied
    the Appellant's uncorroborated  evidence  has  to  be  approached  with
    caution".







    Decision

 7. I find that there is no material error of law in the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Head-Rapson.  My reasons are as follows. In respect
    of the first ground, it is clear  having  regard  to  the  Respondent's
    refusal of 22 August 2014, that the application was not treated  as  an
    application under the elderly dependent Rules  viz  EC-DR  or  R-ILRDR.
    There is no reference to them in that decision.  Moreover  Mr  Staunton
    confirmed having had regard to the record of proceedings  made  by  the
    Presenting Officer at the First-tier Tribunal, that no  arguments  were
    raised or entertained by the Judge in respect of the elderly  dependent
    Rules.

 8. On that basis I consider that ground 1  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds has no relevance given that this  is  not  an  entry  clearance
    appeal and given that the appeal was brought entirely on the  basis  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules and Article 8 outside the  Rules  on  the
    basis of exceptional circumstances and there is no  material  error  of
    law in the judge's approach to the refusal and  to  the  appeal  before
    her.

 9. In respect of the second of the grounds of appeal,  and  the  assertion
    that the Judge erred in accepting the credibility of a document without
    reference to Tanveer Ahmed, the Judge did not make a material error  of
    law because, as Miss Appiah has helpfully pointed out,  the  Judge  did
    not in any event accept the Claimant's uncorroborated  evidence.   That
    evidence is essentially one document that is a declaration by a  family
    friend from the DRC [at pages 20-21 of the Claimant's bundle]. It is in
    French with an English translation and it confirms that the  Claimant's
    property, number 14 Avenue Masala, no longer belongs to her as none  of
    her family members  live  there  any  more  and  is  essentially  being
    occupied by third parties.  The reference  to  Tanveer  Ahmed  and  the
    documents that the  Judge  was  being  asked  to  consider  essentially
    related solely to the issue of the ability of the Claimant to return to
    a home in the DRC.  Given that this was only one aspect of the case and
    given that the Judge accepted the other evidence  in  relation  to  the
    Claimant's age, state of health, need for care and the ability  of  her
    Sponsor sons to care for her, I do not consider that the  reference  to
    Tanveer Ahmed made any material difference to the outcome of the appeal
    or to the safety of the judge's decision.

Notice of Decision

10. For these reasons I dismiss the appeal by the Secretary  of  State  and
    uphold the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Head-Rapson.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
