
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34001/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 11 December 2014                  |On 23 December 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           MR ASAD MUHAMMAD MALIK
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath a Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer
    For the Respondent:    Mr A Jafar of counsel instructed by Lee Valley
    Solicitors




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. The appellant is the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
         ("the Secretary of State"). The respondent is a citizen of Pakistan
         who was born on 13 March 1984 ("the claimant").  The  Secretary  of
         State has been given permission  to  appeal  the  determination  of
         First-Tier Tribunal Judge Rastogi  ("the  FTTJ")  who  allowed  the
         claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision  of  5
         August 2013 to refuse to grant him further leave to remain  in  the
         UK on Article 8 private life human rights grounds. The  appeal  was
         allowed only to the limited extent that the  Secretary  of  State's
         decision was found not to be in accordance with the law and  should
         be reconsidered by her before reaching a lawful decision.


      2. The Secretary of State's decision stated that the  application  was
         refused on Article 8 human rights  grounds  under  the  Immigration
         Rules. Furthermore, the claimant had  not  shown  that  there  were
         exceptional  circumstances  which  justified  the  grant  of  leave
         outside the Rules. The  Secretary  of  State  also  said  that  the
         claimant had no right of appeal as his application  is  made  at  a
         time when he did not have valid leave to be in the UK.


      3. The claimant appealed and the FTTJ heard  the  appeal  on  20  June
         2014. The Secretary of State's position at the hearing continued to
         be that the claimant had no right of  appeal.  The  FTTJ  concluded
         that the Secretary of State had made an  immigration  decision  and
         that the claimant had a right of appeal which had been exercised in
         time.


      4. The claimant's representative indicated that the claimant wished to
         raise  a  fresh  ground  of  appeal;  10  years  continuous  lawful
         residence under the provisions of paragraph 276AB of the Rules. The
         Secretary of State's representative accepted that the claimant  was
         entitled to do this but it was common ground that  if  he  did  the
         application would first need to be considered by the  Secretary  of
         State. It was for this reason that the FTTJ allowed the  appeal  to
         the limited extent that the Secretary of State's decision  was  not
         in accordance with the law and should be reconsidered by her before
         reaching a lawful decision.


      5. The FTTJ went on to  give  reasons  for  her  conclusion  that  the
         Secretary of State had made an immigration decision  and  that  the
         claimant had a right of appeal which had been  exercised  in  time.
         There was an  issue  as  to  whether  the  claimant  had  submitted
         photographs  in  the  correct  format  with  his  application.  The
         Secretary of State argued that he had not. The FTTJ found that  the
         Secretary of State had failed to produce the photographs and  as  a
         result had failed to show that they did not meet the requirements.


      6. The Secretary of State  applied  to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  the
         permission to appeal. The ground submits that the FTTJ erred in law
         in reaching the conclusion that she had jurisdiction  to  hear  the
         appeal. The judge who considered the application for permission  to
         appeal refused to admit it on the basis that it was out of time and
         the Secretary of State had failed  to  establish  that  there  were
         special circumstances which merited the extension of time under the
         provisions of Rule 24 (4) of the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
         (Procedure) Rules 2005 (as amended).


      7. The Secretary  of  State  renewed  her  application  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal and permission to appeal was granted by  a  judge  in  the
         Upper Tribunal. Nothing was said about the timeliness issue  except
         for; "the application for permission to appeal  to  the  First-Tier
         Tribunal was  not  considered  on  its  merits  due  to  timeliness
         issues".


      8. I asked the representatives to address me on the preliminary  issue
         of whether the Secretary of State's application for  permission  to
         appeal to the Upper Tribunal was in time and if not  whether  there
         were exceptional circumstances which merited time being extended.


      9. I referred the representatives to BO and Others (Extension of  time
         for appealing) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00035 (12 April  2006),  Boktor
         and Wanis (late application for permission) Egypt [2011]  UKUT  442
         (IAC) (22 November 2011) and Samir (FTT Permission to appeal: time)
         Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 3 (IAC) (04 January  2013).  Both  of  them
         told me that they were aware of these cases. BO is referred  to  in
         the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal.


     10. It is common ground that the FTTJ's determination  was  promulgated
         on 27 June 2014. The deadline for applying for permission to appeal
         was 7 July 2014.  The application for  permission  to  appeal  was
         received by the Tribunal three weeks late on 28 July 2014. The only
         reasons given by the Secretary of State for the late submission  of
         the application were; "The reason this application was not made  in
         time is due to a shortage of  resources  within  the  Secretary  of
         State's Specialist Appeals Team, it was not possible  to  have  the
         Determination reviewed within  the  time  limit  for  appeal."  The
         grounds also state that the strength of the grounds of appeal weigh
         particularly heavily towards permission being granted.


     11. Mr Nath relied on the grounds of appeal and the considerations  set
         out in BO. The strong merits of the appeal were an important factor
         which should lead to time being extended.


     12. Mr Jafar submitted that the only reason given by the  Secretary  of
         State was a shortage of  resources.  This  was  not  an  individual
         reason relating to the circumstances of this  case  but  a  generic
         explanation. It was not likely that  a  similar  explanation  would
         assist an individual rather than  the  Secretary  of  State.  Three
         weeks was a significant delay. The Secretary of State had even  now
         failed to provide  the  photographs  which  she  said  merited  the
         refusal of the claimant's application.


     13. I indicated that I would rule against the Secretary  of  State  for
         reasons to be given in writing.


     14. Boktor and Wanis provides, in the headnote prepared by  the  author
         of the determination; "Where permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal  has  been  granted,  but  in  circumstances   where   the
         application is out of time, an explanation is  provided,  but  that
         explanation is not considered by the judge granting permission,  in
         the light of AK (Tribunal appeal - out of  time)  Bulgaria [2004]
         UKIAT 00201 (starred) and the clear wording of rule 24(4)  of  the
         Asylum  and  Immigration  (Procedure)  Rules  2005,  the  grant  of
         permission to appeal is conditional, and the question of  whether
         there are special circumstances making it unjust not to extend time
         has to be considered."  I  find  that  as  the  judge  who  granted
         permission to appeal in the Upper Tribunal did not consider whether
         there were special circumstances making it  unjust  not  to  extend
         time her granted permission to appeal was conditional  and  I  must
         consider this question.


     15. Following  Samir  and  as  the  decision  on  the  application  for
         permission to appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal was a  decision  to
         refuse to extend time because special circumstances  had  not  been
         demonstrated and the decision on the  renewed  application  to  the
         Upper  Tribunal  did  not  consider  whether  there  were   special
         circumstances the decision I now take is a decision  in  the  Upper
         Tribunal and there is no possibility to renew  the  application  to
         the Upper Tribunal.


     16. As is conceded I find that the application for permission to appeal
         was out of time by three weeks.  The  only  explanation  was;  "The
         reason this application was not made in time is due to  a  shortage
         of resources within the Secretary  of  State's  Specialist  Appeals
         Team, it was not possible to have the Determination reviewed within
         the time limit for appeal." The Secretary of State has submitted no
         evidence to support the explanation. It is not suggested  that  the
         application had been lost or that a  mistake  had  been  made.  The
         explanation appears to cover the whole of the period of  delay.  It
         gives the very strong impression of a generic explanation  applying
         to a number of cases rather than an individual explanation  limited
         to this case. It is difficult to see how it does not  or  does  not
         come close to an acknowledgement of fault.  I find  that  in  these
         circumstances whilst an explanation has been provided it is  not  a
         satisfactory explanation.


     17. The Secretary of State has not suggested that the  issues  in  this
         appeal have any wider public importance or that  she  would  suffer
         any serious denial of justice  if  permission  to  appeal  was  not
         granted.


     18. Should I be mistaken in my conclusion that the Secretary  of  State
         has not provided a satisfactory explanation I consider the question
         of whether the strength of the grounds of appeal  should  be  taken
         into account and assist her. This  is  a  complicated  case  but  I
         consider  that  the  grounds  are  no  more  than   arguable.   The
         consequence of the decision adverse to the Secretary of State is to
         some degree diminished by the fact that the decision is to send the
         case back to her for further consideration rather than allowing the
         appeal outright, albeit in the light of the findings of  fact  made
         by the FTTJ.


     19. I have not been asked to make an anonymity  direction  and  in  the
         circumstances of this case can see no good reason to do so.


     20. In the light of the  provisions  of  Rule  24  of  The  Asylum  and
         Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  (as  amended)  I  find
         that the time for appealing should not be extended because I am not
         satisfied that by reason  of  special  circumstances  it  would  be
         unjust not to do so. In the circumstances I must  not  and  do  not
         admit the Secretary of State's application for permission to appeal
         to the Upper Tribunal.






    .............................................
    Signed        Date 13 December 2014
    Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden


