

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/34063/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 July 2017                       |On 1 August 2017                     |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                        NILESHKUMAR BAVABHAI MANGELA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Subbarayan, of Sivaramen, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION

   1. The appellant has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Place who,  by  a  determination
      promulgated on 20 March 2017, dismissed his appeal against refusal  to
      grant him leave to remain on the basis of rights protected by  article
      8 of the ECHR. The grounds upon which permission to appeal was  sought
      and granted conclude by summarising the  challenge  pursued  as  being
      that the judge made the following errors of law:


        a. She failed adequately to have regard to the  best  interests  of
           the appellant's child;
        b. She failed to consider whether the appellant should  succeed  on
           the basis that the requirements of para 276ADE of the rules were
           met on the basis that the son's autism meant there would be very
           significant obstacles to integration in India;
        c. The judge wrongly  failed  to  consider  whether  the  appellant
           should succeed under para 276A1
        d. The assessment of proportionality for the purposes of article  8
           ECRH outside the rules was legally flawed


   2. In his oral submissions, Mr Subbarayan refined those grounds,  placing
      the emphasis upon the complaint that the judge failed to have adequate
      regard to what was in the best interest of the appellant's son. In  so
      doing, he advanced arguments straying between his grounds, rather than
      addressing each in turn, which I took to represent his view  that  the
      need to treat the best interests of the appellant's child as a primary
      consideration was a thread woven through his  challenge  generally  to
      the decision of the judge. I shall, though, do my best to address each
      of the issues he has raised.


   3. The appellant, who is a  citizen  of  India,  arrived  in  the  United
      Kingdom in May 2006 and was admitted as a student with leave that  was
      progressively extended until 30 August 2012. His wife, also a  citizen
      of India, joined him 3 years later and was granted leave  in  line  as
      his dependant. It was established in  submissions  this  morning  that
      although the appellant was admitted for the purpose of study,  he  did
      not secure any academic qualification because his college closed down.
      He last attended a college in 2009 and, although the last extension of
      his leave was for a period between 30 September  2010  and  30  August
      2012, I was told that was on the basis that by then his wife had  been
      granted leave to remain as a student and his leave was extended as her
      dependant.


   4. On 23 August 2012, he made an application for leave to remain  on  the
      basis of rights protected by article  8  ECHR.  That  application  for
      leave to remain on the basis of family and private life was refused by
      a  decision  dated  30  September  2013  but,  for  reasons  that   go
      unexplained, that decision was said by the appellant not to have  been
      served until about two years later.  The appellant lived throughout at
      [ ] Poppy Field in Kettering  but  had  chosen  to  give  a  different
      address, [ ] Braddon Road in Loughborough, to the respondent, but that
      does not seem to explain the delay  in  the  appellant  receiving  the
      decision. It can be seen that in the respondent's bundle is a copy  of
      a letter from the respondent, dated 30 September  2013,  addressed  to
      the appellant at [ ] Braddon Road, enclosing a copy of the refusal. If
      that was not sent or received, or forwarded to the appellant from  his
      chosen "correspondence address", we do not now know why.


   5. At the commencement of the hearing, Mr  Melvin  raised  the  issue  of
      whether there was any valid appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
      given that, on its face, the appeal was brought significantly  out  of
      time and there is no indication that there ever was an application  to
      extend time. However, it  can  be  seen  from  the  notice  of  appeal
      submitted by the appellant that  he  said,  at  section  2,  that  the
      decision of 30 September 2013 had not been  "sent"  until  28  October
      2015 and there has been no challenge to that, so that the  appeal  was
      treated as being brought in time. As is recorded at paragraph 3 of the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  now  under  challenge,  the
      judge herself raised this issue but  the  respondent's  representative
      did not dispute the date of receipt asserted by the appellant.  In  my
      judgment, it is now too late to revisit that matter.


   6. The respondent refused the application because as the appellant's wife
      was not an Indian citizen and was not settled or a refugee,  he  could
      not meet the requirements of the rules under the partnership route and
      as the child was also a citizen of India who had not been resident  in
      the United Kingdom for at least  7  years,  the  appellant  could  not
      succeed under the rules on the basis of the parent route. EX1 did  not
      apply because the appellant did not meet the eligibility  requirements
      of the rules. As for private life, the appellant had spent  the  first
      22 years of his life in India and had not lived in the United  Kingdom
      for the 20 years demanded in respect of long  residence  applications.
      It was not accepted that he would have lost all ties with his  country
      of nationality. Finally, the respondent could  not  identify  anything
      disclosed by the application that demanded a grant  of  leave  outside
      the rules in order to secure an outcome compatible with article 8.

   7. As we shall see, the arguments advanced before the First-tier Tribunal
      in support of the article 8  claim  were  clearly  focussed  upon  the
      appellant's son and his special needs as an autistic child. The reason
      there is  no  mention  of  that  matter  in  the  refusal  letter  is,
      presumably, because the respondent was unaware of the  fact  that  the
      child was autistic. Although the application form was accompanied by a
      6 page long typed letter, this  was  an  issue  that  was  simply  not
      raised. Although that might well be explained by the young age of  the
      child  at  that  time,   there  is  no  suggestion  that  any  further
      submissions were made  subsequently  while  the  appellant  awaited  a
      decision on that application, which he did not  believe  had  happened
      until October 2015.

   8. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Place  on  7  March
      2017. She summarised the evidence called  before  her.  The  appellant
      said he had now been living in the United Kingdom for  10  years,  and
      his wife for 7 years.  Their  son,  born  on  28  February  2011,  was
      autistic and in need of special schooling and attention.  He  and  his
      wife received financial support and practical help with care  for  his
      son from his wife's 3 sisters, all of whom are settled in  the  United
      Kingdom. He was no longer in contact with his parents in India, having
      married against their will. He has 2  sisters  and  1  sister  in  law
      living in India. He confirmed that the financial support  he  received
      from his sisters-in-law in the United Kingdom would continue should he
      and his wife and son move to India. The appellant said that  his  son,
      now 6 years old, was making some progress in a special school here and
      that there was not much social care support available in India.

   9. The appellant's wife gave oral evidence, saying that her son  received
      excellent care and support in the United Kingdom and  that  she  would
      find it hard to manage without the practical support provided  by  her
      sisters in looking after her son.

  10. Two of the appellant's sisters-in-law gave oral evidence.  They  spoke
      of having developed a relationship with the appellant's son  and  said
      that whilst visits to India would be possible,  they  could  not  take
      place frequently because there was a business to  run  in  the  United
      Kingdom and children who are at school.

  11. The findings made by the judge are set  out  at  some  length  between
      paragraphs 20-40 of her decision. She began by recording this:

           "Mr Subbarayan (the appellant's legal  representative)  accepted
           that the Appellant does not qualify for leave to remain  on  the
           basis of the provisions of Appendix FM or  paragraph  276ADE  of
           the Immigration Rules  and  the  matter  therefore  fell  to  be
           decided under Article 8."
      Remarkably, given the clear and unambiguous terms in which  the  judge
      expressed herself, in the grounds upon which the appellant sought  and
      was granted  permission  to  appeal  it  is  contended  that  no  such
      concession was  made.  It  is  said  in  the  grounds  that  the  only
      concession that was made was that  the  appellant  could  not  succeed
      under EX.1. I do not accept that the grounds accurately represent what
      was said before the judge. Support for the position as recorded by the
      judge is found in what has been said by the respondent in the rule  24
      response:
           "From the records held by the respondent from the hearing it  is
           submitted that the appellant's representative conceded that  the
           appellant's claim was only submitted under Article 8 outside  of
           the Rules which is reflected in  the  Judge's  consideration  of
           Article 8 outside of the Rules."
      The grounds for seeking permission to appeal go  on  to  assert  that,
      contrary to the  concession  as  noted  by  both  the  judge  and  the
      respondent's representative present at the  hearing,  the  appellant's
      representative "made submissions on it, i.e. paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)".
      But it seems clear from the evidence before  me  and  the  submissions
      advanced, that any such submissions were not advanced to show that the
      concession just given that the appellant could not succeed  under  the
      rules was wrongly made but were made  in  support  of  the  submission
      that, given the prominence to be given to the best  interests  of  the
      appellant's child, a grant of leave outside the rules, was required in
      order to avoid an impermissible infringement of  rights  protected  by
      article 8.

  12. In any event, this issue is not material, ultimately, to  the  outcome
      of this appeal, because, leaving aside the fact that the child had not
      lived in the United Kingdom for at least seven years and  although  in
      the context of the judge's assessment of the article 8 claim  informed
      by what she considered to be in the best interests of  the  child,  at
      paragraph 36 of her determination the judge delivered an answer to the
      question posed by para 276ADE(iv), saying:
           "Taking all the evidence into account, I find  that  it  is  not
           unreasonable to expect [the child] to be able to adjust to  life
           in India with his parents."
      And it is implicit from the findings made by the judge as a whole that
      she was bound to have found that the appellant and his wife would  not
      encounter the very significant obstacles to integration on  return  to
      India that are demanded by A276ADE(vi).
  13. Having explained that the matter in  issue  between  the  parties  was
      whether the appellant could succeed on the basis of a  proportionality
      assessment outside the rules, the judge directed herself in  terms  of
      the five questions posed by Lord Bingham in R (Razgar) v  SSHD  [2004]
      UKHL 27 and then addressed those questions in  turn,  concluding  that
      the first four questions returned a positive answer so that:

      "The question for me is therefore proportionality."

  14. She began her analysis of the question of  proportionality  by  saying
      that:
           "I am conscious of the need to take the best  interests  of  the
           child as a primary consideration in any case..."
      and a little later on:
           "The crux of the  Appellant's  case  is  that,  as  his  son  is
           autistic, it is in the child's best interests to remain  in  the
           UK where there is excellent support for him. It is not  disputed
           that [the child] has a diagnosis of autism..."
      Therefore, the complaint in the  grounds  that  the  judge  failed  to
      consider the welfare and wellbeing of the child  is  a  hopeless  one.
      The judge concluded that the best interests of this child were  served
      by him remaining with both parents. They, of course, had been admitted
      for the temporary purpose of the appellant's  ambition  to  study  and
      secure further qualifications, an ambition that was not in  the  event
      realised, and the position throughout was that they were  expected  to
      return to India when the limited  purpose  for  which  they  had  been
      admitted and then  granted  further  leave  had  run  its  course.  Mr
      Subbarayan seeks to argue that the judge fell into error in  that  she
      failed to consider the impact upon the child rather than limiting  her
      consideration to the fact  that  the  child  would  remain  with  both
      parents, something, obviously, that would be in his best interests. In
      his  oral  submissions,  Mr  Subbarayan   developed   that   argument,
      submitting that the section  55  duty  extended  to  safeguarding  and
      promoting the welfare of a child in the United Kingdom. He argued that
      what was important was the child's environment. Even if  it  could  be
      demonstrated that there were adequate facilities for autistic children
      in India, although they were unlikely to be as good as those available
      here, as the section 55 duty required the respondent to safeguard  and
      promote the welfare of the child, to  remove  him  from  the  familiar
      environment in which he is presently receiving  excellent  care  would
      not be to promote and safeguard his wellbeing. The  judge  had,  after
      all, herself observed that:
           "It is a matter of  general  knowledge  that  autistic  children
           prefer familiarity and routine."
      But, by reproducing this observation by the judge out of its  context,
      the grounds misrepresent what the judge is saying. Having  said  this,
      the judge continued by saying:
           "This does not amount to it being impossible or unreasonable  to
           expect [the child] to be able to  readjust  to  life  in  India,
           particularly since he would be doing so with both  his  parents.
           The one doctor who states that it is important for  [the  child]
           to stay in one place, Dr Paneri, has apparently never  met  [the
           child]. There is no direct evidence from  any  professional  who
           has been involved with [the child] to  the  effect  that  it  is
           unreasonable to expect him to be  able  to  adjust  to  life  in
           India."
  15. There  were  letters  in  the  appellant's  bundle  from  two  medical
      practitioners, Dr Rajiv Barodia and  Dr  Ravi  Paneri.  Mr  Subbarayan
      submitted that the judge had fallen into  error  in  failing  to  give
      adequate weight to the views they expressed but I  am  satisfied  that
      complaint is not sustainable. Dr Paneri  is  a  doctor  practicing  in
      India. He said that the  appellant  had  sent  details  of  his  son's
      condition by email and considered that the child should remain in  the
      United Kingdom because:
           "In India we do not have even the basic  facilities  to  support
           such Autistic child in  school  or  medical  centre  or  in  big
           government hospital..."
      But that view was impossible to reconcile with evidence put before the
      judge by the respondent that gave details of  significant  numbers  of
      specialist  facilities  for  autistic   children   throughout   India,
      including specialist medical and educational  facilities  and  support
      organisations established as "Autism Centres". The judge  was  plainly
      correct to find that this prevailed over  the  view  of  this  doctor,
      unsupported by any evidence.
  16. The other letter relied upon, written by Dr  Rajiv  Barodia,  a  Locum
      Consultant Community Paediatrician employed by the  Hertfordshire  NHS
      Community NHS Trust, is brief and says simply this:
           "This is to confirm that [the child] was seen earlier by me  and
           was agreed to have  a  clinical  diagnosis  of  Autism  spectrum
           Disorder with moderate to  severe  speech  and  language  skills
           delay.
           I understand from [the child's] parents that they  are  applying
           for UK citizenship. I am not aware of their  immigration  status
           but will like to support their view that [the  child]  will  get
           better professional support and help in the  United  Kingdom.  A
           similar service in the native India is hard to find."
      Again, that view is impossible to reconcile with the evidence  of  the
      existence of support organisations before the judge Nothing is offered
      to explain how a doctor employed in a Hertfordshire NHS trust is  well
      placed to express a view on the availability of such services in India
      and it was plainly open to the judge to give no weight  to  his  view,
      unsupported as it was by any evidence, either of the fact asserted  or
      his expertise to express that view.
  17. Earlier  in  her  reasoning  the  judge  had  carried  out  a  careful
      examination of such evidence there was that the parties had chosen  to
      put before  her  concerning  the  appellant's  son  and  the  care  he
      required, as well as the arrangements that could  be  expected  to  be
      available in India. At para 24 the  judge  noted  that  both  parents,
      unsurprisingly, spoke Gujarati and would have  no  difficulty  in  re-
      establishing themselves in India. She rejected their claim to have  no
      ties or relatives in India. She explained why the asserted falling out
      with  the  appellant's  parents  on  account  of  his   marriage   was
      immaterial. She made a clear finding of fact, which was soundly  based
      upon the evidence, that adequate financial support would be available.
      As to financial support, as the appellant and his wife have  not  been
      able to take any form of  employment  throughout  their  time  in  the
      United Kingdom, it is clear that as the  level  of  financial  support
      provided by relatives was sufficient to provide for them in the United
      Kingdom, and it has been confirmed that those relatives would continue
      to provide that financial support, there would plainly  be  sufficient
      financial resources available to the appellant and his wife and  child
      in India.


  18. Between paragraphs 26 - 33 of her judgment,  the  judge  examined  the
      evidence concerning the arrangements for  education  and  support  for
      this child in the United  Kingdom  and  the  educational  and  support
      arrangements that would be available for autistic children  in  India.
      She explained why  she  rejected  the  submission  that  there  is  no
      adequate provision for autistic children in India.  She  also  made  a
      clear and reasoned finding of fact that the child speaks Guajarati  as
      a first language and  that  there  was  no  evidence  to  support  the
      submission that he would be disadvantaged  in  accessing  services  in
      India because in the United Kingdom those services are delivered using
      the English language. Mr Subbarayan submitted that  the  judge  failed
      properly  to  engage  with   a   report   before   her   prepared   by
      Northamptonshire Heathcare. But it can be seen that the report records
      that Gujarati is the language spoken  at  home,  that  the  child  can
      follow simple instructions in Gujarati without visual clues,  although
      he was not yet, at the date of that report in May 2015, following  any
      verbal commands in English and the parents told  the  author  of  this
      report that the child "understands better in Gujarati". Therefore, the
      submission advanced that the child would be disadvantaged in  that  he
      is used  to  receiving  support  serviced  delivered  in  the  English
      language whereas in India he  would  have  to  engage  with  any  such
      services in Gujarati leads nowhere at all.

  19. Mr Subbarayan submitted also  that  the  reasoning  of  the  judge  is
      infected by a mistake of fact. At paragraph 26 of  her  decision,  the
      judge rejected  the  evidence  of  the  appellant  that  his  son  was
      attending "a special school for autistic  children".  The  appellant's
      solicitors have now produced an undated letter from the headmaster  of
      the school presently attended by the child.  This  confirms  that  the
      child is being educated in "a class  designated  ASD-specific"  and  I
      accept, although this is not specifically stated, that the  school  is
      one that provides specialist educational support to children  such  as
      this one. Although the letter does not confirm his admission  date,  I
      accept also that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  reject  the  appellant's
      evidence  in  this  regard.  But  that  is  not  material  given   the
      availability of suitable  educational  and  support  organisations  in
      India that the judge found to be available.

  20. Having reached that conclusion, the judge went on to say that although
      it was submitted that the provision for autistic children was  not  as
      good in India as it was in the United Kingdom it was not  for  her  to
      resolve that issue because:


           "The caselaw is clear in medical cases that where  treatment  is
           available in the country of origin, it is  not  a  breach  of  a
           person's rights under Article 8 or Article  3  of  the  ECHR  to
           return them to their home country."
      With respect to the judge, that was to misunderstand  the  case  being
      advanced. It was not suggested that there would  be  an  impermissible
      infringement of protected rights on the basis of medical health issues
      and a disparity in the quality of care available in India  as  opposed
      to in the United Kingdom. . The argument, as I  understand  it  to  be
      advanced on behalf of the appellant, is that the best interest of  the
      child were for him to continue to receive the support services he  was
      accustomed to and that should  be  accepted  to  outweigh  the  public
      interests, as enshrined in primary  legislation  at  s117B(1)  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, that the maintenance  of
      effective immigration control is in the  public  interest.  But,  once
      again, if that be an error on the part of the judge I do not see  that
      it is a material one. The route to her ultimate conclusion  was  this.
      The appellant's child is autistic  and  requires  specialised  support
      which is presently provided in the United Kingdom. His best  interests
      are  served  by  remaining  with  both  parents  who  are  subject  to
      immigration control  but  have  no  continuing  leave  other  than  as
      extended by s3C. His first language is Gujrati and he will be able  to
      access continuing specialised support and  education  in  India  in  a
      language he understands. It would not be unreasonable  to  expect  the
      child to move with his parents to India where they will have  adequate
      financial support. The support provided by the appellant's sisters  in
      law does not amount to protected family life and that support  is  not
      indispensable. Having found that it was not unreasonable to expect the
      child to move with his parents to India, the judge had regard to s117B
      and the fact that the parents' immigration status had been precarious,
      even if lawful, throughout and so that reduced the weight  that  could
      be given to the private life  they  had  established.  Therefore,  the
      judge found that  the  respondent's  decision  was  proportionate  and
      lawful.
  21. It is said also that the judge erred in law by failing to have  regard
      to the fact that the  appellant  had  lived  lawfully  in  the  United
      Kingdom for 10 years and so was entitled to leave under 276A1. But, no
      such  application  has  been  made  and  that  was  not   a   question
      specifically before the judge. If the  appellant  does  make  such  an
      application, the respondent will have to consider whether he meet  the
      requirements  of  276B(ii).  In  any  event,  in  carrying   out   her
      proportionality assessment, the judge was plainly aware of the  length
      of time the appellant had been in the United Kingdom,  the  fact  that
      his leave had been extended by section 3C and that there  had  been  a
      significant but unexplained delay in the appellant becoming  aware  of
      the decision to refuse his application.

  22. The grounds raise  other  matters  but  amount  to  no  more  than  an
      expression of disagreement with reasoned findings  that  were  plainly
      open to the judge. Essentially, this was a fact-based assessment  and,
      having heard oral evidence, the judge was best placed to carry it out.
      Even if this claim disclosed features that might properly be  said  to
      speak compellingly in favour of the  appellant,  as  was  observed  by
      Carnwarth LJ (as he then was) in Mukarkar v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  1045
      at paragraph 40 :
           "Factual judgments of this kind are often not easy, but they are
           not made easier or  better  by  excessive  legal  or  linguistic
           analysis. It is of the nature of such judgments  that  different
           tribunals,  without  illegality  or  irrationality,  may   reach
           different conclusions on the same case (as is indeed illustrated
           by Mr Fountain's decision after the second  hearing).  The  mere
           fact that one tribunal has reached what may  seem  an  unusually
           generous view of the facts of a particular case  does  not  mean
           that it has made an error of law, so as  to  justify  an  appeal
           under the old system, or an order for reconsideration under  the
           new. Nor does it create  any  precedent,  so  as  to  limit  the
           Secretary of State's right  to  argue  for  a  more  restrictive
           approach on a similar case in the future. However, on the  facts
           of the particular case, the decision of the specialist  tribunal
           should be respected."
  23. This, of course, is not a case where the judge reached what  might  be
      described as an unusually generous view of the facts but the principle
      is the same one and is equally valid  where  the  challenge  is  to  a
      conclusion that the appellant no doubt considers to be at the opposite
      end of the spectrum of judicial assessment. The judge has not left out
      of account any material consideration and has given legally sufficient
      reasons for arriving at conclusions that were  founded  upon  evidence
      (or  the  absence  of  it)  and  which  cannot  be  considered  to  be
      unreasonable, irrational or otherwise unlawful.


  24. Put another way, the judge has made no  material  error  of  law.  The
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the
      judge shall stand.
   Summary of decision:
  25. First-tier Tribunal Judge Place made no material error of law and  her
      decision to dismiss the appeal shall stand.


  26. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed

Signed           [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 28 July 2017

