
[pic]




Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/34958/2014


                                                 IA/34959/2014

                                                 IA/34961/2014

                                                 IA/34963/2014

                                                 IA/34968/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                   |                                      |
|At  Field House                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|on 18th September  2015            |on 24th November 2015                 |
|                                   |                                      |
|                                   |                                      |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                     A Q
                                                                        KQ
                                                                        AQ
                                                                        SQ
                                                                        DQ
                                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                          Appellant

                                     And


               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                          Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:        Mr S.Harding, Counsel, instructed by March and
Partners, Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction


1. The proceedings before the First tier Tribunal were not anonymised. I am
   influenced by the fact that there are children affected by this decision
   and at this stage have made an anonymity order.

2. Although it is the respondent who is appealing, for convenience I will
   continue to refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

3. The first appellant came to the United Kingdom in January 2000. He was
   joined by the second appellant, his wife, in July 2002. The third
   appellant, his eldest daughter, came to the United Kingdom in December
   2009 at the age of 11. She is now aged 17. The remaining fourth and fifth
   appellants are their 10-year-old daughter and 8 year-old son, born in the
   United Kingdom. All are nationals of Albania. The first, second and third
   appellants entered the United Kingdom illegally and the first two
   appellants unsuccessfully claimed asylum.

4. An application made on behalf of the family for leave to remain was
   refused in September 2012. Following reconsideration the refusal was
   maintained in August 2013. Removal directions were made and the family
   appealed.

5. Their appeals were heard by First tier Judge Morgan at Taylor house on
   26 February 2015. It was accepted at hearing on behalf of the two adult
   appellants that they retained ties with Albania (paragraph 7). It was
   common case that the respondent intended to remove the family as a unit
   and the focus in the appeal was on private rather than family life.

6. In a decision promulgated on 12 March 2015 the judge allowed the appeals
   of the fourth and fifth appellants under the immigration rules and
   allowed all of the appeals on article 8 grounds.

7. The judge was influenced by the two youngest children and concluded they
   were well settled in the United Kingdom. At paragraph 16 the judge
   referred to exceptional facts. The judge did refer to section 117 and it
   was agreed between the parties that the two youngest children constituted
   qualifying children within the legislation. The judge said that it would
   not be reasonable to expect them to return to Albania and for the same
   reason found that paragraph 276 ADE (iv) applied. Consequently, their
   appeals were allowed on this basis.

8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the judge failed to
   consider relevant jurisprudence, namely, Zoumbas [2013] 2014 UKSC
   74;EV(Philippines )-v- SSHD EWCA Civ 874 and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720.

9. At hearing, argument focused upon the grounds of appeal advanced, with
   both representatives suggesting that if an error of law was found the
   matter should be remitted for a de novo hearing in the First-tier
   Tribunal.

The First tier decision

10. First-tier Judge Morgan stated there were no significant factual
   disputes, concluding the family circumstances outlined were credible and
   consistent. The appeal was presented on the basis the family were to be
   removed as a unit and the appeal turned on private rather than family
   life.

11. At paragraph 13 the judge sets out considerations taken into account in
   assessing the reasonableness of return. The first point was that the two
   younger children have been born and at that stage lived in the United
   Kingdom seven and nine years respectively. Both speak a little Albanian
   but their primary language is English. They are well settled in the
   United Kingdom and integrated into the British educational system.

12. For these reasons the judge concluded it would not be reasonable to
   expect the two British-born children to return to Albania. In support of
   this conclusion reference was again made to the fact they have been in
   the United Kingdom over seven years.

13. At paragraph 16 the judge referred to the exceptional facts of the case
   and concluded the younger children's best interests favoured them
   remaining in the United Kingdom and cited ZH Tanzania [2011] UKSC 4 for
   the proposition that they should remain unless there were countervailing
   reasons of considerable force.

14. At paragraph 18 the judge referred to other factors weighing in the
   family's favour but was not persuaded they would outweigh the
   respondent's legitimate right to exercise effective immigration control.

15.  Clearly the judge was allowing the appeal because of the two British-
   born children having lived here over seven years. Having reached this
   view, the judge concluded it followed it would be unreasonable to expect
   them to leave the United Kingdom and consequently paragraph 276 ADE (iv)
   applied.

Consideration

16. It is now well established that the welfare of children is a primary
   but not a paramount consideration in a situation like the present. There
   is also a statutory obligation on the respondent by virtue of section 55
   to promote the best interests of the child, irrespective of their
   nationality.

17. It is also established that the longer a child is in the United
   Kingdom, then the more unreasonable it is to expect them to leave. The
   longer they are here the more they can put down roots and integrate.
   Seven years in the country for children has historically been considered
   a milestone. However, it is of note that the focus of young children
   until around the age of four or thereabouts is to their parents rather
   than their surroundings. Furthermore, seven years is only a guide and an
   assessment of the individual circumstances must take place.

18. A decision maker is required to consider each individual child affected
   and also the family as a whole. Any health issues have to be taken into
   account. A relevant consideration is whether the family are being
   expected to leave as a unit and whether there are wider members of the
   family settled. The question of integration has to be considered.

19. An important consideration is whether the children or one of the
   parents is British. ZH Tanzania [2011] UKSC 4 emphasised the intrinsic
   importance of British citizenship.

20. The ties with the home country of the parents and the children have to
   be considered. What support, if any, will be available to them for
   resettlement is relevant. Any special features have to be factored into
   the evaluation. The notion of exceptional circumstances means something
   more than the unusual or the unique but is aimed at an outcome which will
   be particularly harsh.

21. In considering the decision of First-tier Judge Morgan I am struck by
   the vintage of the cases referred to and the absence of reference to the
   important up-to-date cases.

22. There have been various significant cases applicable in this situation
   which had not been referred to. In Azimi-Moayed and others( decisions
   affecting children; onward appeals) [2013]UKUT 00197 the President, the
   Honourable Mr Justice Blake summarised the principles established from
   Upper Tribunal jurisprudence in relation to children. The starting point
   is that their best interests are to be with both their parents. Lengthy
   residence can lead to development of ties and past and present policies
   identify seven years as relevant. However, the tribunal noted that seven
   years from the age of four is likely to be more significant than the
   first seven years of life when young children are focused on their
   parents.

23. There are greater similarities in the factual situation in Zoumbas -v-
   SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 with the present case than ZH Tanzania where the
   children and one of their parents were British. In Zoumbas, Mr Zoumbas
   came here in May 2001. He entered the country illegally and then claimed
   asylum. His wife entered the country illegally the following year and
   also unsuccessfully claimed asylum. Their first child was born in the
   United Kingdom three years later, in April 2004.Mother and child were
   removed in October 2005 but returned illegally in March 2006 .Mrs Zoumbas
   had a second child in February 2007 and a third in April 2011. They
   sought a judicial review of how their claims were dealt with. Dismissing
   their appeal the Supreme Court at paragraph 24 said:

    There is no irrationality in the conclusion that it was in the
    children's best interests to go with their parents to the Republic of
    Congo. No doubt it would have been possible to have stated that, other
    things being equal, it was in the best interests of the children that
    they and their parents stay in the United Kingdom so that they could
    obtain such benefits as healthcare and education which the decision
    maker recognised may be of a higher standard than would be available in
    the Congo. But other things were not equal. They were not British
    citizens. They had no right to future education and health care in this
    country. They were part of a close-knit family with highly educated
    parents and were at an age when their emotional needs can only be fully
    met within the immediate family unit. Such integration as had occurred
    into United Kingdom society would have been predominantly in the
    context of that family unit...


24. In EV Philippines and others -v- Secretary of State for the home
   Department [2014] EWCA Civ., the family came to the United Kingdom
   lawfully. In June 2007 the mother came as a work permit holder and was
   joined in April 2008 by her husband as her dependent. In July 2009 their
   three children joined them. They were born in 2001, 2002 and 2004,
   respectively. In March 2011 they applied for indefinite leave to remain
   and this was refused. The difficulty for the family was that the mother
   was being underpaid by the Care Home where she worked and did not meet
   the requirements of the rules.

25. The Court of Appeal gave guidance on how tribunals should approach the
   proportionality exercise where it is determined the best interest of the
   children is to continue their education in England. The Court said it was
   necessary to determine the strength of the factors which make it in their
   best interest to remain and to take account of any factors pointing the
   other way. What is in their best interest will depend on their age; the
   length of time they have been in the country; how long they have been in
   education; what stage of education has reached; to what extent they have
   become distanced from their home country; and how renewable those
   connections may be. British citizenship is another factor. (Para 35).

26.  The Court pointed out the longer the child has been here, the more
   advanced and critical a stage their education is at, the looseness of
   ties with their home country will all add weight in their favour. By
   contrast, if their best interests only remain on balance, the result
   could be the opposite. Balanced against their interests the Court
   referred to as `the strong weight to be given to the need to maintain
   immigration control in pursuit of the economic well-being of the country
   and the fact that, ex hyposthesi, the applicants have no entitlement to
   remain. The immigration history of the parents may also be relevant ...'





Conclusion

27. It is my conclusion First-tier Judge Morgan failed to demonstrate that
   a proper and balanced assessment of all the relevant factors had taken
   place. Instead, the decision is based solely on the fact the two youngest
   children had been here since birth and were progressing in their
   education. The judge should have demonstrated the factors in the cases
   cited above were considered and indicate the weight given.

28. The judge referred to exceptional circumstances in the appeal. However,
   I cannot see any exceptional circumstances identified. Rather, the judge
   has allowed the appeal solely on the basis that the two younger children
   were born and have lived here all their lives for a period in excess of
   seven years and are doing well at school. I do not see anything
   exceptional in this. What the judge does not refer to is the fact that
   the family had no right to be here and whilst the children were born here
   they are not British.

29. The judge's failure to do so and to indicate relevant factors were
   taken into account amounts to a material error of law and the decision
   cannot stand. The judge allowed the appeals of the fourth and fifth
   appellant's under the immigration rules on the basis it would be
   unreasonable to expect them to leave the United Kingdom. This conclusion
   was solely premised upon the judge's conclusion in relation to article
   8.As it was flawed so to is the decision under the immigration rules.
   Consequently, the matter should be remitted to the First-tier tribunal
   for a de novo hearing.

Decision

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeals of the
    fourth and fifth appellant's under the immigration rules and of the
    five appellants on article 8 grounds contains a material error of law
    and cannot stand. The decision is set aside and the appeals are to be
    reheard de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly


