
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/34313/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25 April 2017                          |On 16 May 2017                    |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                Jahanzeb dar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr Z Malik, of Counsel instructed by Messrs
Whitefield Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:   Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan born on 21 December  1983  appeals
    with permission against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Mathews who in a determination promulgated on 4 August  2016  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State  to
    refuse to grant him indefinite leave to remain.   The  application  was
    refused under Rule 322(1A) on the basis that the appellant  had  failed
    to disclose material facts about his application.  The relevant part of
    the reasons for decision reads as follows:-


         |". |18/10/14 |- |Current application submitted for indefinite    |
|   |         |  |leave to remain on the basis of long residency. |
|   |         |  |                                                |
|.  |23.3.15  |- |IS151A served.  Reporting arrangements set up   |
|   |         |  |commencing on 8 April 2015 following the service|
|   |         |  |of letter ISI51A.  Documents sent to last known |
|   |         |  |address -                                       |
|   |         |  |[                                               |
|   |         |  |]                                               |
|   |         |  |                                                |
|.  |17.04.201|- |Failed to attend reporting event at Manchester  |
|   |5        |  |Reporting Centre.                               |


         As set out above  it  is  noted  that  you  failed  to  attend  for
         reporting at Manchester Reporting Centre.   In  addition  you  were
         required to attend an interview in relation to the English Language
         qualification submitted with your current application.  You are not
         residing at the address provided to us.  We  wrote  to  your  legal
         representatives, Whitefield Solicitors Ltd, on 24  August  2015  to
         ascertain your current address.  We did not receive a response.  As
         we have been unable to contact you with regard to your  application
         it is considered that you have  failed  to  demonstrate  that  your
         application was not obtained fraudulently and your  application  is
         therefore refused under paragraph 322(1A).


         For the above reasons, I am  satisfied  that  you  have  failed  to
         disclose material facts about your application and  it  is  refused
         under 322(1A), of the Immigration Rules as below:


             '322(1A) where false representations have been made  or  false
                      documents or information have been submitted (whether
                      or not material to the application,  and  whether  or
                      not to the applicant's knowledge), or material  facts
                      have  not  been  disclosed,  in   relation   to   the
                      application or in order to obtain documents from  the
                      Secretary of State  or  a  third  party  required  in
                      support of the application.'


         Your application has also been  considered  under  the  Immigration
         Rules on the basis of long residence.


         Paragraph 276B states that:


             '276B.   The requirements  to  be  met  by  an  applicant  for
                    indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  ground  of  long
                    residence in the United Kingdom are that:


                    (i)    (a)  he has had  at  least  10  years  continuous
                             lawful residence in the United Kingdom.


                    (ii)   having regard to the public interest there are no
                        reasons why it would be undesirable for him  to  be
                        given indefinite leave to remain on the  ground  of
                        long residence, taking into account his:


                        (a)    age; and


                        ...


                    (v)    the applicant must not be in the UK in breach  of
                        immigration  laws  except  that   any   period   of
                        overstaying for a period of 28 days or less will be
                        disregarded, as  will  any  period  of  overstaying
                        between periods of entry clearance, leave to  enter
                        or leave to remain of up to 28 days and any  period
                        of overstaying  pending  the  determination  of  an
                        application made within that 28 day period.'


         You entered the United Kingdom on 22 April  2004  and  your  lawful
         leave was curtailed on  18  January  2014.   You  cannot  therefore
         demonstrate 10 years' continuous, lawful residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom ...".

2.   The background to this case is that the appellant  entered  Britain  on
    22 April 2004 and had leave to remain as a student  up  to  18  January
    2014.  He made an application on that day for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student which was refused on 17 July 2014 without right of appeal.   On
    18 October 2014 he made the application for indefinite leave to  remain
    on the basis of his long residency.

3.   Of relevance is the application form which he completed.  In Section  1
    of the form he gave as his contact address in Britain  the  address  of
    his solicitors and at section B14 gave his own address.  It is accepted
    that the address he gave was the address at which he  was  living  when
    the application was made.   The  applicant  also  put  in  his  hotmail
    address and referred to the application which he had made on 18 January
    2014 which he believed was still pending.

4.   In a witness statement the appellant stated  that  the  refusal  of  17
    July 2014 regarding the application for the student extension  had  not
    been received until March 2015  by  his  solicitors.   He  argued  that
    therefore his lawful leave had been extended by virtue of Section 3C of
    the Immigration Act 1971.  He stated that on 1  November  2014  he  had
    moved from the address which he had put  on  the  application  form  to
    another address on 26 October 2015.  He stated  that  the  person  with
    whom he had been living had not wanted  him  to  pass  that  particular
    address  to  the  Home  Office.   He  stated  however  that  his  legal
    representatives had written to the respondent in May  2015  asking  for
    further information regarding the initial application.

5.   Judge Mathews heard the evidence of the appellant and in  paragraph  16
    of the decision made  a  clear  finding  that  by  22  April  2014  the
    appellant had accumulated a ten year period of continuous residence.

6.   Although the Secretary of State had indicated  concerns  regarding  the
    appellant's English language certificate, no allegation was  made  that
    the appellant's English  language  certificate  had  been  fraudulently
    obtained and that was not part of the refusal.  The  refusal  was  that
    the  appellant  had  failed  to  disclose  material  facts  about   his
    application and those "material facts" it  was  agreed  were  that  the
    applicant had not informed the Secretary of  State  of  his  change  of
    address.

7.   In paragraph 19 the judge stated:-

     "A general ground of  refusal  under  Section  322(2)  is  asserted  in
         failing to provide his current address ...".

     I would comment that although at the end of the decision (page 4 of  9)
    there is a reference to paragraph 322(2), that ground of refusal is not
    particularised, whereas that where the refusal under paragraph  322(1A)
    is in the decision.  In any event, however, the judge went  on  to  say
    that he found the appellant  did  not  notify  the  respondent  of  his
    address after he had moved home and  therefore  paragraph  322(1A)  was
    made out:-

     "... since the appellant's current address was clearly a material  fact
         in the present application.  An accurate address is a pre-requisite
         for timely notices and requests to be  able  to  be  passed  to  an
         appellant,  it  would  avoid  precisely   the   difficulties   with
         notification that the appellant complains  of  in  this  case,  and
         which I find to be due to his  own  conduct  in  moving  properties
         without notifying the respondent".

8.   The judge comments in paragraph 21 that  he  had  noted  the  assertion
    relating to fraud by the appellant in obtaining a language certificate.
    He stated that:-

     "I do not find that the  respondent  has  put  before  me  adequate  or
         sufficient evidence to prove the dishonesty  alleged  against  this
         appellant.  I simply have  a  notice  sent  to  the  appellant  and
         containing generic evidence that is not specific to this man.  I do
         not find that paragraph 322(1A) is made out in  relation  to  false
         test results."

9.   He then commented on the copy of the letter  sent  to  the  appellant's
    solicitors regarding the request that the appellant report on 6 May and
    noted that the solicitors  had  stamped  the  correspondence  as  being
    received by them on 6 May 2015.  He stated that however the letter  had
    been dated 29 April 2015 and therefore was sent in timely fashion.

10.  The judge concluded that:-

     "I find that he failed to attend as directed having been  given  proper
         notice of the date and time at which he  was  required  to  report.
         Again I find that fact engages paragraph 322 as a ground upon which
         refusal of leave should normally follow."

11.  However, he went on to state that the response had not been put  before
    him nor adequate evidence to show any further  appointment  request  to
    the appellant's connection with his language test results  and  he  was
    unable to make findings that the appellant failed to  attend  any  such
    interview  in  the  absence  of  such  evidence  from  the  respondent.
    However, in paragraph 24 the judge stated:-

     "I have found the appellant has failed to notify the respondent of  his
         address, and  failed  to  report  as  directed,  I  find  that  the
         respondent was correct in engaging provisions of paragraph  322  in
         those respects, and I do not find that the appellant has  addressed
         those failures in evidence such that it  is  unfair  to  find  that
         general grounds for refusal are made out.  Those matters are  fatal
         to his 10 year application notwithstanding the accumulation of  the
         required period."

12.  The judge went on to dismiss the appellant's appeal under Article 8  of
    the ECHR.

13.  It is clear from paragraph 24 of the determination that the  judge  not
    only found that the appellant had met the ten year requirement  of  the
    Rules, but that he also discounted an allegation that the appellant had
    failed to attend  for  interview  regarding  the  allegation  that  his
    English language test results might have been improperly obtained.

14.  In brief the judge found that the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  not
    informed the Secretary of State of his change of address meant that the
    Secretary of State was entitled to refuse  his  application  under  the
    provisions of both paragraphs 322(1A) and 322(2) of the Rules.

15.  The grounds of appeal argued that the judge had misdirected himself  in
    law in his consideration of the application of  paragraph  322(1A)  and
    322(2).  Having set out the provisions of paragraph 322(1A), to which I
    have referred when I quoted from the notice  of  refusal,  the  grounds
    quoted paragraph 322(2) which states as follows:-

     "the making of false representations or the  failure  to  disclose  any
         material fact for the purpose of obtaining  leave  to  enter  or  a
         previous variation of leave or in order to  obtain  documents  from
         the Secretary of State or a third party required in support of  the
         application for leave to enter or a previous variation of leave".

16.  It was argued in the grounds that there was nothing in  the  provisions
    that required an applicant to inform the Secretary of State as  to  the
    change of his residential  address.   It  was  impossible  to  see  how
    changing a residential address without notifying the  respondent  could
    amount to the making of a false representation or non-disclosure  of  a
    material fact.  It was  pointed  out  that  this  was  different  in  a
    situation  where  an  applicant  had  given  a  false  address  in  his
    application form.

17.  The grounds also  argued  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  failing  to
    consider and determine whether the appellant had been dishonest  so  as
    to fall  within  the  provisions  of  paragraphs  322(1A)  and  322(2),
    pointing to case law which made it clear that dishonesty  or  deception
    was needed to render a  "false  representation"  ground  for  mandatory
    refusal under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.   Failing  to
    disclose a material fact  could  be  classed  as  deception,  but  that
    required dishonesty on behalf of the applicant.  The judge had erred by
    not considering whether or not the appellant had acted dishonestly.

18.  It was also argued that the judge had failed to appreciate  the  burden
    was on the Secretary of State to establish  contested  facts  and  that
    that included the issue of whether or not the appellant had  failed  to
    attend  a  reporting  requirement  and  that  that  would  fall  within
    paragraph 322 of the Immigration Rules.

19.  Permission was granted on those grounds of appeal by  Designated  Judge
    Shaerf on 9 March 2017.

20.  On 16 March 2017 the respondent served a Rule 24 response opposing  the
    appeal.  It was stated that the grounds of appeal were  wrong  in  that
    the judge had found the appellant had "knowingly provided an  incorrect
    address to the respondent".    Moreover, it was stated that  the  judge
    had clearly found that the appellant had acted dishonestly and  it  was
    stated that the appellant had conceded that he had given the respondent
    the wrong address.  The appellant had failed to report as required.  It
    was argued that the respondent had made out her case and therefore this
    was not a question that the respondent's discretion  should  have  been
    exercised differently.

21.  At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr Malik amplified  the  grounds
    of appeal pointing out that the appellant had put the  correct  address
    in the application form and that there was  nothing  requiring  him  to
    inform the respondent of his change of address.  Moreover, he has given
    the address of his solicitors as his  contact  address.   Moreover,  he
    pointed out that there was  no  appeal  from  the  Secretary  of  State
    against the decision of the judge that the appellant had completed  ten
    years' lawful residence in Britain.  He stated that if the Secretary of
    State wanted to make an allegation of dishonesty that should clearly be
    set out.

22.  Mr Avery has stated that the actions of the appellant had  "frustrated"
    the appellant's enquiries.  There was no case law  on  which  he  could
    rely to show that Rules 322(1A) and 322(2) were engaged.   However,  he
    did point to the  fact  that  the  application  form  stated  that  the
    appellant  declared  that  "If  there  is  a  material  change  in   my
    circumstances or any  new  information  relevant  to  this  application
    becomes available before it is decided, I will inform the Home Office".
     He stated the appellant had not informed the Home Office of his change
    of address.

Discussion

23.  The reality is that the issue before the  judge  was  a  simple  one  -
    whether or not the provisions of Rule 322(1A) and 322(2) were  engaged.
    To be found to have fallen foul  of  those  Rules  leads  to  draconian
    consequences for an appellant.  I have considered  the  facts  of  this
    case, noting that the sole issue is whether or not the  appellant  made
    false representations or did not  disclose  a  material  fact  for  the
    purpose of obtaining leave to enter.

24.  It is accepted that when he made the application the appellant put  his
    correct address in the application form.  He clearly did not  make  any
    false representations at that time.  Moreover, he gave his  solicitors'
    address and details as the contact details.  Those again were  correct.
    He also gave an e-mail address and indeed repeated that when  requested
    to do so.

25.  It is correct that the appellant did change his address, but  I  cannot
    consider that that is a material fact given that  the  contact  address
    and the e-mail address remained the same.  Indeed, in  any  event,  the
    reality is that the appellant's solicitors  state  that  they  did  not
    receive the letter requesting him to  attend  for  interview  in  time.
    They marked the received letter with a date which was the same  as  the
    interview.  Given the short period between the letter  being  sent  out
    and the date of interview, I do not consider that that is not credible.



26.   Mr Avery has argued that the fact that the appellant did not give  his
    change of address was a material fact.  The reality is that nowhere  on
    the application form does it state that the respondent must be informed
    of a change of address and, of course,  the  contact  address  did  not
    change in any event.  Mr Avery relied on the fact  that  the  appellant
    has moved as being a change of circumstances  of  which  the  appellant
    should have informed the respondent.   Given  that  the  appellant  had
    given correct contact addresses - the address of his solicitor and  had
    also given his e-mail address, I cannot see how his change  of  address
    can  be  a  material  change  in  his  circumstances  relevant  to  the
    application.  A material change in circumstances could have  been,  for
    example, that the appellant's marital status had changed, that  he  had
    left the country and did not intend to return, or indeed had  committed
    a crime.  That was not the case here.

27.  The argument that somehow the  appellant  was  trying  to  frustrate  a
    consideration of his application is simply not made out.

28.  Nor, of course, has the Secretary of State shown  that  there  was  any
    factor which  would  mean  that  the  appellant  was  not  entitled  to
    indefinite leave to remain.

29.  Taking all these factors into account I find  that  the  judge  made  a
    material error of  law  in  the  decision  in  that  he  erred  in  his
    conclusion that the appellant had used false representations or in  any
    other way was guilty of behaviour which would mean that  Rules  322(1A)
    and 322(2) were engaged.  I therefore set aside his decision dismissing
    this appeal.

30.  For the same reasons I find that, given the unchallenged  finding  that
    the appellant had had  ten  years'  lawful  residence  in  Britain  and
    moreover that Rules 322(1A) and 322(2) were  not  engaged  this  appeal
    should be allowed.



Notice of Decision

31.  This appeal is allowed.

32.  No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]


Signed                                  Date 15 May 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


