
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/34164/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 18 July 2014                      |On 9 September 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                        Mrs HAJARAT TOBILOBA ADEBEUN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C H Ndubuisi, Drummond Miller
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal with permission against a decision by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Wallace dismissing  an  appeal  brought  against  a
    refusal by the respondent to issue the appellant with a residence  card
    under regulation 17(1) of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.

 2) The appellant is a national of Nigeria born on 19  December  1986.   On
    4th June 2013 she applied for the residence card as  the  spouse  of  a
    Czech national, Mr Ivo  Nagy.   The  application  was  refused  by  the
    respondent in a decision dated 6 August 2013  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant had not shown that her spouse was an EEA national  exercising
    Treaty rights in the UK.

 3) The decision of the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  largely
    concerned with whether the appellant had submitted a valid passport  or
    identity card for her  spouse  with  her  application.   The  appellant
    maintained that she had submitted a Czech passport  for  Mr  Ivo  Nagy.
    The respondent maintained, however, that before  the  refusal  decision
    was made the passport was declared by the  Czech  authorities  to  have
    been lost or stolen.  The view taken by the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was that it was an essential requirement for the appellant  to
    produce a valid ID card or a passport for her EEA spouse  and  she  had
    been unable to do this.  It was part of the evidence before the  First-
    tier Tribunal that the appellant and her husband were estranged.

 4) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  the  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal arguably erred in  dismissing  the  appeal  on  the
    ground that the appellant had not produced a  valid  identity  document
    for her EEA national spouse and on the basis that the judge had  failed
    to make a finding as to whether the EEA national was exercising  Treaty
    rights in the UK.

 5) At the hearing before us Mr Ndubuisi  relied  on  the  grounds  in  the
    application.  He submitted that in terms of regulation 17(1)(a) of  the
    EEA Regulations the person who is required to produce a valid  passport
    is not the EEA national but the non-EEA national family  member  making
    an application for a residence card.  The case of  Barnett  and  Others
    (EEA Regulations: rights  and  documentation)  [2012]  UKUT  00142  was
    relied upon as  the  authority  for  this.   Notwithstanding  that  the
    requirement in regulation 17(1)(a) was for the appellant to  produce  a
    valid passport of her own, not of her spouse, it was submitted that  at
    the time the application was made  the  passport  for  the  appellant's
    spouse, Ivo Nagy, was valid.  It was  suggested  that  the  appellant's
    spouse had declared the passport lost while the appellant's application
    was with the Home Office because he  needed  a  passport  in  order  to
    travel.  No information had been provided by the respondent as to  when
    the passport had been declared lost by the Czech authorities.

 6) It was further submitted that the judge did not at  any  point  make  a
    finding as to whether the  appellant's  spouse  was  exercising  Treaty
    rights as a worker, which was the basis  on  which  she  had  made  her
    application.  By failing to make such  an  application  the  judge  had
    erred in law.  It was submitted that the judge appeared to be under the
    misapprehension that, as the appellant was estranged from her  husband,
    she could no longer be treated as a  family  member,  even  though  the
    marriage had not been dissolved.  The question was whether the marriage
    had been dissolved and not whether the couple were residing together.

 7) It was pointed out to Mr Ndubuisi that notwithstanding the  wording  of
    regulation 17(1)(a), the appellant would still be required  to  produce
    evidence of her relationship with an EEA national in order  to  satisfy
    Regulation 17(1)(b).  Mr Ndubuisi submitted that  documentary  evidence
    establishing this was produced.  It was pointed out  to  him,  however,
    that this  did  not  include  evidence  of  nationality.   Mr  Ndubuisi
    submitted that the passport was valid although it had expired and  been
    declared lost.  It was valid at the time of  the  application  and  the
    respondent had then taken some months to make a decision.

 8) For the respondent, Mrs O'Brien submitted that once the respondent  was
    informed that the passport was stolen, then  it  could  not  longer  be
    relied upon.

 9) Mr Ndubuisi then turned to the evidence  relating  to  the  appellant's
    husband's employment in the exercise of Treaty  rights.   He  submitted
    that payslips had been provided showing the appellant's husband  was  a
    qualified person.  Although the respondent had received information  to
    say the company employing the appellant's spouse  had  been  dissolved,
    this did not affect his employment.  There was also a letter  from  the
    employer.  Mr Ndubuisi acknowledged, however, that he did not have  up-
    to-date information about the appellant's spouse's employment.  It  was
    not known if he was still in the UK, although he was in the UK  at  the
    date  of  the  respondent's  decision,  according  to  the  appellant's
    evidence.  It was not known if he was in the UK  at  the  date  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

10) In order to succeed in this appeal it was not enough for the  appellant
    to show that she was married to an EEA national.  In order  to  qualify
    for the issuing of a residence card as a non-EEA national family member
    she had to show that her husband was exercising Treaty  rights  in  the
    UK.  The Treaty rights the appellant claimed her husband was exercising
    were those of a worker.  She produced payslips for the period from late
    September 2012 to March 2013 and a letter dated 22 April 2013 from  his
    purported employer, Africans United Media Ltd.

11) The respondent's reasons for refusal letter of  6  August  2013  states
    that in order to assess  the  wage  slips  and  employer's  letter  the
    respondent undertook various checks to verify the  employment  but  was
    unable to do so satisfactorily because the company concerned  had  been
    dissolved at Companies House.  The letter  further  states  that  every
    attempt had been made by the UK Border  Agency  (as  it  then  was)  to
    establish the appellant's EEA family member's employment but the burden
    of proof rested with her to provide such evidence and she had failed to
    do so.

12) We note that in the decision of the Court of Appeal in Amos [2011] EWCA
    Civ 552 it was observed that  the  procedure  before  the  Tribunal  is
    essentially adversarial: the appellant seeks to show that the  decision
    of the  Secretary  of  State  is  unlawful  or  otherwise  wrong.   The
    Secretary of State must present the facts as known to  her  fairly  and
    seek a decision of the Tribunal that accords with the law,  but  to  go
    beyond those requirements would be irrational in  the  sense  that  "it
    would be to require the Secretary of State to take steps to prove  that
    her own decision was wrong."   Accordingly we accept that the basis  on
    which the Secretary of State approached the issue  of  the  appellant's
    husband's employment in the reasons for  refusal  letter  was  correct.
    The Secretary of State would seek to verify the  employment  and  trace
    information available to the department but it was for the appellant to
    supply information showing the requirements had  been  met,  which  she
    failed to do.

13) At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the evidence was  little
    different from the evidence before the Secretary of  State,  save  that
    the appellant gave oral evidence asserting  that  her  husband  was  in
    employment.   She  was,  however,  unable  to  produce,   any   further
    documentary evidence beyond the  payslips  and  the  employer's  letter
    already filed, on which, as the respondent pointed out, little reliance
    could be placed.  Mr Ndubuisi submitted before us that  notwithstanding
    the dissolution of the company employing the appellant, the  employment
    had nevertheless continued.  In the absence of any substantive evidence
    supporting this assertion, we find it difficult  to  place  any  weight
    upon  it.   We  acknowledge  that  there  are  circumstances  in  which
    companies are dissolved for legal rather than  financial  reasons,  for
    example because of failure to make a return, and are  then  reinstated,
    but there is no evidence before us  to  show  that  this  is  how  this
    particular company was affected and that it has indeed been reinstated.



14) Furthermore, even if the appellant's  husband  was  employed  in  April
    2013, as the employer's letter indicates, there was nothing to show  he
    remained employed at the date of the respondent's  decision,  6  August
    2013, and nothing to show he has been in employment  in  the  UK  since
    then.  Indeed, the appellant was herself uncertain as to whether he had
    remained in the UK after the date when the  respondent's  decision  was
    made.

15) With these matters in mind we find that the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should have made a decision on whether the appellant's husband
    was exercising Treaty rights in the UK but the judge did not do so.  On
    the evidence before her, however, there is only one decision which  she
    could have reached, which was that the appellant's husband was not,  at
    the date of the respondent's  decision,  6th  August  2013,  exercising
    Treaty rights in the UK.  The appellant was not able to show  that  she
    was entitled to a residence card as a family member of an EEA  national
    exercising Treaty rights in  the  UK  and  accordingly  the  judge  was
    correct to dismiss  the  appeal,  albeit  there  were  defects  in  her
    reasoning.

16) We further observe, although this is not material to our decision, that
    this  outcome  does  not  infringe  or  impede  any  exercise  by   the
    appellant's husband of his rights of free movement as an EEA  national.
    As the appellant and her husband are estranged and are no longer living
    together, her husband is free to enter or leave the UK and to work here
    as an EEA national, or not, without any interference  with  his  rights
    arising from the appellant's lack of status.

17) As far as the appellant's husband's passport was concerned,  we  accept
    that in terms of regulation 17(1)(a) it was the appellant  herself  who
    was required to produce a valid passport.  It  was  nevertheless  still
    incumbent upon her under regulation 17(1) read as a whole to show  that
    she and her husband was  married  and  that  her  husband  was  an  EEA
    national.  We accept that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  allowed
    herself to be side-tracked away from the main issue in this appeal into
    addressing the questions of whether the appellant's husband's  passport
    had to be produced under regulation 17(1)(a) and, if  so,  whether  the
    passport was valid.  To the extent that the judge went down this route,
    she asked herself the wrong question.  The questions  she  should  have
    asked were, notwithstanding that the appellant  had  produced  a  valid
    passport for herself under regulation 17(1)(a), was she  able  to  show
    that her husband was an EEA national and that he was exercising  Treaty
    rights in the UK at the material time.  There were deficiencies in  the
    evidence both in relation to the appellant's husband's nationality  and
    in relation to his exercise of Treaty rights.   On  the  basis  of  the
    evidence, even if it was accepted that the appellant's husband  was  an
    EEA national, the appellant was unable to show that he  was  exercising
    Treaty rights as a worker in the UK.  Because of this the appeal  could
    not succeed.

18) The position is that the judge reached the correct conclusion  although
    there were defects in her reasoning.  Having regard to  the  evidential
    position before the Tribunal, however, we do not consider it  necessary
    to set the decision aside and re-make it.  The only decision the  judge
    could properly have made on the evidence before her was to dismiss  the
    appeal.

Conclusions

19) The making of a decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

Anonymity

20) The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  We  do
    not see any need for such direction and no submission has  made  to  us
    with regard to this.


Signed      Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
