
                                    [pic]

UPPER TRIBUNAL
IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER    Appeal No. IA/34600/2015,
                                                              IA/34601/2015,
                                                              IA/34604/2015,
                                                               IA/34607/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House           |Decision Promulgated:           |
|On: 1 February 2017             |On: 3 February 2017             |


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Lakhvir Singh Bhandal
                                Gurpreet Kaur
                                Jasleen Kaur
                          Param Veer Singh Bhandal
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ahmed, instructed by Dassaur Solicitors


                  DETERMINATION AND DIRECTIONS FOR REMITTAL

 1. This is an appeal against a determination dated 17 August 2016 of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lodge which  allowed  the  appellants'  asylum  and
    human rights appeal.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the respondent and to the Bhandal family as the appellants,  reflecting
    their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The core of this case concerns the  two  children  of  the  family  and
    whether it would be reasonable for them to live in India. Jasleen  Kaur
    was born on 24 March 2004. She entered the UK on a visit visa with  her
    mother on 23 June 2006 and has been here since then. Param  Veer  Singh
    Bhandal has remained in the UK since being born here on 26 March 2007.

 4. It is undisputed that the parents and Jasleen are  overstayers,  having
    only ever had a 6 month visit visa. Param has never  had  any  form  of
    leave. It is undisputed that the parents lived all of  their  lives  in
    India before coming to the UK.

 5. The family maintained in the Article 8 application  that  the  children
    qualified for leave under the  private  life  provisions  contained  in
    paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the Immigration Rules. The relevant section  of
    this provision states:

         "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave
         to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the
         date of application, the applicant:


         ...


         (iv)      is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously
             in the UK for at least seven years (discounting any period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK ...  ."

 6. The respondent did not agree. She maintained, as set out at  paragraphs
    31 and 32 of the  refusal,  that  the  children  did  not  qualify  for
    consideration under paragraph 276ADE at all, as they had  not  been  in
    the UK for 7 years as of the date of the  application  which  had  been
    made on 22 February 2011. Jasleen had been in the UK for only  5  years
    as of the date of application. Param had been here for only 4 years  as
    of the date of the application.

 7. The respondent also maintained, in any event, that  it  was  reasonable
    for the children to return with their parents as a  family  unit.  They
    had experience of Indian customs, culture, language and social norms as
    they had grown up in an Indian environment in the UK  and  could  adapt
    more easily to India.

 8. At paragraphs 38 to 40 of the refusal letter, the respondent  concluded
    that there were no exceptional circumstances that should lead to  leave
    being granted outside the Immigration Rules even though it was relevant
    to that assessment that Jaspreen had been in the UK  for  9  years  and
    Param for 8 years as of the date of the decision. They were at an early
    stage of their education and returning within the  family  unit.  Their
    parents could assist them to adjust. Their  relationships  were  mainly
    within rather than outside the family. They had  no  special  education
    needs and free education was available in India.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal judge made the following findings  on  pargraph
    276ADE at [10] to [14]:

         "10. I turn to 276ADE(1)(iv). The Third and Fourth  Appellants  are
         under 18 years of age and have lived continuously in the UK for  at
         least seven years, the issue  is  therefore  whether  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect them to leave  the  UK.  There  is  little  to
         distinguish between them, both have been in the UK  for  about  the
         same length of time. The fact that the Third  Appellant  spent  the
         first two years of her life in India is not, taken in  the  context
         of this case, significant. Both have been brought  up  in  the  UK,
         have attended school and formed the usual relationships.  There  is
         nothing to suggest that they are  not  completely  integrated  into
         British society.

         11. Both the First and Second  Appellants  had  the  benefit  of  a
         Punjabi interpreter at the hearing. I was  informed  that  the  two
         children understand Punjabi though they cannot read and write it. I
         have no reason to doubt that that is the case. They have never been
         to India and such cultural ties  as  they  have  have  been  formed
         within their family and no doubt within the Indian community in the
         UK.

         12. I have been presented with a plethora of documents in  relation
         to the progress of the children at school. What is critical  in  my
         opinion is  that  the  eldest  child  has  now  embarked  upon  her
         secondary education. As the Respondent accepts  (see  paragraph  38
         reasons  for  decision  letter)  the  critical  age  in  a  child's
         development is between 7 and 11 years of age. The eldest child  has
         been through that critical period the younger is  within  that  age
         bracket. Both have spent their primary school life in  the  English
         system.

         13. I cannot but find that  to  disrupt  their  education  at  this
         critical  stage  would  be  unreasonable  and  not  in  their  best
         interests. The disruption would involve  having  to  adjust  to  an
         alien and unfamiliar environment where they are not  proficient  in
         the language, being unable to read and write Punjabi, even if  they
         have some understanding of it.

         14. I am satisfied  that  the  Third  and  Fourth  Appellants  meet
         paragraph 276ADE (1) (iv)."

10. The respondent challenged this finding in section  2  of  the  grounds,
    thus:

         "In considering whether it  was  reasonable  for  the  children  to
         return, the FTJ has ignored the immigration  history  of  the  lead
         appellants  and  that  they  are  flagrant  overstayers.  He   also
         completely overlooked what kind of support might  be  available  to
         the children from their parents were they to return to  their  home
         country."

11. The grounds seek support for this argument from  MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705. The ratio of that case is, in my judgement,  key  to  the
    error of law arguments here as it addresses the proper approach  to  an
    assessment of "reasonableness" under paragraph 276ADE(iv) (and  section
    117B(6)) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002).  The
    Court of Appeal in MA, with some reluctance, at [45] adopted the  ratio
    of  MM  (Uganda)  [2016]  EWA  Civ  450  to  the  effect  that  in  the
    reasonableness assessment  either  under  or  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules, the "wider public interest considerations  must  be  taken  into
    account". This was so, albeit,  at  [46],  the  Court  identified  that
    "where the seven year rule is satisfied, it is a factor of some  weight
    leaning in favour of leave to remain being granted".

12. At [47], the Court of Appeal also identified that  even  if  a  child's
    best interests were in staying in the UK:

         "... it may still not be  unreasonable  to  require  the  child  to
         leave. That will depend on a careful analysis  of  the  nature  and
         extent of the links in the UK  and  in  the  country  where  it  is
         proposed he should return."

    and at [54]:

         "There is nothing intrinsically illogical in the notion that whilst
         it is in the child's best interests are for him or her to stay,  it
         is not unreasonable to expect him or her to go. That is so even  if
         the reasonableness test should be applied so as to  exclude  public
         interest considerations bearing upon the parents."

13. In the First-tier Tribunal reasonableness assessment here, there is  no
    reference to the "wider public interest considerations", in  particular
    the potentially material factor of the parents having come as  visitors
    and overstayed for a considerable period of time  or,  as  the  grounds
    point out, how renewable the children's connection to  India  might  be
    where they have been brought up "within the Indian community in the UK"
    and will have the support of their Indian parents in readapting.

14. The assessment is also in  error  in  reaching  a  conclusion  on  best
    interests at [13] and, without more, finding this to be the  answer  to
    the "reasonableness" question at [14], contrary to  the  indication  of
    the Court of Appeal that the two assessments are potentially materially
    different. For bot of these reasons I concluded that  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal disclosed a material error on a  point  of  law
    such that it had to be set aside to be re-made.

15. A new ground of challenge arose at the hearing, that the  children  did
    not, as a question of fact,  fall  to  be  considered  under  paragraph
    276ADE. This was noted by the respondent at 31 and 32 of  her  decision
    so the point was before the First-tier Tribunal judge. As the Court  of
    Appeal set out at [13] of MA (Pakistan):


         "13.  Some  preliminary  observations  can  be  made   about   rule
         276ADE(iv) and section 117B(6). First, they are  similarly  framed:
         both require seven years' residence and in both a critical question
         is whether it would be unreasonable for the child to be expected to
         leave the UK. Second, the concept of seven years' residence may not
         be calculated in precisely the same way in the two provisions. rule
         276ADE(1) states in terms that the period must be  assessed  as  at
         the date of  the  application.  However,  the  Secretary  of  State
         conceded that as a result of section 85(4) of  the  2002  Act,  the
         relevant date for the purpose of section 117B  is  the  later  date
         when the court is making its determination."

16. Mr Ahmed pointed out quite rightly that this issue  was  not  contained
    within the grounds of appeal upon which permission had been granted. It
    was my view that where the law had clearly  been  applied  incorrectly,
    this was a "Robinson obvious" ground which should be admitted  even  at
    this stage. The decision must also be set aside to be re-made for  this
    reason and  in  the  re-making  the  appellants  are  not  entitled  to
    consideration under have paragraph 276ADE(iv).

17. For completeness sake I should also indicate that it was agreed by  the
    parties that the First-tier Tribunal erred at [16] in finding that  the
    parents were entitled to consideration under paragraph EX1 of  Appendix
    FM as this route is barred to them, regardless of whether the  children
    fell to be considered under paragraph 276ADE as the parents  could  not
    meet the eligibility requirements of the Immigration Rules.


DECISION

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law such that it is set aside to be re-made.

14. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  re-made  de
    novo.

DIRECTIONS

15. The appeal will be heard at the Birmingham hearing centre on the  first
    available date before a panel  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lodge.

16. No later than 7 days prior to the hearing, the parties are to file with
    the First-tier Tribunal and serve  on  the  other  party  ALL  evidence
    relied upon in a consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle.


Signed: [pic]                                Date:  2 February 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
