

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/34441/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                    |               Decision and Reasons   |
|                                    |Promulgated                           |
|On 8 April 2015                     |                On 14 April 2015      |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                F N NDIRANGU

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C McGinley, of Gray & Co, Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The SSHD appeals against a determination by a panel of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  comprising  Designated  Judge   Murray   and   Judge   Young,
    promulgated on 5 December 2014.   The  panel  allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal against refusal of leave to remain under Article 8 of the  ECHR,
    outside the Immigration Rules.

 3. The appellant applied on 1 July 2012, when still  a  minor,  for  entry
    clearance to join his mother in the UK.  That was refused on 16  August
    2012.  In case OA/16950/2012, determination promulgated on 13 May 2013,
    the First-tier Tribunal allowed his appeal under paragraph 297  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. The panel records in  the  determination  now  under  appeal  that  the
    appellant joined his mother and stepfather in the UK in June 2013.  His
    visa was granted only until 28  June  2014.   His  further  application
    leads to present proceedings.  His mother was granted indefinite  leave
    to remain on 29 October 2014.

 5. The panel did not accept the  submissions  for  the  appellant  on  the
    question of ties with Kenya, but  gave  weight  to  the  terms  of  the
    previous determination and to the current facts.  The panel thought  at
    paragraph 46 that the appellant had been "... led to believe  he  would
    be granted indefinite leave to remain but this did not  happen  because
    of the amount of leave his mother had  remaining.   She  has  now  been
    granted settlement in the UK.  It would  seem  fair  because  of  Judge
    Kempton's decision that the appellant should be granted leave  in  line
    with this".  The panel went on to find nothing in the  public  interest
    against the appellant remaining, and that it would be  disproportionate
    to remove him.

 6. The SSHD's grounds of appeal are that  the  panel  failed  to  identify
    compelling circumstances not recognised by the  Rules,  or  exceptional
    circumstances leading to an unjustifiably harsh outcome.   The  grounds
    maintain that the appellant was always on a  precarious  and  temporary
    stay, that little weight should be given to his private life here,  and
    that he can live an independent life in Kenya.

 7. Mrs O'Brien submitted that the panel  had  fallen  into  the  error  of
    taking a merely sympathetic approach.  They thought  that  because  the
    appellant had once been allowed in, it followed that  he  should  stay.
    There was no identification of any factor which was out of the ordinary
    and not catered for by the Rules.  The appellant  was  returning  to  a
    familiar country and to ordinary  circumstances.   The  panel  had  not
    followed the established approach  on  the  strength  of  circumstances
    required to go beyond the Rules.  They erred at paragraph 46 in  saying
    that Judge Kempton should have looked at the case at that  stage  under
    Appendix FM.   Although  the  ECO  had  applied  Appendix  FM,  it  was
    correctly agreed at the hearing before Judge Kempton that the case fell
    under the  Rules  prior  to  amendment.   The  determination  gave  the
    impression that the appellant was to be compensated for being caught by
    amendment of the Rules, which was not the case.  On the  correct  legal
    approach the outcome might have been different.  Part 5A  of  the  2002
    Act did not benefit the appellant.  The decision should be  remade  and
    reversed.

 8. Mr McGinley pointed out that in response  to  the  previous  successful
    appeal the appellant was granted a visa  "to  join  his  parents"  (his
    mother and stepfather, a UK citizen) until the expiry of  his  mother's
    then current leave.  That grant of leave should have  been  indefinite,
    in line with the general scheme of the Rules prior  to  amendment.   Mr
    McGinley said that a judicial review challenge, being a remedy of  last
    resort, would not have been appropriate at that stage.  The  point  was
    the basis for the panel's view at paragraph 46 of  what  the  appellant
    had been led to expect and the fairness of the outcome.

 9. I indicated that the SSHD's appeal failed.

10. The ECO should have issued a visa carrying indefinite leave  to  remain
    in consequence of the determination of Judge Kempton.   The  point  was
    perhaps not fully crystallised in the First-tier Tribunal, but I accept
    the submission that it would have been premature to pursue the issue by
    way of judicial review  rather  than  by  further  application  to  the
    respondent.  The panel was entitled to conclude that under  those  very
    unusual circumstances  it  would  be  disproportionate  to  refuse  the
    appellant further leave  to  remain.   The  slip  about  whether  Judge
    Kempton should have applied Appendix FM rather than  paragraph  297  is
    immaterial.  That tended against rather than in favour of the appellant
    and  so  would  not  be  a  reason  for  the  respondent  to  have  the
    determination set aside.

11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

12. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            8 April 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




