
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/34007/2014
                                                               IA/34008/2014
                                                               IA/34009/2014
                                                               IA/34011/2014
                                                               IA/34010/2014
                                                               IA/34012/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 14th March 2016                     |on 18th March 2016                   |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               FA and 5 others

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellants:    Mr J Bryce, Advocate; Maguire Solicitors (Scotland)
Limited

For the Respondent:    Ms S Aitken, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are husband, wife and four  children,  all  citizens  of
    Pakistan.  An anonymity order was made in the First-tier Tribunal.  The
    matter was not mentioned in the Upper Tribunal.  The anonymity order is
    renewed below.

 2. The first appellant came to the UK as a student  in  March  2006.   His
    family  followed  as  his  dependants  in  February  2007.   The  sixth
    appellant was born here in September 2007.

 3. The respondent refused the appellants' applications for leave to remain
    on the basis of private and family life  for  reasons  explained  in  a
    letter dated 15th August 2014.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge J C Grant-Hutchison dismissed  their  appeals
    for reasons explained in her  decision  promulgated  on  1st  September
    2015.

 5. Contrary to the grounds of appeal and in line with a correction thereto
    in his note of argument, Mr Bryce accepted that  the  adult  appellants
    could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules and could hope
    to succeed only on the basis of Article 8  of  the  ECHR,  outwith  the
    Rules.  He said that the cases  of  the  two  older  children  met  the
    requirements of the Rules so as to bring them to the point of  decision
    in paragraph 276ADE(iv): whether "it would not be reasonable to  expect
    the applicant to leave the UK".  The third and fourth children had  not
    at the relevant dates reached the period of seven years in the  UK,  so
    their cases also fell outwith the Rules, but they raised  substantially
    the same question  in  terms  of  part  5A  of  the  2002  Act  Section
    117B(6)(b): whether "it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to
    leave the UK".

 6. The submissions for the appellants relied principally  on  Azimi-Moayed
    [2013] UKUT 197,  [2013]  INLR  693.   Mr  Bryce  said  that  the  case
    prescribed a rebuttable presumption  that  children  who  reach  eleven
    years' residence ("four plus seven; seven years  from  age  four")  are
    entitled to remain.  The appellants, although represented in the First-
    tier Tribunal, had not referred the judge to that authority.   However,
    it was such a well-established principle that the judge  erred  by  not
    applying  it,  even  when  not  cited.   The  effect  of  applying  the
    presumption would be that the third and fourth appellants would succeed
    under the Rules, and it would follow, treating the  family  unit  as  a
    whole, that the other appeals would succeed outwith the Rules.

 7. In relation to the appeal by the parents, Mr Bryce  submitted  that  in
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act  section  117B(6)  "switches  off"  the  public
    interest entirely,  so  that  their  appeals  could  only  properly  be
    allowed.  If that went too far, he submitted that  the  respondent  put
    forward only two matters on her side of  the  proportionality  balance.
    One was that the first appellant relied on a dishonestly  obtained  ETS
    certificate,  but  on  that  point  the  judge  found  in  his   favour
    (paragraphs 13 to 21).  The other was the submission of a funding offer
    which  was  not  genuine  to  support  an  application   made   as   an
    entrepreneur.  That application was later withdrawn.  The  judge  found
    against the appellants on that matter (paragraphs  22  to  26)  but  Mr
    Bryce submitted that was wrong in law, because such  false  information
    could be taken into account only in  relation  to  the  application  in
    support of which it was made (which was not the application leading  to
    these appeals).

 8. The authority for the latter proposition was an unreported decision  by
    a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.  However, Mr  Bryce  accepted  my
    observation that there  was  no  basis  to  permit  reference  to  that
    decision, and that it was not in any way an authority.  His  submission
    came to be that whether or not the  suitability  conditions  under  the
    Immigration Rules are met is of no importance, because there is  simply
    no public interest in removal.

 9. The appellants offered further evidence, if required,  to  support  the
    remaking of the decision.  This was  in  the  form  of  further  school
    reports to show that the oldest child continues  to  do  very  well  at
    school.  He was also available to give evidence.  I accept that it is a
    matter which the appellants might naturally feel keen  to  demonstrate,
    but it would be only updating of a point which is  not  contested.   As
    Judge  Grant-Hutchison  found,  the  third  appellant  (and  the  other
    children) may be expected to continue to do well in  life,  whether  in
    Pakistan or in the UK.

10. Mr Bryce said that as far as he is aware there is no case law on how to
    interpret and apply section 117B(6).  I indicated that I had it in mind
    that there has been some authority touching on the point,  to  which  I
    might refer.

11. The respondent submitted that the judge addressed herself appropriately
    to the question whether it was reasonable to expect the  children,  the
    two older ones in particular,  to  leave  the  UK.   She  had  done  so
    carefully and in detail - see paragraphs 30 to 38.  It was agreed  that
    the same question of whether it was reasonable to expect the return  of
    the four children arose in terms of the  Rules  and  in  terms  of  the
    statute respectively.  The judge correctly addressed all  the  relevant
    circumstances and came to a conclusion which she was entitled  to  draw
    and which disclosed no error of law, account having been taken  of  the
    private life of the children, the family life in  the  UK,  ability  to
    adjust or readjust in  Pakistan,  familiarity  with  the  language  and
    culture there, and so on.  There was no  reason  to  set  the  decision
    aside.

12. Mr Bryce in response said that it was clear from the structure of  part
    5A of the 2002 Act that the public interest considerations  in  section
    117B(4) and (5) did not apply in a case which met the terms of  section
    117B(6).

13. I reserved my determination.

14. The case which I had in mind but whose citation I was unable to  recall
    at of the hearing is Treebhawon and  Others  (section  117B(6))  [2015]
    UKUT 00674.  The context of the Rules and the statute is set out  fully
    in  the  decision,  which  is  by  a  panel  comprising  the  President
    (McCloskey J) and Judge Frances.  At paragraphs 20  and  21  the  panel
    said that where the three conditions of section 117B(6) are  satisfied,
    section 117B(1) to (3) does not apply.  At paragraph 22 the panel  said
    that it further appeared that the "little weight" provisions of section
    117B(4) and (5) were also of no application.  The  panel's  conclusions
    appear to me to be broadly in line with much of the  submission  by  Mr
    Bryce, except for the argument  that  section  117B(6)  left  only  one
    result available.  At paragraph 23 the panel said,  "...  in  any  case
    where the parent concerned is unable to satisfy the requirements of the
    rules section 117B(6) may conceivably apply: all  will  depend  on  the
    facts as found by the Tribunal".

15. What Judge Grant-Hutchison did was what the sub-section required.   She
    came to a view on whether she thought it was reasonable to  expect  the
    children to leave the UK  (which  had  to  be  in  company  with  their
    parents), taking sensible account of all the facts before her.

16. In Azimi-Moayed a family comprising  husband,  wife  and  two  children
    appealed unsuccessfully  against  a  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that removal would not contravene Article 8 of  the  ECHR.   A
    panel comprising the President (Blake J) and Judge Taylor provided  the
    following digest of guidance at paragraph 13:


       It is not the case that the best interests principle means  that  it
       is automatically in the interests of any child to  be  permitted  to
       remain in the United Kingdom, irrespective of age, length  of  stay,
       family background or other circumstances. The case law of the  Upper
       Tribunal has identified the following principles to  assist  in  the
       determination  of  appeals  where  children  are  affected  by   the
       decisions:


    i)   As a starting point it is in the best interests of children to  be
       with both their parents and if both parents are being  removed  from
       the United Kingdom then the starting point suggests that  so  should
       dependent children who form part of their household unless there are
       reasons to the contrary.


   ii) It is generally in the interests of children to have both  stability
       and continuity of social and educational provision and  the  benefit
       of growing up in the cultural norms of the  society  to  which  they
       belong.


  iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than the state  of  origin  can
       lead to development of social cultural and educational ties that  it
       would be inappropriate to disrupt,  in  the  absence  of  compelling
       reason to the contrary. What amounts to  lengthy  residence  is  not
       clear cut but past and present policies have identified seven  years
       as a relevant period.


   iv) Apart from the terms of published policies and rules,  the  Tribunal
       notes that   seven  years  from  age  four  is  likely  to  be  more
       significant to a child that the first  seven  years  of  life.  Very
       young children are focussed on their parents rather than their peers
       and are adaptable.


    v) Short periods of residence, particularly ones without leave  or  the
       reasonable expectation of leave to enter or remain, while claims are
       promptly considered, are unlikely  to  give  rise  to  private  life
       deserving of respect in the absence of exceptional factors.  In  any
       event, protection of  the  economic  well  being  of  society  amply
       justifies removal in such cases.

17. I do not find in the above extract a rebuttable presumption, such  that
    Judge Grant-Hutchison fell into an error of law.  She was not  referred
    to the case, but it does not bear to be more than a  general  statement
    of what was established by its date.  It is most often  cited  for  the
    now well-known doctrine that the early years of life are less likely to
    give rise to ties which it would be inappropriate to  disrupt,  because
    infant lives are focussed within the family unit.  The  appellants  did
    not demonstrate that the judge failed to have that doctrine in mind, or
    that she failed to have in mind any of the other matters  canvassed  in
    Azimi-Moayed,  although  she  was  not  referred  to  that   particular
    authority.  It appears to me that all the matters mentioned as relevant
    in Azimi-Moayed are also considered in the decision now under appeal.

18. The judge reached the conclusion that looking at the  circumstances  of
    all appellants and of the family unit as a  whole,  there  was  nothing
    unreasonable in the expectation that  they  would  return  together  to
    Pakistan.  As I observed at the hearing, if the  adult  appellants  had
    decided at the end of the first appellant's studies (being  the  reason
    for which they came here), or at any other time, that the family was to
    return  to  Pakistan,  no-one  would  have  thought  that  to   be   an
    unreasonable course of action, or one which the  UK  authorities  might
    think of preventing, in the interests of the children.

19. In  my  opinion  the  conclusion  the  judge  reached  was  within  her
    reasonable scope, it is more than adequately explained, and it involved
    no error of law which might justify setting it aside.

20. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

21. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants
    are granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly
    or indirectly identify them  or  any  member  of  their  family.   This
    direction applies  both  to  the  appellants  and  to  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.


                           [pic]


                           16 March 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
