
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34018/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                   |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24th July 2014                               |On 28th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                 paul yeboah
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr J Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion I shall continue to  refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


 2. At the first hearing of this appeal in the Upper Tribunal  on  9th  May
    2014 I reached the conclusion that the determination of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Hindson contained an error on a point  of  law  for
    the reasons which follow:

         "2.  On 21st March 2013 Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
             Macdonald gave permission to the respondent to appeal  against
             the determination of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Hindson
             in which he allowed the appeal against  the  decision  of  the
             respondent to refuse a residence card as a  family  member  in
             accordance  with  the  provisions  of  paragraph  17  of   the
             Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

          3.  Designated  Judge  Macdonald  noted  that   the   rounds   of
             application stated that the judge had failed to make  findings
             as to whether  the  type  of  marriage  entered  into  by  the
             appellant, a citizen of Ghana, was recognised by the EEA state
             of the sponsor, namely the Czech Republic, in accordance  with
             the  conclusions  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Kareem  (Proxy
             marriage - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC).  Noting that Judge
             Hindson had concluded that the couple were validly married  in
             Ghana but the determination did not consider  the  recognition
             of the marriage  in  the  Czech  Republic.   Designated  Judge
             Macdonald thought the grounds gave rise to an  arguable  error
             on a point of law.

          4. At the hearing before me Ms Hashmi conceded that it  would  be
             difficult for her to argue  that  the  determination  did  not
             contain an error as outlined  in  the  permission.   She  also
             noted that the determination (paragraph 10)  simply  concluded
             that if the Ghanaian authorities were  sufficiently  satisfied
             by documents provided to register the marriage in  Ghana  then
             it was valid without consideration of the formalities required
             under Ghanaian law for such a marriage to be recognised.

          5. Mr Harrison contended that there was a clear error of  law  in
             the determination as set out in the grounds.

          6. After considering the matter for a few  moments,  I  announced
             that I was satisfied that the determination showed error on  a
             point of law for the reasons which now follow.

          7. The respondent refused the application for a residence card as
             a family member because the copy  of  the  Ghanaian  statutory
             declaration  provided  did  not  follow  the   provisions   of
             paragraph 3(1) of part 1 of the  Ghanaian  Customary  Marriage
             and  Divorce  (Registration)   Law   1985.    In   the   brief
             determination the judge did  not  deal  adequately  with  this
             issue reaching the contradictory decision that,  although  the
             statutory declaration did not contain the  right  information,
             the Ghanaian authorities accepted it and so the  marriage  was
             valid in Ghana.  This was  even  though  Ghanaian  legislation
             would suggest otherwise.  Additionally, the  judge  failed  to
             consider the validity of the proxy marriage for the purpose of
             the 2006 Regulations which,  following  Kareem,  required  the
             appellant to prove that the marriage would have been valid  in
             the Czech Republic.  On this basis the determination should be
             re-made."

 3. I was unable to proceed to immediately re-make the appeal after  I  had
    made the above decision because neither representative had  a  complete
    set of documents in the case and, in  particular,  Ms  Hashmi  had  not
    received full instructions from the appellant's representatives.

 4. At the resumed  hearing  before  me  on  24th  July  2014  neither  the
    appellant  nor  his  representatives,  Michael  &  Co  Legal  Services,
    attended.  Having noted that both the appellant and his representatives
    had been given notice of the hearing by post on 20th June 2014  at  the
    last recorded address on the Tribunal file and that neither notice  had
    been returned in the post, I was satisfied that it was in the interests
    of justice to proceed with the hearing.  In  doing  so  I  applied  the
    provisions of paragraph 38 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.

 5. No further information has been received from either the  appellant  or
    his representatives in relation to the salient point  in  this  appeal,
    namely, whether or not the appellant's claimed  Ghanaian  marriage  had
    been recognised by the EEA state of the sponsor, the Czech Republic, in
    accordance with the conclusions of the Upper Tribunal in Kareem  (Proxy
    marriage - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC).

 6. Mr Harrison briefly submitted that, as there was no evidence of a valid
    marriage or partnership under paragraph 8(5) of the  2006  Regulations,
    the appeal had to be dismissed.

 7. I announced that I would dismiss the  appeal  and  now  give  my  brief
    reasons for doing so.

 8. The legal position set out in Kareem has  now  been  confirmed  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in TA and Others (Kareem explained)  Ghana  [2014]  UKUT
    00316  (IAC).   The  determination  of  whether  there  is  a   marital
    relationship for the purposes of the 2006 Regulations  must  always  be
    examined in accordance with the laws of the member state from which the
    Union citizen obtains nationality.   This  has  not  happened  in  this
    appeal and so it must be dismissed.

 9. I should also point out that  in  my  error  of  law  decision  I  also
    concluded that the determination showed a further error in relation  to
    the judge's conclusion that the Ghanaian  marriage  in  this  case  was
    valid even though  it  did  not  comply  with  the  Ghanaian  Customary
    Marriage and Divorce (Registration) Law 1985.  This is  further  reason
    for dismissing the appeal on the basis that the parties had  not  shown
    that they were validly married under Ghanaian law.

10. I also dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds on the basis that the
    parties have not shown that they are married nor did either or both  of
    them attend the appeal before  me  to  produce  evidence  to  show  the
    existence of family life under Article 8.











DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law.  I set aside that decision and re-make it by dismissing  the
appeal on all grounds.

Anonymity


The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed this appeal there can be no fee award.


Signed
     Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


