
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34284/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 October 2014                             |On 20 October 2014           |
|Prepared 3 October 2014                       |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                       MOHAMMED NAFIH NAMBEETTIKKULAM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Alexander, Counsel, instructed by Krish Morgan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of India, date  of  birth  13  October  1987,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision to refuse leave to remain on
    6 August 2013.

2.   An appeal against that decision came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Garro who, on 5 August 2014, dismissed  the  appeal  both  under  the
    Immigration Rules and in respect of Article 8 outside of the Rules.

3.   Permission to appeal that decision was  given  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Grimmett on 21 August 2014.

4.   The basis of the Appellant's application had essentially  been  outside
    of the Rules as they stood when he applied in June 2012 so as to enable
    him to await his results of his MBA degree course at the London  School
    of Management and Science. Illness had  prevented  him  completing  the
    required processes in time. It is plain  from  the  application  letter
    that this was the basis for it.

5.   The Respondent in the Reasons for Refusal Letter solely considered  the
    Appellant's claim by reference to paragraph 275ADE of  the  Immigration
    Rules which had come into effect on 8 July  2012.   As  a  fact  it  is
    undisputed that at 8 July 2012 the  Appellant's  application  had  been
    made but it had not been  determined.   The  Respondent's  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter shows how paragraph 276ADE came to be considered and the
    basis on which the application was rejected.

6.   The Secretary of State never considered the application  as  originally
    made based on Article 8 of the ECHR.  Rather  the  Secretary  of  State
    solely addressed the matter by reference to whether or not  there  were
    exceptional circumstances to look at the matter outside of the  current
    Immigration Rules.

7.   In submissions Mr Alexander relied upon the  case  of  Edgehill  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 402 and to the construction put  on  the  Rules,  particularly
    with reference to the Rules coming into effect  on  and  after  9  July
    2012, but in the context of looking at an issue of length  of  stay  of
    long residence and the change that had come about through the change in
    the Rules relating to the fourteen year and twenty year requirements.

8.   In the present case there is a materially  factual  difference  set  of
    circumstances in that, as Miss Everett submitted, the Appellant's claim
    has always or only ever been based on an  application  outside  of  the
    Rules arising from the  particular  and  peculiar  circumstances  which
    prevented the Appellant completing his studies through ill health.

9.    Nevertheless  Edgehill,  as  the  decision   sets   out,   notes   the
    requirements  of  the  statement  of  changes  and   the   transitional
    arrangements in the following terms.

         "However,  if  an  application  for  entry  clearance,   leave   or
         indefinite leave to remain has been made before 9 July 2012 and the
         application has not been decided, it will be decided in  accordance
         with the Rules in force on 8 July 2012."

     It is asserted by Mr Alexander that this principle applied as  much  as
    to his client's applications and no doubt many others.   Before  me  it
    was not submitted but Edgehill was subject to an  appeal  or  that  any
    other appeal had been heard against  the point raised within it.

10.  The case of Rafiq [2014]  EWHC  1654  (Admin)  before  Philip  Mott  QC
    sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge dated 7 May 2014 bearing  in  mind
    that must have been  a judicial review application, draws a distinction
    between the situation before and after the July 2012 changes.  This may
    be a valid distinction and it may apply to this appeal but I  am  bound
    by  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in  Edgehill  which  does   not
    acknowledge such a difference given the way it expressed  its  view  on
    the requirements of the Rules coming into force on  9  July  2012.  The
    Court of Appeal concluded the transitional provisions stated  that  the
    new Rules would not apply to applications for leave  to  remain  before
    that date which in this case is what happened.

11.  I find that Edgehill is binding upon me. and therefore  the  Respondent
    did not consider Article 8 ECHR  before the changes in the  Rules.  The
    Respondent did not consider or apply Paragraph 277C  of  the  Rules  or
    thereby seek to justify the decision  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Rules.

12.  Accordingly I find the original Tribunal made a material error of  law.
    The original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.

13.  In the light of the submissions made I am satisfied  that  this  matter
    should be considered in the Upper Tribunal on  the  basis  of  the  law
    prior to 9 July 2012.14. Given the aforegoing I find as follows:-   The
    appeal is allowed to the extent it is remitted  to  be  remade  by  the
    Secretary of State in accordance with the law prior to the 9 July  2012
    changes to the Immigration rules.



Signed                                  Date 10 October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

