
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Numbers:
IA/34054/2015

                                                     IA/34053/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |           Decision & Reasons        |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 18 October 2017                    |           On 24 October 2017        |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                            LC (First Appellant)
                           LDB (Second Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Aslam, Counsel instructed by Solomon Shepherd
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellants are citizens of Brazil.  LC is the mother of LDB.   LC's
    date of birth is 27 April 1982  and  LDB's  27  February  2007.   Their
    application to remain on  human  rights  grounds  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on 23 October 2015.   The  Appellants  appealed  and
    their appeal was dismissed on Article 8 grounds by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Gaskell in a decision promulgated  on  8  February  2017,
    following a hearing on 22 December 2016.   Permission  was  granted  to
    the Appellants by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Grant-Hutchison  on
    24 August 2017.
2.   The grounds are lengthy.  They argue that the  findings  of  the  judge
    are contradictory insofar that the  judge  directed  herself  that  the
    child Appellant should not be disadvantaged because of the behaviour of
    her mother, but then the judge went on to conclude that as a result  of
    her mother's immigration history there could be no expectation  of  the
    child being able to access the education system  here.   It  is  argued
    that the judge engaged  in  speculation  and  conjecture  and  specific
    reference is made to paragraphs 31 and 38. It is argued that the  judge
    failed to provide adequate  reasons  and  that  there  were  no  proper
    credibility findings made in respect of the adult Appellant's  evidence
    and the impact of removal on the child Appellant.  It  is  argued  that
    the judge erred in respect of Section 117B (6) of the 2002 Act.  It  is
    argued that seven years is significant and the judge failed to identify
    powerful reasons why it was reasonable for the child to leave  the  UK.
    It is argued that the judge erred in failing to have regard to the fact
    that the second Appellant was, at the date of the  hearing,  two  weeks
    short of completing ten years residence  which  would  entitle  her  to
    British citizenship.  I have been informed by Mr Aslam that  the  child
    is now a British citizen.

3.   I will set out the salient parts of  the  decision  of  the  judge  and
    those are paragraphs 29 through to the end of paragraph 39:-

         "29. I  first  consider  the  position  of  the  2nd  appellant  in
             isolation.  My first  consideration  is  the  2nd  appellant's
             'best interests' as  required  by  Section  55  (Paragraph  21
             above).  The 2nd appellant  is  clearly  thriving  in  the  UK
             educational system; I have been provided with  no  information
             or evidence as to the standard of education  in  Brazil.   For
             the  purpose  of  this  consideration  I  will   assume   that
             educational standards in Brazil are inferior to those  in  the
             UK; but Brazil has a functioning and  sophisticated  education
             system;  providing,  probably,  a  better  education  than  is
             available to the vast majority of children in the  world.   On
             the narrow test of her education alone, it would  be  easy  to
             conclude that the 2nd appellant's best interests  require  her
             to remain in the UK.  But, the  same  conclusion  may  not  be
             reached on a wider analysis; she is living in the  UK  with  a
             single mother without the support of  wider  family;  she  has
             many friends among her peer group;  but  she  is  deprived  of
             contact with her grandparents  and  her  extended  family;  no
             consideration appears to have been given for  examples  as  to
             what the position might be  finding  the  1st  appellant  were
             taken ill and needed hospital care.  In my judgement,  on  the
             evidence available to me,  I  cannot  conclude  that  the  2nd
             appellant's best  interests  are  necessarily  served  by  her
             remaining in the UK.  In my judgement her best  interests  are
             more likely to be served by her  living  in  Brazil  with  her
             mother and her extended family.


         30.  In any event, whilst the 2nd appellant's best  interests  must
             be and have been considered, they are not determinative of her
             appeal.  Under the Immigration Rules - Paragraph 276ADE  (iv),
             having lived in the UK for a  continuous  period  exceeding  7
             years (in the 2nd appellant's case for the whole of her life),
             she would be entitled to leave to remain on the grounds of her
             private life if the tribunal were to find that it would not be
             reasonable to expect her to leave the UK.


         31.  I have now considered the position of  the  1st  appellant  in
             isolation (without reference  to  the  fact  that  she  has  a
             child).  In my judgement, on this  basis,  for  the  following
             reasons, whether considered inside or out with the Immigration
             Rules, her appeal is totally without merit:-


              (a) Self-evidently she  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of
                  Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii)-(v) of the Immigration Rules.
              (b) In my judgement, she does  not  meet  the  requirement  of
                  Paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi);   there   are   no   significant
                  obstacles to her return and  re-integration  into  Brazil.
                  The 1st appellant is clearly a highly  resourceful  woman;
                  she has gained entry to the UK on 2 occasions; and she has
                  supported herself illegally for more than 10 years.  There
                  is therefore no reason  to  suppose  that  she  could  not
                  support herself illegally in Brazil.  Further, in  Brazil,
                  she has support available from her parents and brothers.
              (c) Although she may have friends in the UK; and she may  lose
                  contact.  She must also have friends in  Brazil  and  will
                  make new ones.  In Brazil she has family members from whom
                  support could be derived.  She is of  an  age  (34  years)
                  where  it  is  not  unusual  for  there  to  have  to   be
                  relocation;  be  it  for  employment   purposes;   marital
                  breakdown; or family need.
              (d)      The  provisions  of  Section  117B(4)  (Paragraph  20
                  above) clearly operate against her in terms of the balance
                  to be struck between the interests of her private life and
                  the respondents  (sic)  legitimate  interest  in  pursuing
                  proper immigration control.


         32.  I have next considered  the  position  of  the  1st  appellant
             having regard to the fact that she is the mother  of  the  2nd
             appellant.  The 2nd appellant, having lived in the UK for more
             than 7 years, is clearly a 'qualifying child'.


         33.  When considering the 1st appellant's appeal under Appendix  FM
             of the Immigration Rules on the basis that she  is  a  parent,
             she  immediately  falls  foul  of   the   immigration   status
             requirement - Paragraph E-LTRPT.3.2;  the  1st  appellant  has
             been living in the UK illegally at all  material  times.   The
             appellant can only therefore  qualify  under  the  Immigration
             Rules if Paragraph EX1 applies.  This depends  on  whether  or
             not it is reasonable to expect the 2nd appellant to leave  the
             UK - Paragraph EX1(a)(ii).


         34.  Considering the 1st appellant's appeal on  the  basis  of  her
             parenthood, but outside the Immigration Rules, I must consider
             the provisions of Section  117B(6)  (Paragraph  20  above)  in
             considering whether it would be proportionate  to  remove  the
             1st appellant from the UK - I must again consider  whether  it
             would be reasonable to expect the 2nd appellant to leave.


         35.  By whatever route, the test  which  determines  these  appeals
             under the Rules is whether or not it is reasonable  to  expect
             the  2nd  appellant  to  leave  the  UK.   This  is  the  test
             applicable  directly  to  her  appeal  pursuant  to  Paragraph
             276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules; and  it  is  also  the
             test to be applied to the 1st appellant when  considering  her
             appeal by reference to Appendix FM and Section 117B(6).


         36.  So, the question to be answered  is  'whether  or  not  it  is
             reasonable to expect the 2nd appellant to leave the  UK?'   In
             my judgement, it is not remotely unreasonable to expect her to
             leave.  Of course, she must not be  disadvantaged  because  of
             her mother's unlawful behaviour; but, on the other hand, in my
             judgement, where a child has substantially benefited  directly
             from her mother's unlawful  behaviour  (by  accessing  the  UK
             education  system),  she  has  no  reasonable  expectation  of
             continuing to receive that benefit indefinitely; and after her
             mother's unlawful conduct has been detected.


         37.  The 2nd appellant is clearly a highly intelligent  child;  she
             would return to Brazil with the benefit of  her  early  years'
             education  in  the  UK.    I   fully   anticipate   that   any
             sophisticated education system will have the means in place to
             receive children who, for whatever  reason,  moved  to  a  new
             country part-way through their education.


         38.  The 2nd appellant is of an age where  inevitably  her  private
             life mainly centres on her mother.  Of course she has  friends
             in the UK who she will miss when she leaves; but it is not  at
             all unusual for children of her age to have to re-locate  with
             their  parents  often  because  of  the  demands  of  parental
             careers; or, as stated earlier, marital breakdown;  or  family
             need.  She is of an  age  where  she  will  learn  new  skills
             including the mastery of Portuguese  very  quickly;  she  will
             make new friends very quickly;  and,  of  course,  it  is  not
             inevitable that  she  will  lose  contact  with  her  existing
             friends.


         39.   I  have  considered  the  question  of  the  2nd  appellant's
             relationship with her father; but so  little  information  has
             been provided with regard to this; and he appears to  take  so
             little part in her upbringing; (and in any  event  he  himself
             may not be lawfully resident in the UK); that my conclusion is
             that this does not disrupt the reasonableness of requiring the
             2nd appellant to leave."


Error of Law


4.       The grounds conflate the tests in relation to  the  best  interests
    of the child and the assessment of reasonableness  under  Section  117B
    (6).  However, they are in reality a challenge to the findings  of  the
    judge in respect of the child Appellant. In my view, the judge erred in
    respect of the assessment of the child's best interests at paragraph 29
    of   the   decision.   The   remaining   paragraphs   relate   to   the
    reasonableness/proportionality assessment. They  are  different  tests.
    The best interest's assessment is child centred and the  reasonableness
    test requires a holistic assessment, taking into  account  all  matters
    including a parents immigration history.

5.   In this case the judge was not assisted by the Appellants.  It  may  be
    that they were poorly served by their representatives, but the evidence
    was lacking. However, there were  material  matters,  not  in  dispute,
    which the judge did not properly factor  into  the  assessment  of  the
    child's best interests. The judge should have had regard to the child's
    age, the length of time that she has been here (attaching  significance
    to the material fact that she has been here in excess of 7 years, 9  at
    the date of the hearing), the stage reached in her education  and  ties
    with Brazil. (I appreciate that the evidence was lacking, but there was
    no suggestion that the child had  ever  been  to  Brazil).   The  judge
    should have considered any difficulties in adapting to life in  Brazil,
    simply as a result of the length of time she has been here. The  longer
    the child has been here, the more advanced the stage of education,  the
    looser his ties with the country in question, and the more  deleterious
    the consequences of his return (see EV (Philippines) v The Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 at paragraph 35). The
    judge attached significance to a hypothetical  situation;  namely,  the
    impact on the child Appellant should her single parent mother fall  ill
    and need hospital treatment.  I am satisfied that there was a degree of
    speculation involved. In any event, whilst this may be a  consideration
    that the judge was entitled to consider, he  attached  significance  to
    this without proper consideration of the  material  matters  identified
    above.

6.       The judge  considered  some  of  the  above  mentioned  factors  in
    context of reasonableness at [37] and  [38],  but  they  were  not  all
    adequately engaged with in respect of the child's best interests  which
    were considered as a discrete issue at [29]. The  judge  erred  because
    the assessment of the child's best interests  was  inadequate  and  the
    decision inadequately reasoned.   The error is material. The assessment
    of child's best interests is not determinative of the appeal.  However,
    the judge's assessment is flawed. It is far from certain  that  had  he
    properly considered the child's best interests, he would  have  reached
    the same conclusion in respect  of  proportionality.   His  conclusion,
    that it is in the child's best interest to return to  Brazil  with  her
    mother,   unarguably   informed   the    reasonableness/proportionality
    assessment and for this reason the error is material. The  decision  is
    set aside.

  Notice of Decision

7.   I set aside the decision  because  the  judge  materially  erred.   The
    matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  the  matter  to  be
    determined de novo.  It will be a matter for the Appellants  to  submit
    whatever evidence they wish.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed            Joanna McWilliam                    Date 20 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam





