
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34113/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 January 2018                             |On 31 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     WB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Medley-Daley, ILAC, Leeds
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, WB, is a female citizen of Bangladesh born in 1983.   By
    a decision dated 19 June 2017, I set aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision (Judge Myers) and directed the decision be remade following  a
    resumed hearing of the Upper  Tribunal  at  Bradford.  My  reasons  for
    finding an error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  were  as
    follows:

         "1.  I shall refer to the respondent as the appellant  and  to  the
         appellant as the respondent (as they appeared  respectively  before
         the First-tier Tribunal).  The appellant, WB, is a  female  citizen
         of Bangladesh born in 1983.  She arrived in the United Kingdom as a
         spouse on 17 February 2010.  Her visa was valid for the  period  23
         December 2009 until 23 March 2012.  On 20 March 2012,  she  applied
         for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the  spouse
         of a settled person.  That application was refused by a decision of
         the respondent dated 24 October 2014.   On  30  January  2015,  the
         appellant withdrew her appeal against  that  decision  and  instead
         submitted an application for leave to remain on the grounds she was
         a victim of domestic violence.  The parties agree that  it  is  the
         appellant's evidence that her relationship with her  husband  broke
         down on 8 January 2015.  As the respondent states  in  the  refusal
         letter "by your own admission, your marriage broke down 2 years  10
         months after your probationary period as a spouse expired".

         2.   The appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Myers)  was
         correctly determined under the "old"  statutory  regime  and  Judge
         Myers allowed the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  (paragraph
         289A).   Paragraph  289A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  provides  as
         follows:

             Requirements for indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom as the victim of domestic violence

             289A. The requirements to be met by a person who is the victim
             of domestic violence and who is seeking  indefinite  leave  to
             remain in the United Kingdom are that the applicant:

             (i)  (a) the applicant was last  admitted  to  the  UK  for  a
                  period not exceeding 27 months  in  accordance  with  sub-
                  paragraph 282(a), 282(c),  295B(a)  or  295B(c)  of  these
                  Rules; or

                  (b) the applicant was last granted leave to remain as  the
                  spouse or civil partner or unmarried partner  or  same-sex
                  partner of a person present  and  settled  in  the  UK  in
                  accordance with paragraph 285  or  295E  of  these  Rules,
                  except where that leave extends leave  originally  granted
                  to the applicant as the partner of a Relevant Points Based
                  System Migrant; or

                  (c) the applicant was last granted leave to enable  access
                  to public funds pending  an  application  under  paragraph
                  289A and  the  preceding  grant  of  leave  was  given  in
                  accordance with paragraph 282(a),  282(c),  285,  295B(a),
                  295B(c) or 295E of these Rules, except  where  that  leave
                  extends leave originally granted to the applicant  as  the
                  partner of a Relevant Points Based System Migrant; and

             (ii)     the relationship with their spouse or  civil  partner
             or unmarried partner or same-sex partner, as appropriate,  was
             subsisting at the  beginning  of  the  last  period  of  leave
             granted in accordance  with  paragraph  282(a),  282(c),  285,
             295B(a), 295B(c) or 295E of these Rules; and

             (iii)    is able to produce evidence  to  establish  that  the
             relationship was caused to permanently break down  before  the
             end of that period as a result of domestic violence

         3.   At [14], Judge Myers found as follows:

             "It was submitted  by  Ms  Anderson  that  the  appellant  did
             satisfy the requirements of paragraph 289A(iii) because  on  8
             January 2015, the  date  the  relationship  permanently  broke
             down, she had leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
             paragraph 281 which had been extended  under  the  Immigration
             Act 1971, Section 3C.  I accept this  submission  because  the
             appellant must show that the relationship was caused to  break
             down before the  end  of  her  probationary  visa  because  of
             domestic abuse.  Her visa expired on 23 March 2012 and she had
             made an in time application for  indefinite  leave  to  remain
             which therefore extended her leave.  The  respondent  did  not
             decide this application for one and a half years and when  the
             application was refused the appellant lodged an  appeal  which
             again extended her leave.  Whilst the appeal was  pending  she
             made her application on the basis of domestic violence."

         4.   At [15] the judge wrote:

             "I am satisfied from the oral evidence although  the  marriage
             was unhappy the appellant was prepared to try to make a go  of
             things until the incident in January 2015.   She  was  hopeful
             that she and her husband would finally have their own home and
             could start a family."

         5.   The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper  Tribunal  on  the
         ground that the judge has misunderstood and  has  misconstrued  the
         provisions of paragraph 289.  In  the  grounds,  the  Secretary  of
         State argues:

             "... 289(i) sets out the relevant periods  of  leave  and  the
             basis upon which they were granted.   289(iii)  sets  out  the
             primary requirement  at  issue.   It  is  clear  from  reading
             289(iii) that "the end of that period" is a  direct  reference
             to the period set out in 289(i).  There is no scope within the
             Rule to extend the period beyond that defined in the Rule."

         6.   The appellant relies upon Section 3C of  the  Immigration  Act
         1971:

             Continuation of leave pending variation decision

             (1)  This section applies if-

                  (a)  a person who has limited leave to enter or remain  in
                  the United Kingdom applies to the Secretary of  State  for
                  variation of the leave,

                  (b)  the application for  variation  is  made  before  the
                  leave expires, and

                  (c)   the  leave  expires  without  the  application   for
                  variation having been decided.

             (2)  The leave is extended by virtue of  this  section  during
             any period when-

                  (a)  the application for variation is neither decided  nor
                  withdrawn,

                  (b)  an appeal under section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
                  Asylum and Immigration Act 2002  could  be  brought  [F18,
                  while the appellant is in the United Kingdom] against  the
                  decision on the application for  variation  (ignoring  any
                  possibility of an appeal out of time with permission), or

                  (c)  an appeal under that section  against  that  decision
                  [F19,  brought  while  the  appellant  is  in  the  United
                  Kingdom,] is pending (within the meaning of section 104 of
                  that Act).

             (3)  Leave extended by virtue of this section shall  lapse  if
             the applicant leaves the United Kingdom.

             (4)  A person may not make an application for variation of his
             leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  while  that
             leave is extended by virtue of this section.

             (5)  But subsection (4) does not prevent the variation of  the
             application mentioned in subsection (1)(a).

         7.   The appellant's case falls to be  considered  under  paragraph
         289A(i)(a); the alternative sub-paragraphs of (b) and  (c)  do  not
         apply to her.  In addition to  meeting  the  requirements  of  sub-
         paragraph (i)(a) the  appellant  was  also  required  to  meet  the
         requirements of sub-paragraphs (ii) and (iii).  The  appellant  was
         last admitted to the UK for a period of 27 months which expired  on
         23 March 2012.  The parties agree that the relationship between the
         appellant and her spouse was subsisting at the  beginning  of  that
         last period of leave.  The parties agree that  the  marriage  broke
         down irretrievably following an incident on 8 January 2015.

         8.   I find that the words in sub-paragraph (iii) "the relationship
         was caused to permanently break down before the end of that period"
         refers to the immediate preceding paragraph (ii) and to  "the  last
         period of leave granted in accordance with 282(a)".  Stripping away
         the parts of paragraph 289A which do not apply in the case of  this
         appellant it is clear that the period referred to in  sub-paragraph
         (iii) is the period of initial leave of 27 months  granted  to  the
         appellant and which expired on 23 March 2012.  I  accept  that  the
         operation of Section 3C(2) of the 1971 Act enabled the appellant to
         remain in the United Kingdom to pursue her appeal and extended  her
         leave so that she might do so legally. However, the "last period of
         leave granted in accordance with paragraph 282(a)"  is  the  finite
         period of 27 months; it is not, in my  opinion,  the  extended  and
         indefinite period of leave provided by Section 3C.  Had  the  Rules
         intended to provide for the breakdown of the relationship to  occur
         within any period of extended leave, I can see no  reason  why  the
         Rule would not  have  stated  so  in  terms.   Significantly,  sub-
         paragraph (iii) does not refer to a period of leave to  remain  but
         to the  last  period  of  leave  granted  in  accordance  with  the
         Immigration Rules (that is, paragraph  282(a)).   It  follows  from
         that analysis that Judge Myers erred in law by allowing the  appeal
         under the Immigration Rules.

         9.   I set aside Judge Myers'  decision.   At  the  Upper  Tribunal
         initial hearing, I heard argument relating to  the  application  of
         the Immigration Rules to the factual matrix in this  case  but,  as
         Judge Gibb indicated in granting permission [4],  Judge  Myers  has
         not considered the appeal at all on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  It  is
         perhaps not surprising that she did not do so  having  allowed  the
         appeal under the Immigration  Rules.   However,  if  the  appellant
         wishes to continue her appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds against the
         original immigration  decision,  then  she  may  produce  oral  and
         documentary evidence and I will hear submissions for  both  parties
         at a resumed hearing.  I shall fix a date  for  a  resumed  hearing
         before me at Bradford but, in the event that the appellant does not
         wish to pursue her Article 8 appeal, then  she  should  notify  the
         Tribunal as soon as possible so that the date may be vacated.

         Notice of Decision

         10.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 11 November 2016 is set aside.  The Upper Tribunal shall  remake
         the decision following a  resumed  hearing  before  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Clive Lane on a date to be fixed at Bradford."

 2.  At  the  resumed  hearing,  Mr  Medley-Davey,  who  appeared  for  the
    appellant, sought to rely upon a bundle of  documents  which  had  been
    filed in connection with  the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing.   That  bundle
    contains documents which were not before the  First-tier  Tribunal  or,
    indeed, before the Upper Tribunal at the error  of  law  hearing.   One
    such document comprises Home  Office  guidance  entitled,  "Victims  of
    Domestic Violence" which is dated 29 May 2015.  Mr Medley-Daley sought,
    in particular, to rely upon page 4 of 50 which reads as follows:

         'Applicants granted limited leave as a partner of a settled  person
         (before 1 December 2013 if the sponsor is British and a  full  time
         member of HM Forces) under paragraph 281, 284, 295A or 295D of  the
         Immigration Rules. To be considered under  paragraph  289A  of  the
         Immigration Rules,  an  applicant  who  is  a  victim  of  domestic
         violence and who applies for indefinite leave to remain in  the  UK
         must meet all of the following requirements:

         (    the applicant was last admitted to the UK  for  a  period  not
         exceeding  27  months  in  accordance  with  sub-paragraph  282(a),
         282(c), 295B(a) or 295B(c) of these rules

         (    the applicant was last granted leave to remain as  the  spouse
         or civil partner or unmarried partner  or  same-sex  partner  of  a
         person present and settled in the UK in accordance  with  paragraph
         285 or 295E of these rules, except where that leave  extends  leave
         originally granted to the applicant as the partner  of  a  relevant
         points-based system migrant

         (    the applicant was last  granted  leave  to  enable  access  to
         public funds pending an application under paragraph  289A  and  the
         preceding grant of leave was given  in  accordance  with  paragraph
         282(a), 282(c), 285, 295B(a),  295B(c)  or  295E  of  these  rules,
         except where that leave extends leave  originally  granted  to  the
         applicant as the partner of a relevant points-based system migrant

         (    the  relationship  with  their  spouse  or  civil  partner  or
         unmarried  partner  or  same-sex  partner,  as   appropriate,   was
         subsisting at the beginning of the last period of leave granted  in
         accordance with paragraph 282(a), 282(c), 285, 295B(a), 295B(c)  or
         295E of these rules

         (     be  able  to  provide  evidence  to  show  the   relationship
         permanently broke down before the end of that period  of  leave  or
         extension of stay because they were the victim of domestic violence



         (    not fall for refusal under the general grounds for refusal'

         [my emphasis]

 3. Mr Medley-Daley submitted that at the bullet point "be able to  provide
    evidence to show the relationship permanently broke down before the end
    of that period of leave or extension of  stay  because  they  were  the
    victim of domestic violence" represented a departure from the  text  of
    the Rules and an extension of the  protection  which  the  Home  Office
    (through its guidance)  was  prepared  to  offer  victims  of  domestic
    violence.  Unlike paragraph 289A of HC 395 (as  amended)  the  guidance
    offered protection to those during "an extension of stay" and not  only
    those who suffered violence  during  the  initial  grant  of  leave  to
    remain.  Mr Medley-Daley submitted that, by  refusing  the  appellant's
    application, the Secretary of State had breached her own stated policy;
    the appellant's marriage had broken down not during her  initial  grant
    of leave but while she had been on Section 3C leave.

 4. The passage of the Home Office guidance upon which the appellant relies
    appears under a heading "Key  Facts:  victims  of  domestic  violence".
    There follows what is, in essence, a paraphrase of  paragraph  289A  of
    the  Immigration  Rules;  indeed,  the  paraphrase  is  headed  "to  be
    considered under paragraph 289A of the Immigration Rules, an  applicant
    who is the victim of domestic violence and who applies  for  indefinite
    leave to remain in the UK must meet all of the  following  requirements
    ..."  A comparison of the text of paragraph 289A and the paraphrase  in
    the guidance shows that, for the most part, the paraphrase uses exactly
    the same words as the text of the Immigration  Rule.   There  are  very
    minor textual differences: for example, "relevant  points-based  system
    migrant" appears without initial capital letters for each word  in  the
    paraphrase.  However, the first four bullet points  of  the  paraphrase
    are the same as the text of the Rule.   At  bullet  point  five  it  is
    correct to say that the words "or extension of stay" have been inserted
    and do not appear in the text of the Rule.

 5. The first  question,  therefore,  is  whether  the  paraphrase  in  the
    guidance is intended simply to set out the "key facts",  that  is,  the
    position under the Immigration Rules or whether it seeks to extend that
    provision to a wider category of  applicant.   In  my  opinion,  having
    considered the guidance document and the rule very  carefully,  I  find
    that the guidance is a misstatement of the  rule  and  that  the  fifth
    bullet point does not seek to extend the  protection  provided  by  the
    rule.  This passage of the guidance is intended simply  to  inform  the
    respondent's officers of the relevant rule.  I admit  that  it  is  not
    clear why the text of the Rule has not been inserted  in  the  guidance
    verbatim and why it  was  felt  necessary  (albeit  very  slightly)  to
    paraphrase  the  rule.   However,  I  reject  the  suggestion  that   a
    substantially more generous provision than provided by the rule  should
    be hidden away by the respondent in a part of a guidance document which
    does not purport to set out the Secretary of State's current policy  at
    all but rather the relevant part of HC 395.

 6. Mrs Pettersen, for the respondent, submitted that the words  "extension
    of stay" as they appear in the guidance should  refer  to  a  grant  of
    further leave to remain issued by the Secretary of State and not to  an
    extension of leave arising under Section 3C of the 1971 Act.   I  agree
    and I refer to [8] of my error of law decision which is set out  above.
    However, I stress that that finding is in the alternative to my primary
    conclusion that the guidance purports to  set  out  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 289A but contains an error.

 7. I have considered the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.   The  standard
    of proof is the balance of probabilities in the Article 8 appeal.   The
    appellant has filed and served a witness statement  dated  19  December
    2017 in support of her appeal.  The appellant did not give evidence  at
    court; there was no interpreter and Mrs Pettersen  confirmed  that  she
    had no questions arising from the appellant's statement.

 8. The appellant states that she is not divorced from her husband although
    separated  from  him  almost  three  years  ago.   She   is   supported
    financially in the United  Kingdom  by  her  brother  who  lives  here.
    Before she came to the United Kingdom she  lived  with  her  mother  in
    Bangladesh (her father died in 2000).  The appellant's mother now lives
    in Bangladesh with another  brother  whilst  a  further  brother  lives
    nearby with his family.  The appellant continues to have  contact  with
    her mother and she says that her brothers in Bangladesh are "not  happy
    about my  marriage  as  my  husband  has  been  married  before".   The
    appellant states that she had fallen out with her brother in the United
    Kingdom but they have reconciled and he now assists  her.   She  states
    that she could "not go back and live with my mother [in Bangladesh]  as
    my brothers would  not  allow  it".   She  states  that  she  would  be
    destitute in Bangladesh and "have nowhere to go to".  She  claims  that
    her brothers in Bangladesh might harm her.

 9. I have had regard to Section 117B of the  2002  Act  (as  amended).   I
    acknowledge that the appellant is supported by her brother but the fact
    that she was unable to give evidence without the help of an interpreter
    would indicate that she  is  unable  to  speak  English.   She  remains
    legally in the United Kingdom at the present time but under Section  3C
    leave; to that extent, her status here is precarious.  I take no  point
    against the appellant for her  failure  to  be  cross-examined  on  her
    statement as I have explained above,  but  her  statement  is  somewhat
    brief as to the reasons why the appellant claims she could  not  return
    to Bangladesh.  There is a letter from the appellant's brother  in  the
    United Kingdom supporting her appeal and I  have  had  regard  to  that
    evidence.  However, I agree with Mrs Pettersen's submission that  there
    was no very clear evidence to show that the appellant could not  return
    to live in Bangladesh with her mother as she had  before  she  came  to
    this country.  She has  reconciled  with  her  brother  in  the  United
    Kingdom who had fallen out with her regarding her marriage; there seems
    to be no reason why she could not similarly reconcile with her brothers
    in Bangladesh.  There was no evidence from the mother  indicating  that
    the appellant could not return to live with her or,  indeed,  from  the
    brother who lives with the appellant's mother who the appellant  claims
    is opposed to her returning there.  The appellant does not address  the
    possibility of returning to live with her mother in  a  property  where
    the two women might live together without the  appellant's  brother,  a
    scenario which would replicate the arrangement which existed before the
    appellant came to the United Kingdom.  As regards the appellant's  ties
    to the United Kingdom, her inability to speak English appears  to  have
    impeded her integration into society; there was no  evidence  that  her
    private life is such that it could not  be  pursued  in  Bangladesh  as
    before.  Given that she is  separated  from  her  husband  and  has  no
    children, there is no question of family life within this jurisdiction.



10. In the light of the observations which I have set  out  above,  I  have
    concluded that it would be proportionate for the appellant to return to
    Bangladesh.  As a consequence, by removing the appellant, the Secretary
    of State would not be in breach of Article 8 ECHR.   In  reaching  that
    conclusion I have had regard also to the fact that the  appellant  does
    not meet the requirements of HC 395.  I therefore remake  the  decision
    dismissing  the  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  4
    November 2015.

Notice of Decision

11. The appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  4
    November 2015 is dismissed under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human
    rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 28 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 28 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
