
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34876/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 October 2015                   |On 6 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                             mr tahir amhed aziz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Manzur-e-Mawla instructed by Morgan Hall
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   On 16 May 2014 the appellant who is a citizen  of  Pakistan  and  whose
    date of birth is 3 August 1987 made an application for a residence card
    pursuant to the 2006 EEA Regulations.  This  application  was  refused.
    The reasons for refusal were that the sponsor's work place as stated in
    the application form, namely Gourmet Restaurant and Takeaway Limited at
    37 York Road, did not exist. According to the respondent  there  was  a
    different business trading at that  address  and  this  was  discovered
    after the respondent made telephone contact using the telephone  number
    given by the sponsor and shown on the letter  of  employment  that  was
    submitted in support of the application.  In  addition  the  respondent
    was  not  satisfied  that  the  payslips  submitted  by  the  appellant
    indicated that the sponsor was paying the appropriate tax  or  national
    insurance contributions.  It was noted that the EEA sponsor submitted a
    cheque in support of the application which was allegedly given  to  her
    by her employers.  The cheque is dated 2 June 2004,  the  corresponding
    payslip submitted by  the  sponsor  was  dated  5  June  2014  and  the
    sponsor's bank statement showed that the money was in  fact  paid  into
    her account on 3 June 2015.  It was not clear to the respondent why the
    sponsor was paid before the payslip was issued.  In addition the  money
    is entered as a credit and not a cheque on her bank statement and it is
    not shown on the bank statement that it was  from  her  employer.   The
    respondent concluded that there was no clear evidence that the business
    for whom the sponsor stated she was working was in fact trading.

2.   The appellant appealed and his appeal was dismissed  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal McIntosh in a decision of 2 June 2015  following  a
    hearing at Taylor House on 6 March 2015.

3.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant  and  the  sponsor.   Their
    evidence was that the sponsor, Ms Bolz, was employed  as  indicated  on
    the application form.  The address that she  gave  on  the  application
    form and which is on the letter that was submitted with the application
    shows the registered address which is  the  address  of  the  company's
    accountant whereas the business trades from another address, namely 717
    to 719 High Road, which is the sponsor's  place  of  work.   The  judge
    dismissed the appeal.  He indicated that he had taken into account  all
    the available evidence and the oral evidence that he heard.

4.   The judge found that  the  contract  of  employment  submitted  by  the
    appellant in support of the application differed  in  detail  from  the
    contract of employment which was in the appellant's bundle.  The latter
    including details not included in the former including a statement that
    reads as follows:-

         "The normal place of work will be at 717-719 High  Road,  7  Kings-
         Ilford IG3 8RL".

5.   The judge recorded that that address appeared on the flier for  Gourmet
    Grills and the business which appears on  the  Google  search  printout
    submitted by the appellant.   The  judge  went  on  to  find  that  the
    business for which the sponsor claims to work, namely Gourmet Grill, is
    a different business from that which was stated in the application form
    namely Gourmet Restaurant and Takeaway Limited at  37  York  Road.  The
    judge  found  that  there  was  no  official  document  concerning  the
    registration of the business which states that Gourmet  Restaurant  and
    Takeaway Limited is Gourmet Grills.  He also noted that  there  was  no
    official document which stated that 37 York Road  is  the  accountant's
    office for Gourmet Restaurant and Takeaway Limited.  The judge went  on
    to find that "it highly regular that a contract  of  employment  should
    state the name of the business and provide an address at  the  head  of
    the document which is not the place of work".   The  judge  also  noted
    that this address, namely 37 York Road also featured at the head of the
    letter from the employers which  was  submitted  with  the  application
    dated 14 May 2013.

6.   The appellant submitted a second letter from the employer which  is  in
    the appellant's bundle and dated 3 February 2015,  but  the  letterhead
    shows the address of Gourmet Restaurant and Takeaway Limited at 717-719
    High Road.  The judge went on to conclude that there were no details as
    to when the company changed its address from one  location  to  another
    and without a credible explanation for the change  of  address  on  the
    headed notepaper he gave no evidential weight to the document.

7.   The judge went on to conclude that  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the
    sponsor as a sales assistant to know the address and  telephone  number
    of the premises and that  she  could  not  recall  the  number  of  the
    business despite the fact that she had been employed since 3 May  2014.
    He went on to conclude that no reasonable explanation  has  been  given
    explaining why  the  address  of  717-719  is  not  on  the  letterhead
    confirming the sponsor's employment (first letter  submitted  with  the
    application) and is not referred to at the outset in the terms  of  the
    contract which was submitted with the application.

8.   The judge went on to consider what he  perceived  to  be  anomalies  in
    relation to the cheque paid to Ms Bolz dated 2 June 2014 and  indicated
    that this was still unexplained.  He went on to find anomalies in  what
    he referred to as the version of the contract of  employment  submitted
    by the appellant and concluded that  the  sponsor  was  not  a  genuine
    employee of Gourmet Restaurant and Takeaway Limited as claimed.

9.   The appellant was granted permission to appeal by Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge A K Simpson on 1 September 2015.

10.   I  heard  oral  submissions  from  both  parties.   Mr  Manzur-e-Mawla
    indicated at the start that the appellant was not relying on the ground
    of appeal relating to Article 8.  He submitted that the judge  did  not
    have a complete copy of the  contract  which  was  submitted  with  the
    application because the copy in the respondent's bundle was incomplete.
     It was further submitted on behalf of the appellant that the judge had
    made erroneous calculations relating to  the  sponsor's  pay.   He  had
    considered the sponsor's pay on the basis of four weeks as opposed to a
    calendar month.  The judge did not take into account  the  evidence  of
    payslips which were generally corroborated by the bank statements.

11.  Mr Clarke indicated that even if this were the case that  the  contract
    in the respondent's bundle was incomplete, it would not be material  in
    the light of the findings as a whole and he indicated  that  the  judge
    was entitled to attach weight to the change in the evidence. It was  Mr
    Clarke's view that the grounds amounted  to  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings of the Tribunal and it was clear in his view  that  the  judge
    took into account the evidence before him and  that  he  gave  adequate
    reasons.  There was no support for the assertion that the  contract  in
    the respondent's bundle  was  not  that  which  was  submitted  by  the
    appellant in support of  the  application.   There  were  two  separate
    companies listed at two separate addresses and the judge  was  entitled
    to conclude to make adverse conclusions against the appellant.

Error of Law

12.  In my view the judge materially erred.  The forensic analysis that  the
    judge conducted in relation  to  the  sponsor's  pay  at  paragraph  27
    appears to have led him into error.  He based the sponsor's income on a
    four week period as opposed to a calendar month and  this  led  him  to
    conclude that her monthly salary was  not  properly  reflected  in  the
    payment that she received.  It is not clear to me that it was a  matter
    raised by the respondent at  any  time  and  it  was  not  put  to  the
    appellant.

13.  There was  evidence  in  the  appellant's  bundle  of  bank  statements
    showing credits specifically from  Gourmet  Restaurant  which  accorded
    with the payslips that were submitted.  In my view the  judge  did  not
    consider these.  I can find no reference to them in the decision and it
    is evidence that potentially corroborates the appellant's  case.  There
    was a letter from the sponsor's employer of 3 February 2015 which seeks
    to deal with the  issue  raised  in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
    relating to the anomaly between the cheque and the payslip.  The  judge
    did not attach weight to this letter because in his view there were  no
    details as to when the company changed its address from one location to
    another and there was no explanation about the change of address on the
    headed notepaper.  Whilst it is the case that there is  no  explanation
    from the  employers  explaining  why  the  letter  submitted  with  the
    application gave the address as that of the registered address and  the
    later letter from them showed the trading address, the evidence was not
    that there was a change of address from one location to another. It was
    simply that the first letter indicated the address  of  the  registered
    company whilst the second one  the  address  from  where  the  business
    traded. I endorse the comments of Judge Simpson who granted  permission
    in relation to the issue of the different addresses.

14.  The judge rightly  concludes  that  there  was  no  evidence  from  the
    accountants which would corroborate the appellant's evidence.  However,
    there was a Google search which indicated that the address at  37  York
    Road  was  a  firm  of  accountants  which  would   again   potentially
    corroborate the appellant's evidence and this does not appear  to  have
    been taken into account by the judge.

15.  It is the appellant's case that the contract of  employment  which  was
    submitted with the application is the same  document  as  that  in  the
    appellant's bundle only that there are a number of pages  missing  from
    the document  in  the  respondent's  bundle.   The  missing  pages  are
    significant because the full  contract  indicates  that  the  sponsor's
    normal place of work is at 717-719 High Road which would indicate  that
    there was evidence in existence at the date of  the  application  which
    would support the appellant's case as  it  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It is clear that the issue of  the  missing  pages  was  not
    raised before the judge and it should have  been.   The  appellant  was
    represented at the hearing.  However,  although  the  judge  cannot  be
    blamed failing to recognise this as the matter was  not  raised  before
    him, it amounts to  an  arguable  procedural  irregularity  leading  to
    unfairness.

16.  The judge made a  number  of  findings  against  the  sponsor  and  the
    appellant relating to the sponsor's employment  which  either  are  not
    challenged  or  the  challenges  amount  to  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings.  However, I cannot  with  any  certainty  conclude  that  the
    errors identified by the appellant are not material to the outcome  and
    for this reason I set aside the decision of the judge  to  dismiss  the
    appeal under the EEA Regulations and remit the matter to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a re-hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside  and  the  matter  is
remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing. There  are  no
findings that are maintained.  The First-tier Tribunal will make  a  finding
concerning whether or not the contract in  the  respondent's  bundle  is  an
incomplete version of the contract in the appellant's bundle.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 26 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
