
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34488/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 2nd February 2017                       |On 7th February 2017             |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                             muhammad asif khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Barber promulgated on 9 August 2016, in which his  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision to refuse his application for  further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 student dated 18 November 2015 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 10 October  1985,  who
    first arrived in the United Kingdom with valid  entry  clearance  as  a
    student on 22 January 2011 with leave to  remain  granted  to  22  June
    2012.  The Applicant applied for further leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom as a student which was  initially  refused  but  the  Appellant
    successfully appealed against the refusal in a decision promulgated  on
    13 June 2013.  That left the initial application outstanding before the
    Respondent, the refusal of which is the subject of this appeal.

 3. The Respondent refused the Appellant's  claim  on  the  basis  that  he
    submitted a TOEIC certificate from  the  Educational  Testing  Services
    ("ETS") with his application which was  fraudulent,  the  test  results
    being invalid on the basis that a proxy test taker was  involved.   The
    application was  therefore  refused  under  paragraph  322(1A)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The  Appellant  appealed  on  the  basis  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules  (as  he  had
    not used deception in his application) and was in any event contrary to
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights,  relying  on  his
    relationship with his partner in the United Kingdom.

 4. Judge Barber dismissed the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  on  the
    basis of findings that the Appellant did not sit the  English  language
    test and therefore applied deception in his  application.   The  appeal
    was also dismissed on human rights grounds.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals the decision of Judge Barber only in relation  to
    the Immigration Rules (there is no  appeal  against  the  dismissal  on
    human rights grounds)  on  four  grounds.   First,  that  Judge  Barber
    misdirected himself as to the Respondent's legal  burden  of  proof  in
    deception cases.  Secondly, that there was a lack of reasons given  for
    the rejection of the Appellant's evidence.   Thirdly,  that  the  Judge
    took into account an irrelevant consideration, namely that  answers  to
    questions about the English language test were freely available on  the
    internet.  Finally, the Judge failed  to  take  into  account  relevant
    considerations,  namely  that  the  Appellant  had  completed   English
    language courses and received qualifications from them, that he was  of
    good character and  had  an  established  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Keane on the basis that there were arguable errors of law  in  relation
    to the burden of proof applied by Judge Barber and taking into  account
    irrelevant considerations.

 7. At the hearing, Counsel for the Appellant referred to paragraph  57  of
    the Upper Tribunal's decision in SM and Qadir v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKU  00229
    (IAC) which, referring back to Shen (Paper Appeals: Proving Dishonesty)
    [2014] UKUT 236 (IAC), sets out the three stages of burden of proof  as
    follows:

    a) First, where the Secretary of State alleges that  an  applicant  has
       practised dishonesty or deception in an  application  for  leave  to
       remain, there is an evidential burden on  the  Secretary  of  State.
       This requires that sufficient evidence be adduced to raise an  issue
       as to the existence  or  non-existence  of  a  fact  in  issue:  for
       example, by producing the completed application which is prima facie
       deceitful in some fashion.

    b) The spotlight thereby switches to the applicant.  If  he  discharges
       the burden - again an  evidential  one  -  of  raising  an  innocent
       explanation, namely an account which satisfies the minimum level  of
       plausibility, a further transfer of the burden of proof occurs.

    c) Where (b) is satisfied, the burden rests on the Secretary  of  State
       to establish, on the balance of probabilities, that the  Appellant's
       prima facie innocent explanation is to be rejected.

 8. Counsel submitted that it was at the second stage of this process  that
    Judge Barber erred in misdirecting himself that the Appellant must show
    an innocent explanation, rather than needing to show only  a  plausible
    explanation which the Appellant did.  The Judge was then required to go
    on to the third stage and determine  whether  the  Respondent  met  the
    legal burden.

 9. In response, the Home Office Presenting Officer  submitted  that  there
    was no misdirection in law and Judge Barber followed  the  three  stage
    approach confirmed in SM and Qadir, it was just that on  the  facts  he
    did not find that there was an innocent explanation such  that  it  was
    not necessary to go on to the final stage.  Judge Barber  assessed  the
    evidence before him and gave reasons as to why it was rejected.

10. The second issue was as to whether Judge Barber took  into  account  an
    irrelevant consideration, namely an internet search.  Counsel  for  the
    Appellant submitted that there  was  no  basis  for  this  finding  and
    nothing  to  suggest  that  it  was  put  to  the  Appellant.   It   is
    objectionable if  Judge  Barber  conducted  his  own  research  on  the
    internet before the hearing without putting  it  to  the  Appellant  or
    after.  On either eventuality, an irrelevant  consideration  was  taken
    into account which was material as it was the sole reason given for the
    Appellant's account being rejected.

Findings and reasons

11. There is no dispute in this appeal that Judge Barber properly  directed
    himself to the first stage question as to whether  the  Respondent  had
    satisfied the initial evidential burden and correctly  found  that  she
    had on the basis of what is known as the generic evidence  relating  to
    ETS fraud and a document showing the Appellant's test as  invalid.   In
    paragraph 6, Judge Barber goes on to identify that the second stage  is
    for the Appellant to show an innocent explanation for the status of his
    TOEIC as invalid.  That is a lawful direction in  accordance  with  the
    staged approach set out in SM and Qadir and I do not find that findings
    and conclusions that follow in paragraphs 7 and 8 show any error of law
    in the application of that second stage.  On any  view,  the  Appellant
    had not given an 'innocent explanation' which met the minimum level  of
    plausibility.  In his written statement, he  had  simply  denied  using
    deception.  In oral evidence, he answered a small number  of  questions
    about his test in a way which was vague  and  he  could  not  give  any
    explanation as to why ETS had invalidated his scores, nor had  he  made
    any efforts to contact ETS to challenge that.   In  the  circumstances,
    the Appellant's evidence amounted to little more  than  a  bare  denial
    which Judge Barber did not accept, to the correct standard  and  burden
    of proof and with sufficient  reasons,  met  the  second  stage  of  an
    'innocent explanation'.  As such,  there  was  no  need  to  go  on  to
    consider the third stage and lawful to conclude that the Respondent had
    met both the evidential and legal burden to establish deception.  I  do
    not find any misdirection or material error of law in this regard.

12. On the second issue, I find that it is an error of law for  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to have taken into  account  that  answers  were  'freely
    available on the internet' as there is nothing to suggest that this was
    in evidence before Judge Barber nor that it was put to the Appellant in
    the course of the hearing.  However, I do not  find  that  this  was  a
    material error of law.  This was not the sole reason why  Judge  Barber
    found that the Appellant  did  not  sit  the  test.   In  addition,  in
    paragraph 7, Judge Barber found that the Appellant's  answers  to  what
    the test involved and where it was  were  'very  vague'  and  that  the
    Appellant had done nothing to challenge the position  with  ETS  or  to
    substantiate that it was him that took the test and not a  third  party
    as alleged.  Further, in paragraph 8, it was noted that  there  was  no
    'innocent  explanation'  as  to  why  the  ETS  system  had  shown  the
    Appellant's results as invalid other than that  there  must  have  been
    some mistake.  These findings, taken  together,  show  that  sufficient
    reasons were  given  by  Judge  Barber  for  the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant did not sit the test, regardless of whether some of his  oral
    evidence was freely available on the internet.   The  consideration  of
    internet  research  in  these  circumstances,  although  an  irrelevant
    consideration, was not material to the outcome of the appeal under  the
    Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such is not necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed        [pic]        Date     6th February 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


