
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/34102/2014
                                                               IA/37990/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th September 2015                        |On 1st October 2015           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                     Ms Mounia Bataoui (First Appellant)
                    Mr Kebab Mohammed (Second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Saleem of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The first Appellant in this case had made application for  a  residence
    card as the spouse of an EEA national under  the  2006  Regulations  on
    20th March 2014.  That application had been refused by  the  Respondent
    on 27th August  2014  on  the  basis  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience.  The second Appellant Mr Kebab, a French national  was  at
    the same time issued with removal directions arising out of Regulations
    19(3)(a) and  24(2)  of  the  2006  Regulations.   The  Appellants  had
    appealed that decision and the appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Barber at Sheldon Court on 19th February  2015.   The  judge  had
    allowed the appeals in this case.

 2. The Respondent had made application to appeal  that  decision  on  18th
    March 2015.  The application was on the basis  that  the  judge  should
    only have allowed the appeal to the extent of remitting it back to  the
    Home Office to exercise their discretion under Regulation 17(4) of  the
    2006 Regulations.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge White  on
    5th May 2015 on the basis that  those  grounds  disclosed  an  arguable
    error of law.  Directions were issued for the Upper Tribunal to  decide
    firstly whether an error of law had been made or  not  and  the  matter
    comes before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 4. Mr Tarlow referred to the single issue raised in the Grounds of  Appeal
    namely the judge's failure to remit the matter to the Home  Office  for
    the Home Office to exercise their discretion under Regulation 17(4)  of
    the 2006 Regulations.  That was in respect of the  first  Appellant  Ms
    Bataoui.

 5. Mr Saleem conceded there was no basis for  him  to  argue  against  the
    point raised by Mr Tarlow in the circumstances.  I therefore provide my
    decision below.

Decision and Reasons

 6. The first Appellant is a citizen of Morocco.  The second  Appellant  Mr
    Kebab is an EEA national namely a Frenchman.  The case  was  originally
    presented on the basis that they had been married and that  accordingly
    the first Appellant would fall within the provisions of Regulation 7 of
    the 2006 Regulations.  The Home Office had not accepted that it  was  a
    genuine marriage and found that this  essentially  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience, hence the decision against the first  Appellant  and  also
    the implementation of  provisions  under  Regulation  19  of  the  2006
    Regulations against the second Appellant.

 7. At the appeal hearing the judge had found,  properly,  that  the  proxy
    marriage of the Appellants did not meet the requirements and  that  the
    first Appellant did not fall within the terms of Regulation 7.  However
    he had found that the parties had not entered into a sham  marriage  or
    relationship and were in a durable relationship to the extent  that  he
    found the first Appellant came within the provisions of Regulation 8 of
    the  2006  Regulations  and  therefore  allowed  the  appeals  of  both
    Appellants.

 8. Given the stance taken by the Respondent in their refusal  letter  they
    had at no stage considered the question of the discretionary issue of a
    residence card.  The first  Appellant's  application  had  been  for  a
    residence card.  The judge had allowed the appeal.  However given  that
    he found that the first Appellant was an extended family  member  under
    Regulation 8 of the 2006 Regulations the issuing of a residence card is
    a  discretionary  matter  for  the  Home  Office  under  the  terms  of
    Regulation 17(4) rather than a mandatory issue that would flow from the
    finding of the Appellant being a family member under Regulation 7.  The
    judge therefore made a material error of law  in  simply  allowing  the
    appeal outright rather than allowing the appeal to the extent  that  it
    should have been remitted back to the Home Office for the  Home  Office
    to exercise  their  discretion  under  Regulation  17(4)  of  the  2006
    Regulations.  Having found that material error of law I can remake that
    decision, and by agreement with the representatives.

Notice of Decision

 9. I find that a material error of law was made by the judge in this  case
    and set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  remaking
    that decision I allow the appeal of the first Appellant to  the  extent
    that it is remitted back to the Home Office to consider the exercise of
    their discretion under Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations.

    No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

