
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34154/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th October 2015                  |On 4th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             mr rizwan muhammad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Stephen Vokes (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Hawden-Beal, promulgated on 3rd December 2014, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham, Sheldon Court on 19th November 2014.  In the determination,
    the judge allowed the appeal  of  Mr  Rizwan  Muhammad,  whereupon  the
    Respondent Secretary  of  State,  subsequently  applied  for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  23rd
    December 1989.  He is the  spouse  of  Ms  Shameen  Akhtar,  a  British
    citizen.

The Appellant's Claim

 3.  The  Appellant's  claim  is  that,  although  he  cannot  satisfy  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of Appendix FM, such that  a  decision
    was made by the Respondent on 11th August 2014 against him, if he  were
    to be removed back to Pakistan, his wife, Shameen  Akhtar,  who  was  a
    British citizen, could not relocate with  him  because  of  significant
    obstacles in her path such as to  create  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing between himself and his wife (see paragraph 20).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge considered the evidence and, whilst rejecting  much  of  what
    was claimed on behalf of the Appellant's wife, eventually came  to  the
    conclusion that there were indeed  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  the
    family life continuing between the Appellant and his wife in  Pakistan,
    because although she may well practise the same religion  as  him,  and
    speak the same language there, (see paragraph 23), the  fact  was  that
    she will be discriminated against in that country, where discrimination
    against women was a well-known fact, and would not be able  to  go  out
    and about, or to work, and would lack  "avenues  of  empowerment"  (see
    paragraph 25).  The judge came to the clear conclusion that there  were
    very significant difficulties to the Appellant and  his  wife  enjoying
    family life together in Pakistan (see paragraph 27).

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application, which are detailed and prolix,  state  that
    the finding by the judge that there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    the Sponsor joining the Appellant in Pakistan, and under Article  8  of
    the ECHR, was not sufficiently reasoned and could not be sustainable.

 6. On 23rd January 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

The Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me on 7th October 2015, Mr  Mills,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, placed reliance  upon  the
    recent Court of Appeal decision in Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ  440.   This
    was a case where Mrs Agyarko, a national of Ghana, had entered  the  UK
    with limited leave in 2003 and within a few months  became  an  illegal
    overstayer.  She formed a relationship and cohabited with a Mr Richmond
    Benette, who was a naturalised British citizen.  They married by  proxy
    in accordance with Ghanaian law in August 2012.  The  relationship  and
    marriage was formed in  circumstances  of  known  precariousness.   The
    Court of Appeal referred to the case of Chikwamba where  the  House  of
    Lords had held that there would be a violation  of  Article  8  if  the
    applicant with leave to remain were removed from the United Kingdom and
    forced to make an out of country application.  It was  said  that  this
    would serve no good purpose.  The Court of Appeal said that, "in a case
    involving precarious family life, it will  be  necessary  to  establish
    that there were exceptional circumstances to warrant such a conclusion"
    (paragraph 31).  The Court of Appeal held that Mrs  Akyarko  could  not
    show that her case was exceptional in the relevant sense (see paragraph
    28).  The claim failed under Article 8.

 8. Second, Mr Mills submitted that, whilst it was accepted that women were
    discriminated in Pakistan, nevertheless, the judge at paragraph 24  had
    said that there was no  particular  risk  to  this  Appellant.   Third,
    although Mr Vokes referred to the Secretary of State's IDI (at page 27)
    in relation to discrimination against women, much of  this  relates  to
    property disputes and divorce rights, which was not in issue here.

 9. For his part, Mr Vokes submitted that whilst it was accepted  that  the
    right to Article 8 residence in the country was not a matter of choice,
    in this particular case, what was a  distinguishing  feature  here  was
    that the Appellant herself had said that she could not live in Pakistan
    because she would not have the right to work, to drive, and to go  out.
    In her case, she is actually objecting to the discrimination  that  she
    will have imposed on her.  That makes all the difference.

10. In reply, Mr Mills submitted that as a matter of rationality, it  could
    not be said that the judge had failed to look at this case at the lower
    threshold.  The appeal should be dismissed.

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge involved  a
    making of an error on a point of law.  The  case  of  Agyarko  was  not
    applied in the sense that it has to be applied.   It  is  quite  clear,
    that even in relation to an illegal overstayer  who  is  married  to  a
    British settled spouse, the  existence  of  "insurmountable  obstacles"
    cannot be automatically assumed.  The evidence does show  that  insofar
    as there is discrimination, it is in relation to property  and  divorce
    rights.

12. I take judicial notice of the  fact  that  there  are  many  people  of
    Pakistani origin that wilfully choose to go and settle there, even when
    they have been born and brought up in this  country  and  there  is  no
    objective evidence in the human rights report that suggests that  there
    are insurmountable obstacles to doing so.  It is for the  Appellant  to
    prove her case.

13. Given what the Court of Appeal has now made clear in Agyarko,  she  has
    failed to do so.  Moreover, that decision is perfectly consistent  with
    the European Court of Human Rights judgment in Jeunesse  v  Netherlands
    [2015] 60 EHRR 17, para 108, where the Grand Chamber  did  not  suggest
    that exceptional circumstances can be automatically assumed.

14. In that case, exceptional circumstances were found to exist because  of
    other factors, such as the fact that the case involved  a  family  with
    children, where the husband and the children of the applicant were  all
    Netherlands nationals, and where  the  authorities  had  tolerated  the
    applicant's presence in the country for a considerable period  of  time
    amounting to many years (see paragraphs 114  to  122).   None  of  this
    applies in this case.

Remaking the Decision

15. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, on the evidence before the judge below, and the submissions that
    I have heard today.  I am dismissing this appeal for the reasons that I
    have already given  above.   The  Appellant  cannot  show,  as  is  now
    required following the Court of Appeal judgment in  Agyarko,  which  is
    based upon the Grand Chamber  decision  in  Jeunesse,  that  there  are
    "insurmountable obstacles", whatever her own personal  preferences  are
    in  the  manner  that  she  personally  chooses  to  express  them,  of
    relocating or not relocating to Pakistan.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original  judge.   I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.   This  appeal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    2nd November 2015

