
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34928/2014
                                                               ia/34936/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 August 2015                    |On 21 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                           thunku pigeran ousmand
                           SAFOORAH AYAAN OUSMAND
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   These are the appeals of Mr Thunku Pigeran Ousmand  and  his  daughter.
    Their appeals were dismissed by First-tier Judge Majid on 1 April 2015.
     They sought permission to  appeal  and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin
    granted permission on all grounds.

2.   The first ground related to a procedural irregularity.  It is  asserted
    in the grounds of appeal that at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT") the presenting officer conceded that following JO  and
    Others  (section  55  duty)  Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT  00517   (IAC)   the
    Respondent's decision was unlawful as it did not consider section 55 of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009.  The  FtT  did  not
    remit the case back to the Respondent but purported to refuse what  was
    perceived to be the Respondent's adjournment request.

3.   At the hearing before me Mr Jarvis produced  a  letter  from  the  Home
    Office to the Upper Tribunal dated 16 June 2015 which states  that  the
    Respondent does not oppose the Appellants' application  for  permission
    to appeal as set out at paragraph 1 of the  grounds.  The  letter  then
    refers to the Presenting Officer's minute from the hearing  before  the
    FtT which states:

         "I supported  Counsel  in  her  preliminary  application  that  the
         absence of an Article 8 assessment and a Section 55 assessment made
         the decision under appeal not in accordance with the law."

4.   The letter then invites the Upper Tribunal  to  determine  the  appeal,
    remitting the matter to the respondent for  consideration.  The  letter
    dated 16  June  2015  was  not  on  the  Court  file.  The  Appellant's
    representatives did not attend the hearing. On the basis of the  letter
    and the Presenting Officer's minutes Mr Jarvis invited me  to  set  the
    decision aside,  allowing  the  appeal  as  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision was not in accordance with the law in order that the  she  re-
    make her decision.

5.   In the light of the Respondent's letter and the Appellant's grounds  of
    appeal, I find that it was conceded by the Secretary  of  State  before
    the FtT  that  the  decision  letter  did  not  contain  an  Article  8
    assessment and an assessment under section 55.  There is  no  reference
    to this concession in the decision of the FtT.  I  find  that  the  FtT
    committed a procedural irregularity in failing to record or act on this
    concession. The FtT manifestly did not subject the Secretary of State's
    decision to the kind of analysis required by JO and Others (section  55
    duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC). Neither the  section  55  duties
    nor the guidance are set out in the determination and the FtT failed to
    consider whether the Secretary of State had complied with either  duty.
    The FtT should have concluded that the Secretary of State's had  failed
    to discharge the duties imposed by section 55 to  have  regard  to  the
    need to safeguard and promote the welfare of the children concerned and
    to have regard to the statutory guidance.  This was a fundamental error
    of law.

6.   I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  because
    it  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  the  matter  remains
    outstanding before the Secretary of State for determination.

Decision

7.   I conclude that the decision of the FtT is infected by material  errors
    of law. Accordingly:

         (i)  I set aside  the  decision  under  section  12(2)(a)   of  the
             Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

         ii) I re-make the decision  in  this  forum,  in  accordance  with
             section 12(2)(b)(ii).  I  allow  the  appeal  to  the  limited
             extent that the decision is not in accordance with the law and
             the Appellant awaits a lawful decision from the  Secretary  of
             State.

8.   It will now be incumbent on the  Secretary  of  State  to  re-make  the
    decision in accordance with this judgment.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

There was no application for anonymity and no direction is required  on  the
evidence before me.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
