
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
IA/34862/2015

                                                  IA/34863/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |     Decision and Reasons          |
|                                        |Promulgated                        |
|On 2 May 2018                           |     On 11 May 2018                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                              laila akter lubna
                                 sohel rana
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr I Khan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh, born on 25 March 1988 and 1
      May 1987 respectively, and are wife and husband. They have been  given
      permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Davey dismissing their appeals against the respondent's  decisions  to
      refuse the first appellant's application for leave to remain as a Tier
      1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant and the second  appellant's  application  for
      leave to remain as her dependant.

   2. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom on 13 October 2009 with
      leave to enter as a student until  31  October  2012  and  the  second
      appellant joined her in the UK on 15 April 2010 as her  dependant.  On
      27 November 2012 the appellant applied for leave to remain as a Tier 1
      (Entrepreneur) Migrant and the second appellant applied for  leave  to
      remain as her dependant. The applications were refused on  5  November
      2015.


   3. The first appellant's application was refused under paragraph  322(1A)
      of the immigration rules on the basis that she had submitted  a  TOEIC
      English language test certificate with her application which had  been
      found to have been fraudulently obtained through the use  of  a  proxy
      test taker. The second appellant's application  was  refused  in  line
      accordingly.

   4. The appellants appealed against  that  decision.  Their  appeals  were
      heard on 24 October 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Davey, who found
      that the respondent had made out her case under paragraph 322(1A)  and
      that the first appellant had  failed  successfully  to  challenge  the
      assertion that  she  had  used  a  proxy  test-taker.  He  accordingly
      dismissed the appeals.

   5. Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  sought  by  the
      appellants on the grounds that the judge had failed to  make  adequate
      findings on the report of Professor Sommer which had been produced  in
      support of the appeals and that the judge's decision as a whole failed
      to provide adequate reasons.


   6. Permission was granted on 27 February 2018.

Appeal Hearing

   7. At the hearing both parties made submissions. Mr Khan relied upon  the
      two  grounds,  submitting  that  the  judge's  decision  contained  no
      analysis of why Professor Sommer's report was inadequate and that  the
      first appellant had provided sufficient evidence of when and  how  she
      had taken the test to discharge the burden upon  her.  The  judge  had
      wrongly referred to the need for  a  "reasonable  explanation"  rather
      than an "innocent explanation". Mr Wilding submitted that there was no
      error of law in the judge's decision.

   8. I advised the parties that I did not consider the judge's decision  to
      contain any errors of law. My reasons for so finding are as follows.

Consideration and findings

   9. I am entirely in agreement with Mr Wilding that it is difficult to see
      how Professor Sommer's report assists the first appellant, given  that
      it is written in general terms and is not specific to  her  and  given
      that it confirms that  fraudulent  behaviour  could  and  did  happen,
      albeit identifying some  flaws  in  the  ETS's  checking  system.  The
      fallibility of the process was, however, a matter  considered  by  the
      Upper Tribunal in SM and Qadir v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229  and  it
      was concluded that the generic evidence produced by the respondent was
      sufficient to discharge the evidential burden of proof.

  10. It is clear that Judge Davey had regard to, and followed the  approach
      in SM and Qadir. He identified the evidence produced by the respondent
      and the appellant at [8] to  [11],  which  included  the  respondent's
      generic evidence together with the "ETS SELT Source data" at D1 of the
      respondent's  bundle  specifically  referring  to  the  appellant  and
      properly  concluded  that  that  was  sufficient  to   discharge   the
      respondent's initial evidential burden of proof. He then  went  on  to
      consider whether the evidence produced by the appellant was sufficient
      to rebut the respondent's evidence. In so doing he  plainly  had  full
      regard to the evidence of Professor Sommer and took that evidence into
      account,  at  [11],  [12]  and  [24].  He  gave   full   and   careful
      consideration to the appellant's evidence about her attendance at  the
      test centre, her choice of  test  centre,  the  actions  she  took  in
      response to the respondent's allegation and  provided  cogent  reasons
      for  concluding  that  that  was  not  sufficient  to  challenge   the
      respondent's assertions. I do  not  consider  that  anything  material
      arises  from  the  judge's  reference  at  [24]   to   a   "reasonable
      explanation" as opposed to  an  "innocent  explanation".  Clearly  the
      judge was perfectly aware of what was required in SM  and  Qadir  and,
      indeed, at [12] he properly referred to the need for the appellant  to
      provide an "innocent explanation". The judge gave cogent  reasons  for
      concluding that no such explanation had been provided by the appellant
      and he was perfectly entitled  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  had
      failed to rebut the respondent's evidence and that the respondent  had
      made out her case.

  11. Accordingly the judge was entitled to dismiss the appeals on the basis
      that he did and provided full and proper reasons for so doing. I  find
      no errors of law in his decision, which I uphold.

DECISION

  12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeals stands.





Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated:  3 May
2018
