

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal Number:  IA/34971/2013
                                                               IA/34973/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 July 2014                               |On 06 Aug 2014               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     TZR
                                     AJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr B Halligan instructed by Manchester Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION

   1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/269) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
      Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings
      shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellants.  This  direction
      applies to both the appellants and to the respondent and a failure  to
      comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to   Contempt   of   Court
      proceedings.





The Background

   2.  The  first  and  second  appellants  are  mother  and  daughter  born
      respectively on 29 December 1981  and  30  December  2003.   They  are
      citizens of Bangladesh.  On 24 March 2006 they arrived in the UK  with
      entry clearance valid until 31 July 2007 as dependents of  MB  who  is
      married to the first appellant and is a student in the UK. Their leave
      was subsequently extended until 30 May 2013.   On  25  May  2013,  the
      appellants appealed for an extension of their leave to remain  on  the
      basis of their private life in the UK, in particular that  the  second
      appellant  had  been  diagnosed  with  autism  and  Attention  Deficit
      Hyperactive Disorder (ADHD).

   3. On 13 August  2013,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  each  of  the
      appellants' applications under the Immigration Rules and,  in  respect
      of each appellant, refused to vary their leave and made a decision  to
      remove them by way of directions under s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum
      and Nationality Act 2006.

   4.  The  appellants  appealed  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal.    In   a
      determination promulgated on 17 December 2013, Judge Pickup  dismissed
      each of the appellants' appeals.  He was  not  satisfied  that  either
      appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules, in particular
      Appendix FM and para 276ADE.   He  also  dismissed  the  appeal  under
      Article 8 of the ECHR on the basis that there were  "not  sufficiently
      compelling circumstances" to justify a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
      Immigration Rules.

   5. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  and
      on 21 January 2014 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Davey)  granted  the
      appellants permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Submission

   6. Mr Halligan, who represented the appellants, submitted, on  the  basis
      of the grounds of appeal that the Judge had erred in law by failing to
      give adequate reasons for his finding  that  the  appellants'  removal
      would not breach Article 8.  He submitted that the  Judge  had  failed
      properly to consider, and take into account, the  evidence  concerning
      the second appellant's autism and ADHD.  He submitted that  the  Judge
      had failed to take into account the evidence in relation to the effect
      upon the second appellant of  returning  to  Bangladesh  in  assessing
      whether there were "compelling circumstances" such that removal  would
      be disproportionate.  He drew my attention to the material set out  in
      the appellants' bundle which runs to 480  pages.   In  particular,  he
      relied upon the evidence from a number  of  professionals  and  others
      concerning her condition and needs (at Sections III and  IV)  and  the
      objective evidence in relation to autism, including a letter from  the
      Principal of a special school in  Bangladesh  (at  Section  VII).   Mr
      Halligan submitted that the Judge's reasoning at paras  20-21  and  34
      was inadequate.

   7. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr  McVeety  submitted  that  the
      Judge had considered the severity of the second appellant's  condition
      and had accepted that her removal (with her mother and  father)  would
      have a significant impact.  The Judge had given sufficient reasons  at
      paras 20-21 and 34 for his conclusion that the  appellants  could  not
      succeed under Article 8.



Discussion

   8. Following the representatives' submissions, I  indicated  that  I  was
      satisfied that the Judge's determination could not  stand  as  he  had
      failed to give adequate reasons  for  his  ultimate  finding  and  had
      failed properly to  take  into  account  the  professional  and  other
      evidence and background evidence.  My reasons for that decision are as
      follows.

   9. In this appeal, Mr Halligan accepts that the appellants cannot succeed
      under Article 3 of the ECHR.  That is, in my  judgement,  an  entirely
      appropriate concession given  the  very  high  threshold  required  to
      establish a breach of Article 3 in what is, in effect, a "health" case
      (see GS and EO (Article 3  -  Health  Cases)  India  [2012]  UKUT  397
      (IAC)).  It is, nevertheless, recognised that a claim under Article  8
      can succeed in circumstances where a claim under Article 3  could  not
      (see GS and EO at [85(8)] and Akhalu (Health Claims: ECHR  Article  8)
      [2013] UKUT 00400 (IAC)).

  10. There is no difference in principle between a pure "health"  case  and
      one, such as the present, concerned with an individual who has "social
      care" or "welfare" needs arising, for example, from autism and ADHD.

  11. Equally, it is clear that a claim  under  Article  8  may  have  added
      impetus where the individual concerned is a child who has  such  needs
      (see R (SQ) Pakistan v UTIAC [2013] EWCA Civ 1251 and AE  (Algeria)  v
      SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 653).

  12. The assessment of  whether  such  an  individual's  removal  would  be
      disproportionate  involves,  necessarily,   a   balancing   of   their
      individual circumstances  both  in  the  UK  and  abroad  against  the
      legitimate aim of the economic well-being of the country.  That  is  a
      balancing exercise which, even in the  case  of  a  child,  may  prove
      difficult to strike in favour of the individual.  Nevertheless, as was
      accepted before  me,  in  appropriate  circumstances,  a  claim  under
      Article 8 could succeed in appropriate circumstances in a "health"  or
      "social care/welfare" case.

  13. As part of that assessment, the Judge was  required  to  consider  the
      "best interests" of the second appellant as  a  primary  consideration
      even if sufficiently weighty counter-veiling  factors  of  the  public
      interest could outweigh those best interests (see ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD
      [2011] UKSC 4 and Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 at [10]).    In  doing
      so, the Judge was required to consider  the  evidence  of  the  second
      appellant's needs, how they were met in the UK and what impact removal
      would have upon the second appellant including the extent to which her
      needs would be met in Bangladesh.

  14. In my judgement, the Judge failed to provide an adequate substratum of
      reasons  underpinning  his  findings  in  relation   to   the   second
      appellant's needs and how they would be met, if at all, in Bangladesh.
       In  particular,  he  failed  to  give  proper  consideration  to  the
      professional and other  evidence  concerning  the  second  appellant's
      needs and how they are, and would be,  met.  At  paras  20-21  of  his
      determination, albeit in the context of  Article  3,  the  Judge  said
      this:

           "20.  I have taken account of the  evidence  as  to  the  second
                 appellant's needs, including the developmental needs  chart
                 handed in at the hearing and the evidence as  to  treatment
                 available in Bangladesh.  I am not impressed  by  the  fact
                 that  the  first  appellant  has  not   looked   into   the
                 availability of treatment herself since 2010.  Pgs  431-471
                 of the appellant's bundle sets out some objective  evidence
                 suggesting that there is limited availability of  treatment
                 and  support  for  autism  and/or   ADHD   children.    The
                 respondent also submitted objective evidence. This includes
                 material about the Autistic Children's  Welfare  Foundation
                 in Bangladesh, and an  article  about  Special  Educational
                 Needs in Bangladesh.

           21.   Without detailing all her needs, treatment and the various
                 pieces of evidence, it is perfectly obvious that  there  is
                 provision for treatment for autism and ADHD in  Bangladesh,
                 but  the  extent  and  quality   of   medical   and   other
                 professional support available to the second  appellant  in
                 Bangladesh would undoubtedly come as a poor second to  that
                 she is currently receiving in the UK.  However, that is not
                 the relevant test for entitlement to remain in the UK.   In
                 all the circumstances of  this  case,  notwithstanding  the
                 sympathy any impartial observer would have for  the  second
                 appellant, I find that it would not be a breach of  article
                 3 ECHR to require the second appellant with all  her  needs
                 to return to Bangladesh.  The second appellant's  condition
                 and the treatment she can access in the UK and  would  have
                 challenges in accessing in Bangladesh  does  not  begin  to
                 meet the article 3 threshold."

  15. It was not, in my judgement, sufficient for the Judge to say  that  he
      had considered the evidence at pages 434-471 of the appellant's bundle
      and that relied upon by the respondent.  At no point does he spell out
      what were, in fact, the appellant's needs based upon the  professional
      and other evidence set out at pages 60-256 (Sections III  and  IV)  of
      the  appellant's  bundle.   It  is  wholly  unclear  on  reading   the
      determination what are the second appellant's needs and what  will  be
      the impact upon her of removal other than for the Judge to state  that
      the support will be a "poor second" to that which she receives in  the
      UK.

  16. The Judge returned to these issues at para 34 of his determination now
      in the context of Article 8.  As regards the second appellant's  needs
      and impact upon her of removal as a result of  her  autism  the  Judge
      said this at para 34(VII-X):

           "VII.  ...That  the  second  appellant  has  significant   needs
                 relating to her autistic spectrum disorder and ADHD,  which
                 have been identified and currently being treated in the UK;



           VIII. The whilst there is some treatment available in Bangladesh,
                 it will undoubtedly not be of the same level and quality as
                 that  available  in  the  UK  and  this   should   not   be
                 underestimated;

             IX. That the welfare of the second appellant is required to  be
                 a primary consideration and that her  treatment  needs  are
                 highly relevant to that consideration;

              X. That not withstanding her significant treatment needs,  the
                 best interests of the child are to be with both parents and
                 as present that can only be in Bangladesh;..."

  17. Those findings build upon, but  in  truth  go  no  further  than,  the
      Judge's conclusions expressed at paragraphs 20-21 of his determination
      in the context of Article 3.  Like those earlier conclusions, they  do
      no more than repeat the rubric  that  the  appellant  has  needs  and,
      although some treatment is available in Bangladesh, it will not be  at
      the same level as that in the UK.  In my judgement, those reasons  are
      wholly inadequate to sustain the Judge's ultimate finding  that  there
      were no "compelling circumstances"  so  that  the  second  appellant's
      removal would be proportionate.  The  Judge  has  failed  properly  to
      grapple with the considerable body of professional and other  evidence
      including  the  background  evidence  concerning  available  care   in
      Bangladesh in reaching his adverse finding.

  18. For those reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to  dismiss  the
      appellant's appeal under Article 8 involved the making of an error  of
      law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

Decision and Directions

  19. At  the  conclusion  of  their  submissions  on  error  of  law,  both
      representatives accepted that the decision under Article 8  could  not
      be remade at the hearing before me. Mr Halligan acknowledged  that  Mr
      McVeety was, through no fault of his own, disadvantaged  by  the  fact
      that he had not been provided with the  appellant's  480  page  bundle
      containing the relevant evidence which needed to  be  considered.   It
      was clear to  me  that  the  justice  of  the  case  required  a  full
      consideration of the evidence  in  relation  to  the  appellants'  (in
      particular the second appellant's) Article 8 claims.  That could  only
      be done at a future hearing.

  20. Both representatives indicated that they were content if  the  appeals
      were remitted to the First-tier Tribunal or if it was retained in  the
      Upper Tribunal.  However, Mr Halligan invited me to transfer the  case
      to the Manchester Hearing Centre given that  the  appellant  lived  in
      North Wales and the original hearing had taken place in Manchester.

  21. On consideration, I have concluded that the appeals should be retained
      in the Upper Tribunal in order for the decision under Article 8 to  be
      remade.  The appeal will be  transferred  to  the  Manchester  Hearing
      Centre (subject to the agreement of the Principal Resident  Judge)  in
      order to remake the decision under Article 8.

  22. I make the following directions:

           (i)  The appeal will be relisted for a  resumed  hearing  before
           the Upper Tribunal at the Manchester Hearing Centre.

           (ii) The Judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  under  the
           Immigration Rules stands.

           (iii) The resumed hearing before  the  Upper  Tribunal  will  be
           restricted to re-making the decision in respect of Art 8.   None
           of the findings are preserved.

           (iv) Any application to admit  fresh  evidence  should  be  made
           under 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
           2008 not later than 7 days before the resumed hearing.


                               Signed




                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
