

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: IA/34330/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7th August 2014                            |On 11th August 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HARRIES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MRS PRABJIT KAUR RIAT
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr G Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Not present


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Parties and Proceedings

    1. The appellant in the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary  of  State  for
       the Home Department.  The respondent is a national of born India  on
       11th July 1988; she is referred to hereafter as the  claimant.   She
       appealed before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Roopnarine-Davies  (the
       Judge) against the decision of the Secretary of State made  on  24th
       June 2013 to refuse to vary  her  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
       Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) and to remove her from the United
       Kingdom by way of directions under section  10  of  the  Asylum  and
       Immigration Act 1999, as notified on 28th July 2013.


    2. The Judge determined the appeal after a hearing date  on  3rd  April
       2014 at which neither the claimant  nor  a  representative  for  the
       Secretary of State appeared. She dismissed the appeal for  variation
       of leave under the Immigration Rules but found  the  decision  under
       section 10 of the Asylum and Immigration  Act  1999  to  be  not  in
       accordance with the law so that  it  remained  outstanding  for  the
       Secretary of State to make a lawful decision.


    3. On an unspecified date permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
       against the section 10 aspect of the Judge's  decision  was  granted
       out of time to the Secretary of State by Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
       for the following reason:


         "...the Judge allowed the appeal  to  the  extent  of  finding  the
         removal decision not to be in accordance with the law on the  basis
         that s10 only applied to people who had  overstayed.   This  is  an
         arguable error of law  as  s10(1)(b)  provides  for  removal  where
         deception has been deployed when seeking leave to remain,  and  the
         Judge had dismissed the appeal partly  under  para  322(1A)  of  HC
         395."


    4. The matter accordingly came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the
       making of the decision  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.

Consideration of Issues and Submissions


    5. A representative for the Secretary of State appeared before  me  but
       the claimant and her  representative  did  not  appear.   There  was
       correspondence dated 6th May 2014 on the file from Pride  Solicitors
       now instructed by the claimant requesting a copy of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal determination. The Secretary of State applied on  2nd  June
       2014 for permission to appeal and following the grant of  permission
       both parties and Pride Solicitors were informed in  a  notice  dated
       1st July 2014 of the hearing date on 7th August 2014 at 2.00  pm  at
       Field House. Notice was given that in the absence of a party or  his
       representative at the hearing the Tribunal may determine the  appeal
       in their absence.


    6. There was no response from the claimant or her representative to the
       notice of hearing and there was no response under  Rule  24  of  the
       Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to the  Secretary  of
       State's notice of appeal; there was  accordingly  no  indication  of
       opposition to the appeal.  In these circumstances  I  was  satisfied
       that it was in the interests of justice to proceed with the  hearing
       and I did so on the basis of the following submissions on behalf  of
       the Secretary of State.


    7. Mr Jack relied on the grounds of appeal  and  submitted  a  copy  of
       section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 as follows:


            10 Removal of certain persons unlawfully in the United Kingdom
            E+W+S+N.I.
         8. This sectionnoteType=Explanatory Notes has no associated
            (1) A person who is not a British citizen may be  removed  from
            the United Kingdom, in accordance with directions given  by  an
            immigration officer, if-

              (a) having only a limited leave to enter or  remain,  he  does
              not observe a condition  attached  to  the  leave  or  remains
              beyond the time limited by the leave;

              [(b) he uses deception in  seeking  (whether  successfully  or
              not) leave to remain by; or

              (ba) his indefinite leave to enter or remain has been  revoked
              under section 76(3) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
              Act 2002 (person ceasing to be refugee);] or

              (c) directions [.......] have  been  given  for  the  removal,
              under this section, of a person [.....]  to  whose  family  he
              belongs.



   8.    Mr Jack submitted that the Judge had erred in law in her  following
      findings at
       paragraph 5 of her determination:


         5. The respondent's decision to remove the appellant under  s10  of
         the 1999 Act is unlawful.  The  appellant  is  not  an  overstayer.
         Removal directions ought to have been issued under  section  47  of
         the immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


   9.   Mr Jack submitted that contrary to the Judge's finding section 10 of
      the 1999 Act was  lawfully  applied  because  the  claimant  had  used
      deception as set out in  section  10(1)(b).   He  submitted  that  the
      claimant had been duly notified on an  IS.151A  of  her  liability  to
      removal for this reason under section 10 and he submitted  and  relied
      upon the notice dated 28th July 2013.


  10. The Judge found, at paragraph 3 of her determination,  that  a  letter
      dated 8th December 2012 submitted by the claimant in  support  of  her
      appeal purporting to come from Habib Bank Ltd in Pakistan  was  false.
      She upheld the mandatory refusal by the  Secretary  of  State  of  the
      application under paragraph 322(1A) because of the use  of  the  false
      document.  The Judge accepted the content of a  document  verification
      report from the Secretary of State in the absence of any  rebuttal  by
      the claimant that she had used a false document and had used deception
      in her application.


  11. I am accordingly  satisfied  that  the  Secretary  of  State  properly
      applied and notified the claimant of the intention to  remove  her  by
      way of directions under section 10 of the 1999  Act  because  she  had
      used deception in seeking leave to remain in the United Kingdom.   The
      Judge's decision to dismiss the appeal for variation  of  leave  under
      the Immigration Rules  is  not  challenged  and  that  aspect  of  the
      decision stands.  However, I find that  the  Judge  erred  in  law  by
      finding the removal decision to be not in accordance with the  law.  I
      set aside that part of the decision and remake it  by  dismissing  the
      appeal against the removal decision.


Summary of Decisions

  12. I find that the making of the  decision  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      involved the making of an error on a point of law in relation  to  the
      removal decision under section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
      1999.


  13. I set aside that aspect of the decision and remake  it  by  dismissing
      the appeal against the removal decision.


  14. This appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of State succeeds.

Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


Signed

J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Dated: 8th August 2014


Fee Award

    The position remains that there is no fee award.

Signed

J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Dated: 8th August 2014



