
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34030/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6th May 2014                                 |On 26th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                           master Ghufran Manzoor
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Traynor promulgated on 20th January 2014, following a hearing  at
    Hatton Cross, which was a "paper hearing" on 16th January 2014.  In the
    determination, the judge allowed the appeal of Master Ghufran  Manzoor.
    The Respondent Secretary  of  State,  applied  for,  and  was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  23rd
    January 2006.  The Appellant had last been granted leave to  enter  the
    UK on 31st August 2011 as a Tier 1 (post-study  work)  dependent  child
    until 14th July 2013.  The Appellant's parents' Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant application  had  been  refused  and  the  Respondent  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant was a child of the parent  who  had  valid
    leave to enter or remain in the UK.  The Appellant now argued  that  he
    should not be punished for the fact that his parents' applications  had
    been refused.   The  Respondent  should  have  applied  the  policy  of
    "evidential flexibility"  to  make  further  inquiries  on  outstanding
    matters in order to acquire the information that was needed.

 3. The appeal of the Appellant's parents, and his sister,  was  determined
    by Judge Cockrill, where  no  reference  whatsoever  was  made  to  the
    Appellant.  Judge Cockrill observed that the Appellant's father's leave
    to remain as a Tier 1 Migrant had expired six months  earlier  on  16th
    December 2012, than that of the Appellant, and that  he  had  made  his
    application for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant  two
    days before the expiry of that leave.

 4. In the instant case, Judge Traynor noted that it was unusual  that  the
    Appellant would have been granted leave  beyond  the  period  of  leave
    granted to his parents, upon whose immigration status he was dependent.



 5. However, the judge observed that:

         "My inquiries have established that  the  address  given  for  this
         Appellant and those named in the decision of Judge Cockrill is  the
         same but that no attempt was made by the  Appellants  to  link  his
         appeal to those other appeals so that it could be considered at the
         same time" (paragraph 12).

    The judge applied Rodriguez (Flexibility Policy) [2013] UKUT 00042  and
    concluded that the Secretary of State should  have  made  inquiries  in
    order to establish the precise relationship and  the  information  that
    was needed dependent on that.  The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The  grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  ought  to  have
    substantively determined the merits of the  Appellant's  appeal  rather
    than allowing his appeal on the basis that the  appeal  of  his  family
    members had been allowed in an earlier appeal.

 7. On 2nd April 2014, permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that
    the judge had failed to properly consider the  limited  extent  of  the
    Respondent's policy of evidential flexibility, in placing reliance upon
    Rodriguez, when reaching conclusions in his determination.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me, however,  there  was  no  appearance  by  the
    Appellant, or of anyone on his behalf, nor was any  explanation  given.
    On the other hand Ms A Everett, appeared on behalf  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State.  She submitted  that,  having  taken  instructions,
    after reviewing the file, she would like  to  make  an  application  to
    withdraw the decision of the Secretary of State dated 30th August  2013
    in order to enable the Secretary of  State  to  reconsider  the  matter
    again, because this is what was already being done in relation  to  the
    Appellant's parents and  siblings.   Judge  Cockrill  had  allowed  the
    appeal to the extent that the matter  should  be  reconsidered  by  the
    Respondent Secretary of State.

 9. Accordingly, it was entirely sensible that the entire family's position
    should be considered at one and the same time.  It was  not  known  how
    the Appellant had become separated  from  the  appeals  of  his  family
    members, but it was clearly in the interests of everyone  that  matters
    were consolidated together, and considered as one.

10. I have decided to accede to Ms  Everett's  request.   Given  that  this
    Appellant's position was parasitic, and  dependent  upon  that  of  his
    parents, it was entirely  correct  for  the  family's  position  to  be
    considered as a whole and the files to be linked.

Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  This is because  the  judge
    allowed the appeal  on  the  basis  of  the  application  of  Rodriguez
    (Flexibility Policy) [2013] UKUT 00042, the  application  of  which  is
    limited.  However, the judge did also find that:

         "Given that the Appellants do not  appear  to  have  alerted  Judge
         Cockrill at the hearing of 18th November 2013 to the fact that they
         have another child whose appeal was outstanding, then I find it  is
         imperative  that  the  Respondent  brings  the   Upper   Tribunal's
         attention to my decision in this appeal ..." (paragraph 16).

    I set aside the decision of the original judge.  I remake the  decision
    as follows.  This appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted
    back to the Secretary of State for a fresh decision in conjunction with
    the decisions in relation to this Appellant's family members.

12. No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Dated



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 24th June 2014
