
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/34982/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated             |
|On 12 April 2017                   |On 26 June 2017                            |
|                                   |                                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                TAWKAL ZADRAN
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Salam, Solicitor, Salam & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

   1. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order. I have not
      been asked to make an order and see no reason to warrant an order
      being made.

Background


   2. The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Graham (hereafter "the Judge") allowing his appeal
      pursuant to the Immigration (European  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the
      2006 EEA Regulations") against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State
      refusing his application for a Residence Card pursuant  to  Regulation
      10 of the 2006 Regulations.


   3. The Appellant is a citizen of  Afghanistan.  He  is  married  to  Anna
      Nikoniuk who is an EEA national. The couple met in 2010  and  began  a
      relationship. They married according to Islamic law in March 2011. The
      couples' son was born on 18 October  2011.  On  9  October  2012,  the
      Appellant was issued a Residence Card as  an  extended  family  member
      until October 2017. The  couple  separated  in  2014  and  an  Islamic
      divorce took place on 10  January  2015.  On  26  November  2015,  the
      Appellant's Residence Card was revoked  as  he  was  no  longer  in  a
      durable relationship  with  Ms  Nikoniuk.  On  12  January  2015,  the
      Appellant applied for a Residence  Card  on  the  basis  that  he  had
      retained a right of residence pursuant to Regulation 10  of  the  2006
      Regulations. The Secretary of State refused  that  application  on  27
      November 2015. It is that decision which was  the  subject  of  appeal
      before the First-tier Tribunal. By the time the appeal came before the
      Judge on 9 September 2016, the Appellant's circumstances had  changed.
      He had reconciled with Ms Nikoniuk and married  in  a  civil  ceremony
      conducted on 17 May 2016.

   4. Before the Judge, the Appellant argued that he had retained a right of
      residence  pursuant  to  Regulation  10.  The  basis  upon  which  the
      Appellant put his case is not fully  set  out  by  the  Judge  in  her
      decision, but the Grounds of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal can  be
      distilled into three essential heads and summarised as follows:


   i) An extended family member is to be treated as a family member pursuant
      to Regulation 7(3);


  ii) The Appellant was entitled to a  retained  right  of  residence  under
      Regulation 10 (5)(a) on the breakdown of his relationship;

 iii) The Appellant retained a right of residence on divorce  as  he  was  a
      parent with actual custody of a child  or  a  parent  who  had  access
      rights to a child 10(4) & 10(5)(d)(iii).


   5. The Judge considered these arguments. At [17] the Judge stated, "Since
      the revocation of the Appellant's residence card in November 2015, the
      Appellant is no longer entitled to be treated as a family member of an
      EEA national. He reverts to  an  extended  family  member  of  an  EEA
      national."

   6. While this reasoning is plainly wrong (he did not revert to  being  an
      extended family member) the Judge found the Appellant could  not  meet
      Regulation 10(5) because (i) his Islamic marriage and divorce was  not
      recognised under UK  law,  and  (ii)  the  2006  Regulations  made  no
      provision  for  an  extended  family  member  to  retain  a  right  of
      residence. Accordingly, the Judge was satisfied that  the  Appellant's
      Residence Card  was  properly  revoked  as  he  was  no  longer  in  a
      relationship with Ms Nikoniuk at the  time  of  revocation,  and  thus
      could not continue to satisfy the requirements of Regulation 8(5).

   7. Nevertheless, the Judge accepted the evidence of the relationship  and
      marriage and thus found the Appellant was entitled to a Residence Card
      as the family member of a qualified person  under  Regulation  7.  The
      Judge accordingly allowed the appeal.

   8. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
      grounds that the Judge had erred for the following reasons:


   i) In finding that the Appellant had not retained a  right  of  residence
      when his relationship terminated as he had secured  access  rights  to
      his child;


  ii)  In  concluding  that  the  marriage  and  its  termination  was   not
      recognised;

 iii) The Respondent's guidance  recognised  that  the  relationship  of  an
      extended  family  member  does  constitute  "termination"   once   the
      relationship ends;

  iv) In drawing a distinction between the termination of a marriage and the
      termination of a relationship of a durable partner;

   v) In stating that the Appellant's status reverted to that of an extended
      family member on termination of the relationship;

  vi) In finding that unmarried partners cannot be classified as  a  'former
      spouse'  on  termination  of  the  relationship,  thus  excluding  the
      appellant from retaining a right of residence on the basis  of  having
      access rights to a child.


   9. First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin granted  permission  on  11  January
      2017 on the basis that the grounds disclosed material errors of law.


   Discussion

  10. The circumstances surrounding this appeal are somewhat unusual. At the
      hearing, I raised the  following  matters  with  the  representatives.
      First, it did not appear to me  that  the  appellant  was  seeking  to
      reverse the decision of the Judge allowing the appeal and I  indicated
      to Mr Salam that the appeal, putting aside the merits, appeared to  be
      an academic exercise given that the appellant had been issued  with  a
      Residence Card. I was told that the significance  of  the  appeal  was
      that if the Appellant had retained a right of residence that he  would
      be  entitled  to  permanent  residence.   Second,   I   reminded   the
      representatives  of  the  decision  in  AN  (Only  loser  can  appeal)
      Afghanistan [2005] UKIAT 00097. Mr Salam did not appear to be familiar
      with this decision and while Mrs  Pettersen  indicated  that  she  had
      given some thought to  its  application  prior  to  the  hearing,  she
      indicated that she was not raising this as an issue and was content to
      proceed. Given the Respondent's position before me and the  change  to
      the statutory scheme underpinning appeals since AN  was  decided  and,
      given my ultimate conclusions in this  case,  I  have  not  asked  the
      parties for their views on that decision.


  11. At the  hearing  both  representatives  made  brief  submissions;  Mrs
      Pettersen amplified the Respondent's Rule 24  Response  and  Mr  Salam
      essentially repeated the grounds the particulars of which I  have  set
      out above. Neither party relied on  any  authorities.  I  reserved  my
      Decision which I now give with reasons.


  12. There is no challenge to the Judge's finding  that  the  appellant  is
      entitled to a Residence Card as a family member under Regulation 7.

  13. The appellant's challenge relates to  the  Judge's  treatment  of  his
      claim that he was on a proper reading of the 2006 Regulations and  the
      Directive entitled to retain a right of residence under Regulation  10
      on the breakdown of his relationship.


  14. The Judge concluded that a right of residence could  not  be  retained
      for the reasons that she gave at [16] &  [17],  which  I  referred  to
      above. While the route by which she reached that conclusion is  flawed
      at [17], I am satisfied that the error is not material. Her conclusion
      that Regulation 10 could  not  be  satisfied  was  I  find  ultimately
      correct.


  15. Article 2.2. of the Citizens' Directive 2004/58/EC defines  a  'family
      member' as:


      "(a)   the spouse;
       (b) the  partner  with  whom  the  Union  citizen  has  contracted  a
       registered partnership, on the basis of the legislation of  a  Member
       State, if the legislation of the host Member State treats  registered
       partnerships as equivalent to marriage and  in  accordance  with  the
       conditions laid down in the relevant legislation of the  host  Member
       State;
       (c) the direct descendants who  are  under  the  age  of  21  or  are
       dependants and those of the spouse or partner  as  defined  in  point
       (b);
      (d) the dependent direct relatives in the ascending line and those of
      the spouse or partner as defined in point (b);"


  16. The beneficiaries of the Directive are set out  in  Article  3.2.  and
      provides:


      "Without prejudice to any right to free movement  and  residence  the
      persons  concerned  may  have,  the  host  Member  State  shall,   in
      accordance  with  its  national  legislation,  facilitate  entry  and
      residence for the following persons:


      ............


      (b)  the  partner  with  whom  the  Union  citizen   has   a   durable
      relationship, duly attested."


  17. The distinction made by the  Directive  between  spouses  and  durable
      partners is  laid  bare  by  these  provisions.  The  former  provides
      automatic rights of residence for spouses and registered partners, and
      the latter only requires Member States to make domestic  provision  to
      facilitate entry and residence of durable partners among other classes
      not relevant here.


  18. The rights of family members as defined by Article 2.2 namely, spouses
      and registered partners, are protected on termination or annulment  by
      Article 13 of the Directive which provides for the "Retention  of  the
      right of  residence  by  family  members  in  the  event  of  divorce,
      annulment of  marriage  or  termination  of  registered  partnership".
      Regulation 10, upon  which  reliance  was  placed  by  the  appellant,
      transposes Article 13 of the Citizens' Directive.  It  is  thus  clear
      that these provisions of the Directive and the Regulations transposing
      them are not applicable where there has  been  no  marriage  or  civil
      partnership.


  19. The Judge was thus correct to find at [16] that  the  appellant  could
      not benefit from the  provisions  of  Regulation  10  as  his  Islamic
      marriage was not recognised under UK law.


  20. The appellant seeks to rely on the respondent's guidance  on  extended
      family members and Regulation 7(3) of the 2006 Regulations. As for the
      former, I was not provided with a copy of the guidance, but  there  is
      no dispute that the  grounds  correctly  set  out  the  terms  of  the
      guidance as follows: "If the relationship is terminated at  any  point
      during the five years immediately before permanent residence, then the
      durable partner no longer has a right of residence." [My undermining].
      Reliance is placed on the verb "termination" in support of an argument
      that there is no distinction between the  termination  of  a  marriage
      between registered  spouses  or  partner  and  the  termination  of  a
      relationship of a durable partner. I fail to see how  this  can  bring
      the Appellant within the terms of Regulation 10. Tellingly,  there  is
      no mention in the guidance of a possibility of retaining  a  right  of
      residence. The guidance notes nothing more than on the termination  of
      the relationship the  durable  partner  ceases  to  have  a  right  of
      residence. The guidance does not assist the appellant's case.


  21. As for the latter, Regulation  7(3)  does  not  assist  the  appellant
      either. Regulation 7(3) provides ".... a person  who  is  an  extended
      family member and has  been  issued  with  an  EEA  family  permit,  a
      registration certificate or a residence card shall be treated  as  the
      family member of the relevant EEA national for as long as he continues
      to satisfy the conditions in regulation  8(2),  (3),  (4)  or  (5)  in
      relation to that EEA national and the permit, certificate or card  has
      not ceased to be valid or been revoked", there is no dispute  that  he
      fell as a consequence to be treated as a family member. However, it is
      plain, in my  judgement,  on  any  reading  of  Regulation  7(3)  that
      following the breakdown of the relationship the appellant ceased to be
      a durable partner under Regulation 8(5) and, in turn, could no  longer
      be treated as a family member under Regulation 7(3).


  22. Insofar as I have understood the  appellant's  arguments  as  set  out
      above, I find that they are  without  merit.  For  the  reasons  given
      above, I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  as
      the Judge did not materially err in law.
Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Signed                                             Date:  20 June 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

