

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Numbers: IA/34494/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                               |Determination           |
|                                                   |Promulgated             |
|On  9th July 2014                                  |On 14th July 2014       |
|                                                   |                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                  Between:

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             HELEN GALDO DEGARA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:          Mr P J White, instructed by Blakewells
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Respondent is a citizen of  the  Philippines  born  on  31st  July
      1973. Her appeal against the decision  to  refuse  to  vary  leave  to
      remain as a spouse and the decision to  remove  her  was  allowed,  on
      Article 8 grounds, by the First-tier Tribunal in a determination dated
      9th April 2014. The Secretary  of  State  applied  for  permission  to
      appeal.




2.    Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Renton  on
      20th May 2014 on the grounds that  it  was  arguable  that  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge  Abebrese  failed  to  consider  the  test  in  Gulshan
      (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT  640  (IAC)  or
      make any decision in respect of it.

3.    Mr Duffy relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted that the  Judge
      had failed to follow Gulshan and had  carried  out  a  'free-wheeling'
      assessment of Article 8. It was not clear from the  determination  why
      the Respondent had failed to satisfy Appendix FM  and  there  were  no
      findings on maintenance. Although this  was  also  not  clear  in  the
      refusal letter it was incumbent on the Judge to look at  the  Rule  in
      its entirety and make findings on where  the  Respondent  fell  short.
      This was relevant to the assessment of proportionality. There were  no
      compelling circumstances in this case.

4.    Mr White submitted that the Judge's application  of  Appendix  FM  was
      not referred to in the grounds and was not the subject of the grant of
      permission. In any event there was no duty on the Judge to go  through
      the Rule. There was no material  error of law in the  Judge's  finding
      that the Respondent had failed to satisfy Appendix FM.

5.    The grounds of appeal submitted that the Judge  had  failed  to  apply
      Gulshan which stated that only  if  the  Judge  identified  compelling
      circumstances was it necessary to consider Article  8.  It  was  clear
      from the determination that the Judge had Gulshan in mind  because  he
      identified  compelling  circumstances  in  this  case.  There  was  no
      challenge to the Judge's finding that the refusal  to  vary  leave  to
      remain was disproportionate. The grounds alleged that  the  Judge  was
      wrong to consider Article 8 in the first place. There was no  material
      error in the Judge's Article 8 assessment.


Findings and conclusions

6.    The reasons for refusal  letter  did  not  refer  to  the  maintenance
      requirements of the  Immigration  Rules,  nor  did  it  challenge  the
      Respondent's relationship. The  Appellant  failed  to  identify  which
      paragraphs of the Immigration Rules the Respondent failed  to  satisfy
      other than stating that she could not benefit from paragraph EX.1. The
      Judge found that the Respondent could not satisfy Appendix FM  of  the
      Rules, but failed to give reasons for coming to this conclusion, other
      than reference to paragraph EX.1. Any error of law in this regard  was
      not material to the decision to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.
      There was no challenge to the Judge's decision to dismiss  the  appeal
      under the Immigration Rules.

7.     The  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  relied  on  Gulshan  in   her
      submissions before the First-tier Tribunal. However, the Judge  failed
      to refer to the case in his findings on Article 8. I  find  that  this
      error was not material because the Judge identified  circumstances  in
      this case which were compelling and  were  not  recognised  under  the
      Immigration Rules at paragraph 19 and 27  of  the  determination.  The
      Sponsor lived with and cared for Mr Campbell, an 88-year-old  man  who
      had suffered a stroke and cancer in 2007.

8.    The Judge took into account the fact that the  Sponsor  was  68  years
      old and had      lived in the UK all his life. He had  adult  children
      with whom he had a close bond. The Respondent and  the  Sponsor  cared
      for Mr Campbell and the Sponsor had investment properties in  the  UK.
      The Judge found that it would be unreasonable to expect the Sponsor to
      relocate to the Philippines and the decision to refuse leave to remain
      was disproportionate in the circumstances. This finding  was  open  to
      the Judge on the evidence before him and he gave adequate reasons  for
      his conclusions.

9.    The Judge made no error on any point of law which  might  require  the
      determination to be set aside. The appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
      dismissed.  The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  dated  28th
      March 2014 shall stand.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
11th July 2014
