
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34809/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th April 2015                            |On 21st May 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                             REENA SADDAF AKRAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Patel of Highfields Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Carey made
    following consideration on the papers on 7th November 2014.





Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  20th  September  1990.
    She came to the UK as the wife of Wasim Aslam, a  British  citizen,  on
    5th February 2012 and, on 19th April 2014, applied for further leave to
    remain on the basis of her marriage.

 3. The application was refused on suitability grounds because it  was  the
    Secretary  of  State's  belief  that  the  appellant  had  engaged   in
    deception.  The English language test produced by her  to  support  her
    original application for leave to enter had been confirmed  by  ETS  to
    have been obtained through the use of a proxy test taker.  He was  also
    not satisfied that the claimed relationship with Mr Aslam  was  genuine
    and subsisting or that they intended to live together permanently.

 4. The judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was  granted  by  Judge
    Nicholson on 23rd January 2015.

The Hearing

 6. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Mills confirmed that he  was  not
    in a position to prove the allegation of deception.  In  paper  appeals
    such as this it was not the Secretary of State's  practice  to  provide
    the necessary witness statements and printouts from  ETS  to  establish
    that deception had taken  place.   He  was  therefore  content  with  a
    finding that the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  under  paragraphs
    322(1A) and 322(9) could not stand.

 7. Mr Patel explained that the appeal papers  had  been  prepared  by  the
    appellant's father-in-law without the benefit of  legal  representation
    and he had  not  provided  evidence  in  relation  to  cohabitation  or
    subsistence of the marriage, choosing to concentrate on  the  issue  of
    deception.  He accepted that there was a paucity of material before the
    Immigration Judge although he pointed out that there  were  letters  in
    the respondent's bundle which established that  she lived  at  [  -  ],
    Bradford, which was the address of her parents in law and husband.

 8. As the judge observed, it is a great pity that the  appellant  did  not
    elect to have an oral  hearing  which  might  well  have  assisted  her
    appeal. The most recent letter from the Bradford teaching hospital  and
    the GP predates the application by approximately six months.  There was
    almost nothing in the documents relating to Mr Aslam and  no  financial
    documents, such as bank statements or payslips,  or  any  documents  in
    joint names, no photographs and no evidence of any joint life  together
    at all.  The couple have no children.

 9. In these circumstances it is very difficult to see how the judge  could
    have done anything else but to conclude  that  the  appellant  had  not
    discharged the burden of proof upon her to  show  that  she  was  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with her husband.

Decision

10. So far as the decision under paragraph  320  is  concerned,  the  judge
    erred in law and the decision is set  aside.   The  refusal  under  the
    suitability requirements of Appendix FM does not  stand.   However  the
    appellant is not able to meet the eligibility requirements for  limited
    leave to remain, and her appeal against that decision is dismissed.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

