
IAC-TH-LW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34369/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th January 2015                  |On 25th March 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mr baker gashugi
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Collins (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against  a  decision  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom was allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Beg  ("the
    judge") in a determination promulgated on 3rd October 2014.

2.   Having made the decision to remove the appellant under paragraphs 8  to
    10A of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971, the Secretary  of  State
    went on to set removal directions, identifying Burundi as  the  country
    of return.  At the First-tier Tribunal hearing, the two representatives
    present drew the judge's  attention  to  a  determination  made  by  an
    Adjudicator in May 2003.  In dismissing the appeal in  that  year,  the
    Adjudicator found that the appellant was not a national of Burundi.  In
    the present appeal, the judge recorded a suggestion from the  Secretary
    of State's representative that "the matter  be  referred  back  to  the
    caseworker to consider the removal directions in light of 'the  earlier
    findings'"  (paragraph  2  of  the  determination).   The  judge   then
    purported to allow the appeal, observing that it was appropriate in the
    light of the finding of fact regarding nationality made  in  2003  that
    the Secretary of State consider the case further.

3.   The Secretary of State applied for  permission  to  appeal,  which  was
    granted on 20th November 2014.  The author  of  the  grounds  contended
    that the judge erred in allowing the appeal.  The country identified in
    removal directions does not render the decision under  appeal  unlawful
    and removal directions are not in themselves an "immigration  decision"
    attracting a right of appeal.  The judge was required to determine  the
    appeal and erred in law in allowing it for the reasons given.

4.   In a rule 24 response, Mr Collins submitted that the judge did not  err
    in allowing the appeal.  The Tribunal was  required  to  determine  any
    matter raised as a ground of appeal, by virtue of section 86(2) of  the
    2002 Act.  Removal directions set in accordance with  paragraphs  8  to
    10A of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act fell within section 82(1)  and  82(2)
    of the 2002 Act, as an "immigration decision" under section 82(2)(h) of
    the 2002  Act.   The  appellant  raised  as  a  ground  of  appeal  the
    destination of return and so this was a relevant issue in  the  appeal.
    In those circumstances, the judge correctly allowed the appeal  to  the
    limited extent of  deciding  that  the  adverse  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law and properly directed that the matter be  given
    further consideration by the Secretary of State.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   Mr Walker said that the identification of the country of return  was  a
    matter for the Secretary of State.  She could, as a matter of law, name
    two countries.  The judge was required  to  determine  the  appeal  and
    erred in  finding  that  the  decision  to  remove  the  appellant  was
    unlawful, by reason of the country named in the removal directions.

6.   Mr Collins said that it had been the  Presenting  Officer's  suggestion
    that the Secretary  of  State's  caseworker  give  the  matter  further
    consideration.  The country of removal was a matter raised as a  ground
    of appeal, falling within section 86(2) of the  2002  Act.   There  had
    been further delay which might have been avoided if  the  Secretary  of
    State had simply applied  for  an  adjournment  at  the  hearing.   The
    appellant was concerned at delay and further cost  when  all  that  was
    sensibly required was reconsideration by the Secretary of State.

Conclusion on Error of Law

7.   I conclude that the judge materially erred in allowing  the  appeal  on
    the basis that the removal directions identified Burundi as the country
    of return, notwithstanding the finding of fact made in this context  in
    2003.  The setting of removal directions is an administrative step  and
    does not amount to an "immigration  decision"  falling  within  section
    82(2) of the 2002 Act.  In his rule 24 response, Mr  Collins  suggested
    that section 82(2)(h) was engaged but, with great  respect  to  him,  I
    disagree.  The decision identified there is a decision  to  remove,  in
    accordance with directions under paragraphs 8 to 10A of Schedule  2  to
    the 1971 Act.  There  is  a  clear  distinction  between  the  decision
    itself, which gives rise to an appeal under section 82(1) of  the  2002
    Act and the setting of removal directions.  With great respect  to  the
    judge, she erred in concluding that the identification of  the  country
    of return of itself rendered the removal decision unlawful.

8.   Of course, identification of Burundi as the  country  of  return  might
    very well have been a relevant matter in the judge's overall assessment
    but, again,  naming  Burundi  in  the  directions  did  not  of  itself
    undermine the integrity or lawfulness of the removal  decision.   Under
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, the setting of removal  directions
    did give rise to an appeal but that is not the case under the 2002 Act.
     The Secretary of State may, administratively,  alter  the  country  of
    return in a particular case and, as Mr Walker said,  she  may  identify
    more than one country.  Whereas the lawfulness of  a  removal  decision
    falling within section 82(2) of the 2002 Act may  be  challenged  in  a
    statutory appeal, a challenge to a  particular  country  identified  in
    removal decisions may  be  pursued  by  means  of  an  application  for
    judicial review.

9.   Mr Collins properly drew  my  attention  to  his  client's  concern  at
    further delay and expense when the Secretary of State ought  reasonably
    to take into account the earlier findings  of  fact  in  identifying  a
    potential country of return.  In the light of the Presenting  Officer's
    suggestion at the First-tier Tribunal hearing, his remarks have  force.
    There would appear to be no sensible reason why the Secretary of  State
    ought not now to identify a country of return, having  had  over  three
    months to consider the position.

10.  The judge materially erred in allowing the appeal for the  reasons  she
    gave.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be  set  aside  and
    remade.  The two representatives agreed that the appropriate venue  was
    the First-tier Tribunal and, taking into account the practice statement
    and the very limited findings of fact made in the First-tier  Tribunal,
    I agree.

11.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, at Taylor House,  to
    be remade by a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg.

12.  The rule 24 response prepared on  the  appellant's  behalf  included  a
    claim for costs but in the light of my conclusion that the judge  erred
    in law, there would be no basis for making such an order, even  if  the
    Upper Tribunal's jurisdiction in this regard were not as limited as  it
    is.

NOTICE OF DECISION

13.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside.   It  shall  be
    remade in the First-tier Tribunal, at  Taylor  House,  before  a  judge
    other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg.  The parties agreed  that  no
    interpreter would be required and that a time estimate of  three  hours
    would suffice.   The  appellant  and  his  partner  will  be  the  only
    witnesses.



Signed        Date 23rd March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell




ANONYMITY

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no anonymity  order  and  none  has  been
sought since.  I make no order on this occasion.



Signed        Date 23rd March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
