

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/34983/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reason Promulgated  |
|On 9 January 2018                          |On 25 January 2018             |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        ankilkumar jagdishkumar patel
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms B Asanovic, instructed by Zahra & Co, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 26 October 2017, FtT Judge Foudy granted the appellant Secretary  of
    State w permission to appeal against the decision and reasons statement
    of FtT Judge Khawar that was promulgated on 19 April 2017.

 2. Judge Khawar decided the decision to refuse a human  rights  claim  was
    unlawful under s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 and  therefore  allowed
    the appeal.  The appellant Secretary of State alleges Judge Khawar gave
    too much  weight  to  delays  in  the  Home  Office  in  processing  an
    application by the appellant's father under  the  "legacy  policy",  on
    which the appellant had been a dependant.  The  appellant  argues  that
    the judge confused issues relating to private and  family  life  rights
    under article 8 ECHR.

 3. There was no rule 24 response  but  Ms  Asanovic  provided  a  skeleton
    argument in lieu.

 4. At the outset of the hearing I raised three potential issues on which I
    would like to be address.  The first was whether the Secretary of State
    was  relying  on  the  reported  case  MNM  (Surendran  guidelines  for
    Adjudicators) (Kenya) * [2000] UKIAT 00005 since it would  appear  that
    Judge Khawar  was  concerned  about  his  role  in  the  absence  of  a
    presenting officer.  The second was whether paragraph 3 of the  grounds
    was accurate in terms of the relevant date in the  appeal.   The  third
    was the fact Judge Khawar appeared to have relied  on  more  than  mere
    delay when assessing proportionality.

 5. Ms Aboni relied on the grounds and added  the  following  points.   She
    reminded me that the application made to the  Secretary  of  State  had
    initially been on the basis of the respondent's private life.   It  was
    varied to take account of his family life.  This is where the error  of
    law appears to  have  arisen  because  the  judge  took  the  delay  in
    processing  the  private  life  issues  into  consideration   when   he
    considered family life.  This meant the decision  was  unsound  because
    the judge failed to give adequate consideration to the relevant issues,
    particularly the need for the respondent to leave the UK to  leave  the
    UK to make an entry clearance application as a partner  under  appendix
    FM.  Ms Aboni said the judge's  decision  failed  to  give  appropriate
    weight to the public  interest  in  maintaining  effective  immigration
    controls.

 6. As to the issues arising under MNM,  Ms  Aboni  recognised  that  Judge
    Foudy appears to have had these in mind when granting  permission.   It
    was not raised by the appellant Secretary of State.  Ms Aboni suggested
    that Judge Khawar could have investigated more during  the  hearing  as
    required under the Surendran guidelines.  Ms Aboni was candid, however,
    that she had no intention of raising this issue  herself  and  did  not
    seek to amend grounds to include it.

 7. Ms Aboni reminded me that at [41], Judge Khawar refers to "undue  harsh
    consequences"  rather  than  "insurmountable  obstacles".    This   was
    arguably the wrong legal test and was another reason why the  Secretary
    of State said the decision and reasons statement was flawed because  it
    failed to have proper regard to the public interest.

 8. Ms Asanovic relied on her skeleton argument (headed,  Note  on  Error).
    She reminded me that a  judge  must  take  into  account  all  relevant
    factors when assessing proportionality.  In this case,  the  length  of
    delay, was a very relevant factor since it was  during  that  time  the
    respondent's relationship developed.  It had to be  recalled  that  the
    respondent arrived in the UK in February 2004 and that since  8  August
    2006 there  had  been  no  progress  on  his  status  despite  relevant
    applications  being   made.    His   parents'   applications   remained
    unresolved.  It was reasonable for the respondent to move on  with  his
    life (see Agyarko and EB (Kosovo)).

 9. Ms Asanovic also reminded me that Judge Khawar began his  consideration
    with the earlier judicial findings of another  judge,  as  required  by
    Devaseelan.  The respondent provided a voluminous bundle which included
    full details of his immigration history, his  educational  achievements
    and employment.

10. As to the other matters, there was no material difference  between  the
    unduly harsh and insurmountable obstacles  tests.   They  have  similar
    thresholds.  The severity of separating the  family  meant  the  public
    interest in this case was outweighed.

11. Ms Aboni had nothing more to add.

12. Having heard the arguments, I decided there  was  no  legal  error  and
    announced my decision at the hearing.  Judge Khawar was faced  with  an
    appeal against a refusal of a human rights claim.  He carried  out  the
    necessary balancing act, assessing first the personal circumstances  of
    the respondent and then the public interest factors.  He  then  weighed
    them and came down in favour of the respondent.  In so doing he did not
    rely on one factor above all others.   He  recognised  that  the  delay
    meant the respondent had got on with his life, as  might  be  expected,
    and started a relationship.  It was no longer  proportionate  to  treat
    the respondent and his wife as if  the  respondent  had  only  recently
    arrived in the UK.  The failings of the Home Office to deal with a case
    in a reasonable time was a reasonable factor to consider  and  was  not
    given undue prominence.

Decision

There is no legal error in the decision and reasons of Judge  Khawar  and  I
uphold his decision.


Signed                                       Date:    25 January 2018

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


