



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/34743/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at: Field House             |                 Decision and Reasons    |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On: 21 February 2018              |                 On: 14 March 2018       |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr Navadeep Koval Krishan
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Collins, counsel, instructed by Visa Inn
Immigration

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as the secretary of state  and  to  the
      respondent as the claimant.

   2. The secretary of state appeals against the decision of the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge who, in a decision promulgated on 10 May 2017,  allowed
      the claimant's appeal against the decision of the secretary  of  state
      dated 26 November 2015 refusing his application for leave to remain in
      the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student.

   3. The Judge found that the  claimant  satisfied  the  Immigration  Rules
      applicable at the time [26]. If  the  application  had  been  properly
      determined at the correct time he would have been able to make  an  in
      country application in accordance with paragraph 245ZX(b). It would be
      unfair in the circumstances to require him to leave the UK to make his
      application. The secretary of state should  accordingly  exercise  her
      discretion and allow the application to be made in country [30].

   4. The Judge also considered  the  Article  8  human  rights  claim.  The
      claimant's circumstances were exceptional and related to "...a  result
      of the lack of failure to apply the  Rules,  the  unfairness  and  the
      changes brought about by the Immigration Act 2014 in  relation  to  in
      country appeals constitute exceptional circumstances" [33].

   5. In the circumstances the decision to remove him  was  disproportionate
      [36].

   6. On 28 December 2017,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly  granted  the
      secretary of state permission to appeal.  It  was  arguable  that  the
      Tribunal erred in holding  that  the  secretary  of  state  had  acted
      unfairly or that the claimant met the requirements of paragraph  245ZX
      of the Rules. Further, it was arguable that  the  Tribunal  failed  to
      give any discrete reasons for allowing the appeal under Article  8  of
      the Human Rights Convention.

   7. Mr Jarvis on behalf of the secretary of state has prepared  a  helpful
      skeleton argument for the hearing. Mr Collins acknowledged  the  force
      of his submissions regarding the findings of the Tribunal  in  respect
      of the rules. However, with regard to Article  8,  he  submitted  that
      there has been an adequate consideration of Article 8 private life.

   8. Mr Collins noted that the finding by the Judge  that  there  had  been
      exceptional circumstances was not  challenged.  Adequate  reasons  had
      been given in accordance with the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in
      Budhatoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341. It  is  generally
      unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for  First-tier  Tribunal  judgments   to
      rehearse every detail or  issue  raised  in  a  case.  This  leads  to
      judgments becoming overly long and confused and is not a proportionate
      approach to deciding cases.

   9. The Tribunal in Budhatoki held that it is however necessary for judges
      to identify and resolve key conflicts in the evidence and  explain  in
      clear  and  brief  terms  their  reasons,  so  that  the  parties  can
      understand why they have won or lost. He referred to paragraph [10, 13-
      14].

  10. Mr Collins submitted that the secretary of  state  can  in  this  case
      understand why the Judge allowed the Article  8  appeal.  The  reasons
      were adequate. The assessment relating to Article 8 begins at [29-30].
      This  informed  the  circumstances  leading  to  the  conclusion  that
      exceptional  circumstances  exist.  This  followed  a   very   unusual
      background.  The  claimant  had  been  in  the  UK  since  2010.   The
      conclusion was predicated on  the  basis  of  the  problems  that  the
      claimant had  found  himself  in,  flowing  from  the  flawed  initial
      decision.

  11. Mr Jarvis contended in essence that  the  Article  8  findings  cannot
      stand as the Judge had not approached the issue on the  basis  of  the
      correct legal framework and had applied the wrong framework.

  12. In order to apply Article 8 (2), the Judge has to properly  understand
      the nature of both sides of the balance including the legal basis. The
      secretary of state's case is expressed through the rules.

  13. As part of the proportionality assessment the  Judge  stated  at  [36]
      that the  claimant  should  have  been  granted  leave.  That  however
      misunderstood the secretary of state's case in respect of  the  public
      interest. Nor has the Judge properly given effect to  s.117B(5)  which
      is also predicated on the finding that the claimant should  have  been
      granted leave under the rules.

      Assessment

  14.  I  set  out  the  helpful  analysis  undertaken  by  Mr  Jarvis.  The
      overarching reason why the Judge found that the decision to refuse  in
      2015 was unlawful was that the secretary of state failed to apply  the
      rules as at the date of the application. The initial  refusal  of  the
      application  had  been  overturned  by  the  Tribunal  in  July  2014,
      resulting in the claimant  having  been  unfairly  prejudiced  by  the
      secretary of state, taking into account matters  occurring  after  the
      date of application.

  15. That approach to the applicable issues  and  law  in  respect  of  the
      November 2015 refusal was contended by Mr Jarvis to be  clearly  wrong
      in law. It was  inconsistent  with  binding  authorities  that  unless
      otherwise stated the secretary of state is to apply the  rules  as  at
      the time that the decision is made - Adeola [2009] UKHL 25 at [7] [38-
      39].

  16. It is evident that the Judge failed to identify the correct version of
      the rules as at 10 July 2013 which in any event was  not  the  correct
      legal stating point.

  17. Further, the quotation at [17] by the Judge of what  purported  to  be
      the 2013 version of paragraph 245ZX is not a full and correct  version
      of the rules. In accordance with the archived rules,  produced  by  Mr
      Jarvis, paragraph 116 provides that  confirmation  of  acceptance  for
      studies will only be considered to be valid if it was issued  no  more
      than six months before the application is made.

  18. It is also provided that  the  institution  must  still  hold  such  a
      licence at the time the application for entry clearance  or  leave  to
      remain is determined. Even assuming that the 2013 rules were correctly
      applied, the Judge would be required to dismiss the  appeal,  because,
      as at the date of the refusal of the application in November 2015, the
      college had lost its licence which was revoked on 5 June 2015.

  19. Nor did the Judge identify any contextual basis for the  finding  that
      the time taken to reconsider the claimant's case, 14  months,  was  in
      itself unusual and unfair. There had been  no  legitimate  expectation
      that  the  secretary  of  state  would  be   able   to   process   his
      reconsideration before a specific point in  time  which  the  claimant
      considered favourable to him.

  20. In any event, according to the claimant's own evidence, he intended to
      remain at East Thames College and start a Masters' course. Had he been
      granted leave earlier, leave would have been later curtailed after his
      licence was revoked in June 2015. The claimant would have been in  the
      same position. The delay was therefore  not  relevant  in  respect  of
      either fairness or Article 8.

  21. Mr Jarvis also contended that the legal  contentions  claimed  in  the
      skeleton argument of counsel  who  represented  the  claimant  at  the
      hearing were also subject to error.

  22. The Judge also erred with regard to  the  application  of  common  law
      fairness principles.  In EK (Ivory Coast) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  1517
      the Court of Appeal held that the principle  of  common  law  fairness
      does not apply in factual  situations  where  the  alleged  unfairness
      arises from the action of a  third  party  and  not  following  direct
      action of the secretary of state.

  23. In this case the claimant's submission in the  skeleton  argument  was
      that the claimant did not get a CAS from any university  during  a  60
      day grace period and the universities takes a dim  view  of  the  fact
      that he came from an institution which had had  its  licence  revoked.
      This was also the claimant's own evidence.

  24. Accordingly, Mr Jarvis submitted that the decision to refuse the issue
      of a CAS was that of the relevant universities and not  the  secretary
      of  state.  There  had  been  a  refusal  to  issue  a  CAS  when  the
      universities took an adverse view of  the  educational  background  of
      those entrants who came from institutions which had had their licences
      revoked.

  25. Further, the claimant had  completed  his  studies  by  the  time  his
      application was reconsidered, had obtained his degree in February 2015
      and therefore the purpose of the original  application  for  leave  to
      remain made in 2013 was complete.

  26. As noted, Mr Collins has accepted  that  this  brief  analysis  as  to
      errors made by the First-tier Tribunal is correct. He did not seek  to
      contend otherwise. He did submit however  that  there  was  sufficient
      evidence available to the Judge for allowing the appeal under  Article
      8 outside the rules.

  27. The difficulty with that submission is, as submitted by Mr Jarvis, the
      difficulty to divorce from the Article 8 assessment, the fact that the
      Judge applied the same unlawful logic to the assessment of the  public
      interest and the claimant's private life.

  28. Nor was there any basis for the conclusion that his residence  in  the
      UK as a student, dependant upon  the  lawful  acquisition  of  further
      grants of leave to remain, was not precarious for the purpose  of  the
      application of s.117B (5) of the 2002 Act.

  29. In the circumstances, I find that there have been material  errors.  I
      set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

  30. As noted, the  findings  with  regard  to  Article  8  were  based  on
      misunderstandings of the appropriate legal matrix.

  31. In the circumstances I am satisfied that the extent of  judicial  fact
      finding which will be necessary in order for the Article 8 decision to
      be re-made,  is  extensive.  I  have  had  regard  to  the  overriding
      objective and conclude that it would be just and  fair  to  remit  the
      case to the First-tier Tribunal.




      Notice of decision

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law and is set aside.

      The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor House) for a
      fresh decision to be made.


      Anonymity direction not made.














      Signed                             Date 9 March 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer






