
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34047/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Determination Promulgated         |
|On 27 November 2014               |On 31 December 2014               |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                              YI KA JANICE CHAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Haji, Fletcher Day, LLP, London
For the Respondent:    Ms Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Hong  Kong.   She  is  classified  as  a
    British national overseas  citizen  born  on  3  September  1988.   She
    appealed against the decision of the  respondent  dated  23  July  2013
    refusing her leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  following  a
    decision made on the same day by the respondent to remove her from  the
    United Kingdom.  Her application was for leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom on the basis that she had lawfully lived in the United  Kingdom
    for a continuous period of 10 years.  She also claimed  that  requiring
    her to return to Hong Kong would render the United  Kingdom  Government
    in breach of Article 8 of ECHR.  Her appeal was heard by Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal K W Brown on 23 June 2014 and dismissed  under  the
    Immigration Rules and  on  human  rights  grounds  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 14 July 2014.

 2. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  Permission to appeal was  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Simpson on 29  August  2014  but  Judge  Macleman  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal granted permission.  He  found  that  the  appellant  had  not
    argued in the First-tier Tribunal that her case should succeed  on  the
    basis of the discretion  of  the  respondent  within  the  Rules.   The
    appellant does not say where any relevant discretion may exist  in  the
    Rules but seeks to rely on  the  respondent's  discretion  outside  the
    Rules, which is not a matter within  Tribunal  jurisdiction  and  apart
    from the vague reliance on discretion, she does not say how there could
    have been any other outcome under the Rules.  Judge Macleman goes on to
    say that these grounds are  only  a  reassertion  of  the  case  and  a
    disagreement with a private  life  and  proportionality  assessment  in
    which no arguable error of law is shown, however, permission to  appeal
    was granted by him.

The Hearing

 3. The parties agreed that there was a mistake made by Judge Macleman when
    he granted permission as he found no error in the determination and  he
    has cast out the grounds.  As permission  has  been  granted,  however,
    both parties accepted that the error of law hearing  should  go  ahead.
    The respondent has made a Rule 24 response which states that the  judge
    found that the appellant could not succeed under the Rules and that his
    findings are reasoned and sustainable and the grounds have no merit and
    merely disagree with the adverse outcome of the appeal.

 4. The appellant's representative submitted that she  is  relying  on  the
    grounds and the skeleton argument and she submitted that there  is  now
    another matter.  The appellant is in  a  relationship  with  a  British
    citizen although that relationship has not been ongoing for 2 years.

 5. As this is not mentioned in the grounds, I informed both parties that I
    would not be considering it.

 6. The appellant's representative submitted that  the  judge  has  made  2
    errors in his determination.  She submitted that he  did  not  properly
    consider or review the respondent's discretion  relating  to  paragraph
    276B of the guidance.  I was referred to  paragraph  7  and  8  of  the
    determination, being the judge's findings of fact.  She submitted  that
    the judge accepts the reasons for the  appellant's  absences  from  the
    United Kingdom, acknowledging that  these  absences  were  for  medical
    treatment.

 7. The representative submitted that the refusal is under  paragraph  276B
    because of a short period when the appellant  overstayed  in  2003  and
    because she spent more than 18 months outside the United Kingdom on one
    occasion.  She submitted that the judge  has  failed  to  consider  the
    respondent's exercise of discretion referred to in the guidance.  I was
    referred to page 11 of the guidance (Long Residence  on  Private  Life-
    guidance of the Home Office valid from 20 May 2013.)  This states  that
    the applicant must not be in the  UK  in  breach  of  immigration  laws
    except for any period of overstaying for 28 days  or  less  or  if  the
    application  was  submitted  before  9  July  2012,   which   will   be
    disregarded.  The representative submitted that when she overstayed the
    appellant was aged 15 and at  boarding  school.   The  school  had  her
    passport and the appellant did not know that her visa had  ended.   She
    submitted that the school was at fault, not the appellant.  With regard
    to the period over 540 days when the appellant was out  of  the  United
    Kingdom, she directed me to page 17 of the  guidance  which  refers  to
    discretion for short breaks in lawful residence.   She  submitted  that
    the respondent and the Secretary of State should have  used  discretion
    and should have taken into account the appellant's  character  and  her
    conduct in the United Kingdom.  She submitted that  the  judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal accepted the appellant's serious illness and I  was
    referred to the medical documents on file.   She submitted  that  based
    on all of these matters the threshold for exceptional circumstances has
    been reached.

 8. I was referred to pages 34 and 35 of the  guidance  which  states  that
    even if an applicant has not completed the required period of residence
    and falls for refusal, any reasons for why this has happened,  have  to
    be considered and compassionate circumstances have  to  be  taken  into
    account.  She submitted that because of the strength of the appellant's
    connections to the United Kingdom and her  domestic  circumstances,  to
    grant her indefinite leave would not be against public  interest.   All
    the circumstances of the case have  to  be  taken  into  account.   She
    submitted that in this case compassionate circumstances are a  relevant
    factor.

 9. I was asked to consider section 86(3) of the Nationality, Immigration &
    Asylum Act 2002.  This states that where the respondent has  considered
    discretion the Tribunal can review that discretion  and  make  its  own
    decision if it feels that  the  discretion  should  have  been  applied
    differently.  She submitted that the judge did not deal  with  this  in
    the determination.

10. With regard to Appendix FM and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Rules,  the
    representative submitted that at paragraph 31 of the determination  the
    judge states that the appellant has not been in the United Kingdom  for
    20 years.  He also states that she has family ties in Hong  Kong.   The
    representative submitted that all the appellant's ties are now  British
    ties.  She has been in the United Kingdom from age 14 to age 25 and she
    lives a very British lifestyle.

11. The representative then made reference to Article 8 submitting that  if
    I find that there is no error  of  law  in  the  judge's  determination
    relating to her appeal under the Rules, I should find  that  the  judge
    should have considered this claim outside the Rules.  She  referred  to
    the proportionality test and the case of Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27.   She
    submitted that what the judge should have decided was  whether  removal
    would be  reasonable  in  all  the  circumstances  of  this  case.   At
    paragraph 32 of  the  determination  the  judge  considered  Article  8
    relating to compelling circumstances  and  found  that  there  were  no
    compelling circumstances.  The representative submitted that this is an
    error and that when proportionality is assessed the judge has used  the
    wrong approach, finding that it would proportionate for her  to  go  to
    Hong Kong  and  work  as  a  freelance  graphic  designer  there.   She
    submitted that the judge has not given proper consideration to  Article
    8 outside the Rules.  What the judge should have done is  look  at  the
    extent and quality of  the  appellant's  private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom and find that it  would  be  serious  and  disproportionate  to
    remove her.  She submitted that the judge has not given proper  reasons
    in the light of evidence before him, that the respondent's decision was
    proportionate and necessary in a democratic society.  I was referred to
    the case of R [2012] UKSC 32 at paragraph 44 and the reference  therein
    to discretion.  She referred to the  wide  discretion  granted  to  the
    Secretary of State and her power to grant  leave  to  enter  or  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules.  She submitted  that  the  judge  should
    have considered the appellant's study history, her Postgraduate degree,
    the fact that her breaks from the United Kingdom were to  do  with  her
    health and to visit her parents and the  fact  that  she  came  to  the
    United Kingdom as a minor and is now a  career  woman.   She  submitted
    that the appellant has significant ties to the United Kingdom  and  the
    judge has not based  his  proportionality  assessment  on  these.   She
    submitted that if the appellant is removed to Hong Kong she will be  in
    for a culture shock as the only connection she has there is some  blood
    relatives.  All her professional and personal ties are  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  She has a significant private life here.  She submitted  that
    the interference  which  would  be  caused  by  removal  would  not  be
    proportionate.  The appellant has spent a lot  of  money  building  her
    life in the United Kingdom.

12. With regard to public interest the representative submitted  that  when
    the balancing exercise  is  carried  out  because  of  the  appellant's
    connections with the United Kingdom and her strong private life,  there
    would be a serious interference in this private  life.   She  submitted
    that the judge has not addressed these issues, the only  thing  he  has
    considered is her ability to work.

13. I was asked to overturn the First-tier determination on an error of law
    basis and have the claim reheard.

14. The Presenting Officer submitted that she is relying on the  permission
    by Judge Macleman.  He  found  there  to  be  nothing  wrong  with  the
    determination and  found  that  the  claim  cannot  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

15. The Presenting Officer submitted that there is no error in the Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal's Article 8 finding.   It  is  clear  that  the
    judge was mindful of all the facts of this case  and  was  entitled  to
    reach his decision.

16. The Presenting Officer submitted that this claim cannot meet the  terms
    of the  Rules  and  having  taken  into  account  all  the  appellant's
    circumstances, the judge's decision is correct.

17. The appellant's representative referred me to the case of  Ukus  [2012]
    UKUT 00307 (IAC) relating to discretion.  She referred me to paragraphs
    20-24 and paragraph 9 of thereof.

Determination

18. The facts of  the  case  are  not  disputed.   It  is  clear  from  the
    determination that the judge had considered all of these  facts.   This
    is an appellant who was outside the United Kingdom for 644 days  during
    her qualifying period.  The maximum allowed is 540  days.   Her  appeal
    cannot succeed under Appendix FM  or  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Rules.  She has no family members in the United  Kingdom.   She  cannot
    meet the basic criterion under paragraph 276ADE.  She has  not  resided
    in the United Kingdom for half of her life and still has family ties in
    Hong Kong.

19. All of these points have been considered by the judge and the appellant
    did not argue before the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  her  case  should
    succeed on the basis of discretion within the Rules.

20. The judge has taken note of all the circumstances of this appeal and of
    the appellant's immigration history and her  situation  in  the  United
    Kingdom.   All  the  evidence  that  was  available  to  him  has  been
    considered and he has reached a conclusion open to him, based  on  that
    evidence and the relevant Rules on the balance of probabilities.

21. At paragraphs 32-34 the judge has considered Article  8,  referring  to
    the relevant case law and has taken into account the  elements  of  the
    appellant's private life in the United Kingdom.  He does not find  that
    removal would have  grave  consequences  for  the  appellant.   He  has
    considered public interest in that he has found that the removal of the
    appellant  to  Hong  Kong  is  consistent  with  the  UK   government's
    legitimate aim of maintaining immigration control in the  UK.   He  has
    not made any other reference to public interest but I find that  if  he
    had,  his  decision  would  have  been  the  same.   When   considering
    proportionality he finds that removal would be a proportionate response
    and would be consistent with  any  Article  8  rights  enjoyed  by  the
    appellant.  He finds there to be no compelling circumstances that would
    render removal disproportionate.

22. Based on his findings the judge does not require to consider Article  8
    outside the Rules.  The judge's discretion should not have been applied
    any differently.  The appellant is trying to rely on  the  respondent's
    discretion  outside  the  Rules  and  that  is  not   within   Tribunal
    jurisdiction.

23. Judge Macleman states in his grant of permission that the  grounds  are
    only a reassertion of the case and disagreement with the  private  life
    and proportionality assessment, and I find that that is the case.

                                  DECISION

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 4 July 2014 must
    stand  as  there  is  no  material  error  of  law   in   the   judge's
    determination.



Signed        Date 31 December 2014

Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


