
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34066/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 November 2015                   |On 19 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                             Mr Justice Collins
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Carolyn Findley
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimant: Ms A Benfield, instructed by Divine Legal Practice
For the respondent:    Mr A Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The claimant, Carolyn Findley, date of birth 30.10.81, is a citizen  of
    Jamaica.

 2. The Secretary of State appealed  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Monaghan promulgated 17.3.15, allowing, on human  rights
    grounds, the claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of
    State to refuse her leave to remain in the UK on the basis  of  private
    and family life.  The Judge heard the appeal on 4.3.15.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Reid granted permission to appeal on 14.5.15.

 4. Thus the matter came before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Pickup  on
    16.9.15 as an appeal in the Upper Tribunal.   Judge  Monaghan  made  it
    clear that the appeal would not have been allowed on the basis  of  the
    claimant's private life, her extended ties to family in the UK,  or  on
    the basis of her private life with her partner, all  established  at  a
    time when her  immigration  status  was  precarious  and  her  presence
    unlawful. Those findings were not challenged  and  there  is  no  cross
    appeal.  It  follows  that  the  only  live  issue  is  the  claimant's
    relationship  with  her  grandmother,  which  prompted  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge to consider compelling circumstances justifying allowing
    the appeal outside the Rules on the basis of this relationship.

 5. In summary, Judge Pickup found such error of law in the making  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal as to require the decision of Judge
    Monaghan to be set aside and remade. In  summary,  Judge  Pickup  found
    that there had been inadequate consideration of  the  very  significant
    public interest in  the  claimant's  removal  from  the  UK,  that  the
    assessment  of  the  claimant's  circumstances  was  unbalanced,   gave
    inadequate weight to the fact that the  claimant  could  not  meet  the
    Rules, and that before going on  to  consider  article  8  outside  the
    Rules,  the  judge  failed  to  adequately  identify   the   compelling
    circumstances justifying doing so. Further, the judge  failed  to  give
    sufficient weight to the claimant's appalling immigration  history  and
    disregard for the law in the article 8 assessment. In error, the  judge
    also relied on Chikwamba [2008] UKHL  40,  to  find  it  would  not  be
    proportionate to expect the claimant to leave the UK and apply for  re-
    entry from abroad. Chikwamba is not applicable on  the  facts  of  this
    case, particularly as there is no route for entry from outside  the  UK
    on the basis relied on by the claimant.

 6. Judge Pickup set the decision of Judge Monaghan aside and reserved  the
    remaking of the decision in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  As  this
    is an in-country appeal, Judge Pickup gave  directions  granting  leave
    for further evidence to be adduced  as  to  the  circumstances  of  the
    claimant and her grandmother. Judge Pickup directed  the  provision  on
    behalf of the claimant of a single  consolidated  bundle,  indexed  and
    paginated, containing all objective and subjective material relied  on,
    to include witness statements and skeleton argument.

 7. Hence the matter came before us on 5.11.15 sitting as a  panel  of  the
    Upper Tribunal. We heard  oral  evidence  from  the  claimant  and  the
    submissions of  the  representatives  of  both  the  claimant  and  the
    Secretary of State. We announced  our  decision  to  allow  the  appeal
    outside the Rules on human rights grounds, reserving our reasons, which
    we now give.

 8. The relevant background can  be  summarised  briefly  as  follows.  The
    claimant first came to the UK  as  a  family  visitor  on  11.7.01.  An
    application to extend her leave was refused, but she did not leave  and
    has been an overstayer since August 2001. She has worked illegally  and
    received financial assistance  from  relatives.  It  follows  that  her
    status in the UK was from  the  outset  precarious  and  following  the
    expiry of her  leave  became  unlawful.  The  claimant  relies  on  her
    relationship with her mentally and physically ill grandmother, for whom
    she provides what is alleged to be essential care.  The  claimant  also
    developed a relationship with a partner. They have no  living  children
    and do  not  live  together.  The  claimant  also  has  several  family
    relatives in the UK.

 9.  The  claimant  asserts  that  she  has  a  close  family  tie  to  her
    grandmother,  who  suffers  from  paranoid  schizophrenia  and  several
    physical ill-health  conditions.  It  is  asserted  that  the  claimant
    provides essential care for her grandmother, despite evidently spending
    considerable periods living apart from her  and  was  in  fact  working
    during some of this time. She also spent time developing a relationship
    with a partner.

10. It was common ground that the claimant  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules. There is no  appeal  or  cross  appeal  against  the
    implicit findings in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing
    the appeal on immigration grounds. The single issue in the remaking  of
    the decision in the appeal is the family life relationship between  the
    claimant and her grandmother. Neither the private life of the  claimant
    in the UK nor her alleged relationship with a 'partner' in the UK would
    provide any compelling  circumstances  to  justify  granting  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules on the basis of article 8 ECHR, as the  First-
    tier Tribunal held and we endorse and adopt that part of the decision.

11. In remaking the decision in the appeal, we take into account as a  very
    significant factor relevant to any proportionality assessment that  the
    claimant cannot meet the requirements of the Rules for leave to remain.
    The  Rules  do  not  in  fact  recognise  a  private  or  family   life
    relationship  such  as  that  between  the  adult  claimant   and   her
    grandmother. She could never have obtained entry  clearance  under  the
    Rules to come to the UK to look  after  her  grandmother.  The  nearest
    category would be that of an adult dependant relative,  in  respect  of
    which the Rules in Appendix FM set out a very high  threshold  and  for
    which Appendix FM-SE requires cogent independent evidence.

12. However, we have to consider the circumstances now prevailing and  thus
    have carefully considered the nature and  extent  of  the  relationship
    that has  developed  between  the  claimant  and  her  grandmother  and
    continues to the present day. Whilst at  the  time  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeal  hearing,  the  grandmother  had  been  detained  under
    section 2 of the Mental Health Act 1983, and thus was not  being  cared
    for at all by the claimant, she was  subsequently  discharged,  in  May
    2015, and returned to her own home, cared for full-time by the claimant
    with the assistance of three state-funded carers, each  of  whom  comes
    into the home for an hour each  day.  This  is  a  material  change  in
    circumstances from those prevailing  at  the  date  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeal hearing.

13. Whilst the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal  was
    flawed on  the  circumstances  prevailing  at  the  date  of  decision,
    amounting to an error of law, for the reasons set out herein,  we  find
    that the family life circumstances of the claimant's relationship  with
    her  grandmother  are  sufficiently   compelling   and   insufficiently
    recognised under the Rules so as to  merit  consideration  outside  the
    Rules under article 8 ECHR and in  fact  to  justify  leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules, at least for a discretionary period.

14. In particular, we find that there is now such  dependency  between  the
    claimant and her grandmother that when considering  in  particular  the
    family life rights of the  grandmother,  more  so  than  those  of  the
    claimant, these considerations outweigh the public interest in  removal
    of the claimant, such that it  would  be  disproportionate  and  unduly
    harsh for the grandmother to be  deprived  of  the  care,  support  and
    family relationship she now has with the claimant.

15. In favour of the public interest in removal of the  claimant,  we  take
    into account that she is an illegal  overstayer  who  has  also  worked
    illegally, flouting the law. She has an appalling immigration  history;
    consequently the public interest in her removal is high.

16. We take into account section 117B of the 2002  Act  and  in  particular
    that immigration control is in the public interest and that  it  is  in
    the public interest that persons  seeking  to  remain  in  the  UK  are
    financially independent, which the claimant is not. Section  117B  also
    requires us to accord little weight to  the  claimant's  private  life,
    being precarious and unlawful, and that little weight should  be  given
    to any relationship she has developed  whilst  in  the  UK  unlawfully.
    These are all significant factors weighing against the claimant in  the
    proportionality balancing exercise.

17. We also bear in mind that the claimant is not the only  person  who  is
    able to support her grandmother, a British citizen who is  entitled  to
    state care and support.  There  are  also  other  family  members,  her
    children, who are also involved to greater  or  lesser  degree  in  the
    grandmother's life. That they choose not to do so,  because  they  have
    full lives with work and family responsibilities, and  instead  provide
    the claimant with financial support to live in the  grandmother's  home
    and care for her, is insufficient by itself to justify  granting  leave
    to remain. If the claimant is removed the grandmother will not be  left
    isolated at home, without her personal needs being  met,  as  is  clear
    from the medical evidence.

18. We also note that the claimant has spent significant periods not living
    with her grandmother, and at the date of  the  appeal  hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal the grandmother was  in  the  full-time  indefinite
    care of mental health professionals for all  her  physical  and  mental
    health needs, and thus not in the claimant's care at all. However,  the
    grandmother is now back at home and in the care of the claimant.

19. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Reid noted that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge placed considerable weight on a letter of  January  2015
    from a consultant psychiatrist.  "However,  it  is  arguable  that  his
    report  was  prepared  without  important  information  including   the
    appellant's immigration status, the appellant's periods of absence from
    her grandmother or other members of the  family  periodically  residing
    with the grandmother. The grounds disclose an arguable error  of  law."
    In our view that  was  an  irrelevant  consideration.  It  is  not  the
    business of a consultant psychiatrist to address the immigration status
    of the claimant carer of the grandmother. However, for the reasons  set
    out in the error of law decision of Judge Pickup, the decision to allow
    the appeal on human rights grounds was flawed, amounting to an error of
    law and was thus set aside.

20. We bear in mind that Article 8 is not a  shortcut  to  compliance  with
    Immigration Rules. The claimant does not gain a stronger case to remain
    in the UK the greater the degree to which she did not meet  the  Rules.
    It is necessary to approach article 8 through the lens of  the  various
    routes for settlement provided by the Immigration

21. We adopt the approach endorsed by the Court of Appeal in Singh  v  SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 74, and again in SSHD v SS (Congo) &  Ors  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 387, where the Court of Appeal held that it is  clear  that  whilst
    the assessment of Article 8 claims requires a two-stage  analysis,  and
    there is no threshold or intermediary requirement of arguability before
    a decision maker moves to  consider  the  second  stage,  whether  that
    second stage is required will depend on whether  all  the  issues  have
    been adequately addressed under the Rules. In other words, there is  no
    need to conduct a full separate examination of article  8  outside  the
    Rules where in the circumstances of a particular case, all issues  have
    been addressed in  the  consideration  under  the  Rules.  However,  it
    follows in this case that there  could  have  been  no  proportionality
    assessment within the Rules, as there is no Rules route  to  remain  on
    these circumstances. The  Rules  have  only  limited  relevance  to  an
    article 8 consideration outside the Rules, but any  such  consideration
    should be made through the lens of the Rules and  the  fact  that  they
    represent the Secretary of State's proportionate  response  to  private
    and family life claims under article 8 ECHR.

22. Our attention was drawn to the various letters from Dr  Mike  Payne,  a
    consultant Old  Age  Psychiatrist,  of  whom  the  grandmother  is  his
    patient. He confirms that the grandmother, Mrs Thelma  Harvey,  suffers
    from chronic paranoid schizophrenia and  early  vascular  dementia.  Of
    significant is Dr Payne's evidence that, consistent with her mental ill-
    health, Mrs Harvey can be suspicious  of  and  paranoid  towards  other
    family members.  However,  she  has  become  used  to  and  trusts  the
    claimant, with the result that the claimant can provide care that other
    family members would not be able to. Dr Payne is of the view that other
    family members would not be able to provide sufficient care to maintain
    an acceptable standard of living in the home. In  a  development  since
    the First-tier Tribunal Mrs Harvey is now largely bedbound  and  doubly
    incontinent. Although she has a care  package  from  the  council,  she
    needs additional care between the domiciliary carer  visits,  which  is
    provided by  the  claimant.  "Without  this  additional  input,  it  is
    possible that Mrs Harvey may need residential care sooner  rather  than
    later. Carolyn is also able to provide emotional support  and  company,
    and can engage her grandmother in daytime activities. All these  things
    reduce the risk of relapse and the likelihood of further  admission  to
    hospital." The witness statement of her  daughter,  Ms  Yvonne  Harvey,
    dated 27.10.15, further confirms the medical and bedbound state of  the
    grandmother. Her attached letter  explains  that  during  the  day  the
    grandmother has carers who attend  to  her  washing  and  dressing  and
    personal hygiene needs, four times a  day.  The  claimant  assists  the
    carers by operating the hoist to manoeuvre her from and to the bed. She
    is registered as a carer and administers her grandmother's  medication.
    At nights the claimant attends to Mrs Harvey's needs  alone.  She  also
    maintains the home, including the shopping, cleaning and  attending  to
    the bills. We accept the evidence that Mrs Harvey will only accept food
    prepared by the claimant. Clearly, with the mental disorder identified,
    trust in a familiar face and care  by  a  relative  rather  than  state
    carers  are  important  elements.  Similarly,  compliance  with   anti-
    psychotic and other medication, which is crucial to the mental state of
    Mrs Harvey, is facilitated by the claimant. In his letter of 4.9.15  Dr
    Payne describes the claimant's care for her grandmother as follows: "Ms
    Findley has been supporting her grandmother very ably and  helping  her
    maintain an adequate standard of living. Without Ms Findley's input  it
    is likely that Mrs Harvey will need a much larger care package." It  is
    also stated that Mrs Harvey "lacks motivation and will  not  do  things
    unless encouraged and supported. She tends to refuse her medication and
    needs encouragement to accept this."

23. In an earlier letter of 15.1.15, Dr Payne  explained,  "Carolyn  offers
    her grandmother security and a better quality of  life  whilst  in  her
    care. Due to her illness Carolyn is the only  person  Thelma  can  live
    with because she is somebody she sees every  day  and  they  have  been
    together for a long time. Thelma cannot be left alone for even a  short
    time. Carolyn helps to calm her down. She understands her grandmother's
    needs."

24. It is clear from the evidence now placed before the tribunal, only part
    of which has been summarised above, that the role of  the  claimant  is
    crucial to the continued well-being of her grandmother and that without
    her assistance, which goes beyond the role of merely  a  carer,  it  is
    likely that Mrs Harvey would not be able to remain in her home.

25. In summary, as things stand at the present  day,  the  care  team  work
    alongside the claimant to enable the grandmother to have an  acceptable
    quality of life in her own home. We are satisfied on the evidence  that
    without the claimant's significant contribution, Mrs Harvey  would  not
    be able to remain in her own home with the quality of life she has.  We
    accept  that  this  quality  of  life  of  the  grandmother   is   very
    significantly dependent on the emotional and practical care and support
    provided by the claimant. We are  satisfied  that  no  one  else  could
    provide such a level of emotional and practical support to Mrs  Harvey.
    This relationship goes beyond that of a carer to qualify as family life
    within the ambit of article 8 ECHR. If the claimant is  removed  it  is
    virtually inevitable that Mrs Harvey  will  have  to  be  placed  in  a
    residential home with all that entails for the  quality  of  her  life.
    These are unusual and compelling circumstances not  recognised  in  the
    Rules and which, in our view, justify consideration outside  the  Rules
    under article 8 ECHR.

26. We noted in the claimant's evidence that the period  of  time  in  2007
    when she was not living in the grandmother's home, it  was  because  of
    her mental ill-health that she was sent away in  the  belief  that  her
    children would look after her. We accept the evidence that the claimant
    in fact continued to visit and care for her grandmother  on  a  regular
    basis, despite not being resident in  the  home.  A  similar  situation
    prevailed between 2008 and  2009  when  Mrs  Harvey  relapsed.  Between
    August 2013 and December 2014 the claimant was living in  Bedford,  but
    still attended on her grandmother at least five times  a  week.  It  is
    important to note when considering this  history  that  over  time  Mrs
    Harvey's condition has worsened. She has only latterly become bed-bound
    and it was not until  December  2014  that  she  required  carers.  The
    situation  at  the  present  day  is  significantly  different  and  in
    particular different to that which prevailed at the time of the  First-
    tier Tribunal, not least because at that time Mrs Harvey  was  detained
    in hospital.

27. We also accept the evidence that the claimant's illegal working was for
    rather short periods of time and often whilst other carers were able to
    tend to her grandmother's needs.

28. In all the circumstances, we find that this is an exceptional case with
    significant compelling circumstances, which in our view  outweighs  the
    also significant public interest factors summarised above in favour  of
    the claimant's removal. We conclude that it would  be  disproportionate
    and unjustifiably harsh to remove the claimant at the present time. The
    situation may change; Mrs Harvey may in due course  with  deterioration
    in her health have no alternative but to go to a  24  hour  residential
    care or nursing home, at which point the role of the  claimant  in  her
    grandmother's family would substantially diminish. It follows that  the
    circumstances do not in our view justify a grant of indefinite leave to
    remain but rather a limited period of discretionary  leave,  given  the
    claimant's unattractive immigration  history  and  our  findings  which
    centre principally on the family life of Mrs Harvey more than those  of
    the claimant.

Decision

                    The appeal is dismissed on immigration grounds.

                    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


                    [pic]
                    Signed


                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated




Mr Justice Collins
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



Anonymity

We have considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an anonymity order. Given the circumstances,  we  make
no anonymity order.



Fee Award     Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of our decision, we have  considered  whether  to  make  a  fee
award.

We have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

We make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has only been allowed  because  of  the  rights  of  the
claimant's grandmother. Outside those considerations the  claimant's  appeal
lacks all merit.


                    [pic]
                    Signed


                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated




Mr Justice Collins
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
