
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34733/2014
                                                               IA/34736/2014
                                                               iA/34737/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 February 2018                  |On 06 March 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     MS
                                     JA
                                     SA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, Counsel, instructed by JRK Solicitors
For the Respondents:   Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. These appeals come by way of a Consent Order, sealed by  the  Court
         of Appeal on 25 November  2017,  limited  to  requiring  the  Upper
         Tribunal to consider the appellants'  article  8  appeals.  It  was
         agreed by the Secretary  of  State  in  the  Statement  of  Reasons
         accompanying the Consent Order that the Upper Tribunal was required
         to remake the earlier  decision  of  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Mailer, promulgated on 15 April 2016, in respect of the appellants'
         article 8 claims. This was confirmed by way of Directions issued by
         Upper Tribunal  Judge  Jordan  on  2  January  2018.  Judge  Jordan
         directed that further evidence from the parties be filed and served
         to enable the Upper Tribunal to determine the article 8 appeals  at
         the resumed hearing. The parameters of the  remitted  appeals  were
         confirmed by both representatives at the  hearing  on  16  February
         2018. It was agreed by both representatives that  the  appeals  are
         governed by the appeals regime in force  prior  to  the  amendments
         wrought by the Immigration Act 2014.

      2. The underlying decisions giving rise to these proceedings are those
         refusing to vary the appellants' leave to remain in the  UK,  dated
         19 August 2014. The appellants appealed the decisions of 19  August
         2014 to the First-tier Tribunal. In a decision  promulgated  on  13
         April 2015 the First-tier Tribunal allowed the  appeals  under  the
         immigration rules. The respondent successfully sought permission to
         appeal the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Mailer found that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in
         law in allowing the appeals under the immigration rules as the  2nd
         and 3rd appellants could not  meet  the  requirements  set  out  in
         paragraph 276ADE(iv) as  neither  had  resided  in  the  UK  for  a
         continuous period of 7 years prior to making their applications  to
         vary their leave. The Deputy Judge proceeded to dismiss the appeals
         without any satisfactory consideration  of  the  article  8  claims
         outside  of  the  immigration  rules.  This  itself  constituted  a
         material legal error, a matter recognised by both parties, and  the
         matter was remitted back to the Upper Tribunal from  the  Court  of
         Appeal by way of the Consent Order.

Background and Agreed Facts

      3. The appellants are all nationals of Bangladesh. The  1st  appellant
         was born on 1 January 1973 and is the mother of  the  2nd  and  3rd
         appellants. The 2nd appellant is female and was born on 31  January
         1999 and the 3rd appellant, who is also  female,  was  born  on  24
         August 2000. At the date of the resumed hearing  before  the  Upper
         Tribunal the 2nd appellant had just turned 19 and the 3rd appellant
         was 17 years old. Both Mr Clarke  and  Mr  Eaton  agreed  that  the
         factual summary contained in  the  Deputy  Judge's  decision,  from
         paragraphs 7 to 29 and 31 to 33,  was  accurate.  These  paragraphs
         were presented by both  representatives  as  agreed  facts.  I  now
         summarise the facts as agreed by the parties.

      4. Prior to entering the UK, the appellants had  lived  in  Bangladesh
         for 2 years. They previously lived in Saudi Arabia and  Abu  Dhabi.
         The appellants entered the UK on 19 July 2007 as exempt  diplomatic
         dependants of Mr Alam, the 1st appellant's husband and  the  father
         of the other appellants. He worked as an Administrative Officer  at
         the Bangladesh High Commission. On 30 May 2012 the appellants  were
         granted further leave to remain until 30 May 2014 in line with that
         of Mr Alam. The appellants have always remained  lawfully  resident
         in the UK. The family only visited Bangladesh once since coming  to
         the UK, for a period of about 3  to  4  weeks.  Mr  Alam  left  for
         Bangladesh in 2013 as a result  of  his  work  but  the  appellants
         remained living in the UK. Mr Alam has been in Spain since December
         2014 because of his  employment  with  the  Bangladesh  government.
         Although in contact  with  the  appellants  he  has  only  provided
         limited financial support to his  family.  The  1st  appellant  was
         previously  responsible  for  the  financial  maintenance  of   her
         daughters through her lawful employment.

      5. On 29 May 2014 the appellants applied to vary their leave to remain
         on the basis of article 8  considerations.  The  2nd  appellant  is
         profoundly deaf. She suffers  from  bilateral  profound  congenital
         sensorineural deafness. She has lawfully accessed education in  the
         UK since the age of 8 using British Sign  Language  (BSL)  and  has
         learnt to lip read in English. The 2nd appellant sat her GCSE exams
         using BSL. The  2nd  appellant  cannot  speak,  read  or  write  in
         Bengali.  It  was  accepted  that  the  2nd  appellant  would  have
         significant linguistic difficulty in adapting to life in Bangladesh
         where she would be unable to communicate effectively.  If  required
         to leave the UK there would be a significant adverse impact on  her
         ability to communicate with others and on her  overall  well-being.
         The 2nd appellant had become  distant  from  Bangladesh  and  would
         experience difficulties adapting to life in that country.

      6. The 3rd appellant also  suffers  from  a  disability.  She  is  not
         profoundly deaf but has bilateral moderate hearing impairment.  The
         3rd appellant spoke very little when  she  was  in  Bangladesh.  At
         school in the UK she is required  to  use  a  head  microphone  and
         hearing aid, was  in  a  support  group  at  school,  and  required
         intervention from a specialist speech and  language  therapist  and
         from a teacher of the deaf to develop her listening,  learning  and
         communication skills. She was on  the  school  Special  Educational
         Needs (SEN) register. It was accepted that  if  she  went  back  to
         Bangladesh she would have difficulty in adjusting. Her studies  had
         all been in English. The 3rd appellant only spoke a little  bit  of
         Bengali at home but could not write it.

      7. It was agreed by both parties that the 2nd and  3rd  appellant  had
         lived in the UK during the formative years of their development, in
         the case of the 2nd appellant from the age of 8, and in the case of
         the 3rd appellant from the age of 6. Neither child would be able to
         access the support for their deafness that they enjoy  in  the  UK.
         The 1st appellant however would be able to work in  Bangladesh  and
         be in a position to financially support and provide for the 2nd and
         3rd appellants. The appellants also  had  extended  family  members
         still living in Bangladesh.

Evidence at the resumed hearing

      8. The appellants provided a further bundle of  documents  running  to
         261 pages. This included statements from all the appellants  and  a
         statement from MA, the oldest daughter of  the  1st  appellant  and
         sister to the 2nd and 3rd appellants.  MA  was  granted  Indefinite
         Leave to Remain in the UK on 3 August 2017 having lived in  the  UK
         for a continuous lawful period of 10 years.

      9. I summarise the statements. The 1st  appellant  felt  compelled  to
         stay in the UK in 2013 due to the well-being and best interests  of
         her children. She remained responsible for their daily-to-day  care
         and upbringing. The 2nd appellant accessed  her  education  through
         BSL. In the last 10 years she learned to write and read in  English
         while the medium of instruction in Bangladesh is  Bengali.  BSL  is
         not an international language and people from different regions use
         different sign languages. In  Bangladesh  they  use  Inda-Pakistani
         Sign Language (IPSL). Although there were some common features with
         BSL, it  was  substantially  different.  The  appellants  had  been
         informed that it could take around 6 years  to  learn  a  new  sign
         language. Prior  to  learning  BSL  the  2nd  appellant  could  not
         communicate and felt secluded and lost.

     10. The 2nd appellant is currently studying a BTEC Advanced Diploma  in
         Design for Fashion and  Textiles  at  Level  3  and  has  full-time
         support from educational communicators and teachers  of  the  deaf.
         She hopes, if possible, to go up to university level. Owing to  her
         disability the 2nd appellant remains heavily dependent on  the  1st
         appellant for everyday support. The 1st appellant  accompanies  the
         2nd appellant to GP and hospital appointments  and  when  she  goes
         shopping and travelling. The 2nd appellant's family involves her  2
         sisters and her mother. She is very attached  to  them  and  cannot
         live life without them. The 3rd appellant  is  very  close  to  her
         sister and has learned sign language and helps the 2nd appellant to
         communicate with others.  The  2nd  appellant  has  developed  many
         friends, both hearing and deaf, with whom she socialises  and  with
         whom she communicates using BSL. A few of her classmates at college
         are also  deaf  and  they  share  support  from  communicators  and
         specialised teachers. The 2nd appellant  is  very  close  with  her
         classmates and enjoys their company.

     11. The 3rd appellant remains partially deaf and wears 2  hearing  aids
         which need  regular  adjustment.  Since  the  age  of  10  the  3rd
         appellant has been trying to work on her own so she could  be  more
         independent. However, she remains on the SEN register. She receives
         some additional support from school and has a specific support plan
         in place. There is no teacher support available in  Bangladesh  for
         children with hearing impairments. The 3rd appellant completed  her
         GCSE exams and will be completing her A-levels this summer. She has
         received offers from universities. She has had more than  10  years
         of schooling in the UK and is totally integrated into  the  British
         education system. She regularly socialises  with  her  friends  and
         classmates with whom she goes out for lunch or dinner, and is fully
         integrated into British society. The 2nd and  3rd  appellants  have
         little idea of what life is  like  in  Bangladesh  and  they  would
         struggle to adapt to Bangladeshi  society,  especially  with  their
         disabilities. The 1st appellant believed  that  returning  them  to
         Bangladesh would be an ultimately damaging experience for them. The
         2nd and 3rd appellants  themselves  were  very  distraught  at  the
         possibility that they may have to return to Bangladesh.

     12. The 1st appellant emphasised that neither  she  nor  her  daughters
         have ever overstayed and that they have lawfully resided in the  UK
         for an unbroken period of over 10 years. MA, who is employed  full-
         time, and the 1st appellant's brother, who is also settled  in  the
         UK, financially support the family.

     13. The documentary evidence in the appellants' bundle, which  included
         medical reports and correspondence relating to both the 2nd and 3rd
         appellants and educational documents relating to the  2nd  and  3rd
         appellants, corroborated the essential elements in the  statements.
         This included, inter alia, the medical condition of  both  the  2nd
         and 3rd appellants, that the  3rd  appellant  remains  on  the  SEN
         register and that she is due  to  undertake  her  A-levels  in  the
         summer of 2018, that the 2nd  appellant  is  studying  a  BTEC  and
         receive support from her college, that the 3rd appellant has offers
         of undergraduate places at universities, that the 3rd appellant has
         been volunteering at the Manor Park Library over  the  summer,  and
         photographic evidence of the 2nd appellant  with  her  friends  and
         classmates. The appellants' bundle additionally contained  articles
         downloaded from the Internet identifying  the  differences  between
         different types of sign  language,  including  IPSL  and  BSL.  The
         bundle also contained evidence that the 1st  appellant  had  passed
         the 'Life in the UK Test' on 28  October  2017  and  that  she  had
         attained an English-language test at CEFR Level B1.1.

     14. At the outset of the hearing, and in response to questions from me,
         Mr Clarke conceded that there was no discernible reason why the 2nd
         appellant would not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(v) of
         the immigration rules if she were to now make  an  application  for
         leave to remain. In response  to  further  questions  from  me,  Mr
         Clarke accepted that the 3rd appellant was at a critical  stage  of
         her education. It was further accepted that  all  three  appellants
         had resided lawfully in the UK for a period of over  10  years  and
         that the 1st appellant had passed her 'Life in the UK Test'.

     15. In oral  evidence,  under  cross  examination,  the  1st  appellant
         confirmed that she  continued  to  have  a  relationship  with  her
         husband and that she did not accompany her husband when he left the
         UK in 2013 because  of  her  daughters'  stages  of  education  and
         because the 2nd appellant had learned sign language in the UK.  The
         1st appellant spoke of the lack of  educational  support  for  deaf
         children  in  Bangladesh.  Her  husband  contributed  very   little
         financial support and  she  was  mainly  dependent  on  her  oldest
         daughter and her brother. The 1st appellant had lawfully worked  in
         the UK but stopped due to a change in her immigration position.  In
         her oral evidence MA confirmed that her uncle provided most of  the
         financial support to the appellants, that the family  continued  to
         communicate with Mr Alam, and  that  he  wanted  the  2nd  and  3rd
         appellants to be happy and to finish their education. In  her  oral
         evidence the 3rd appellant confirmed that she communicated with the
         2nd appellant via  sign  language,  that  they  had  a  very  close
         relationship, that they spent a lot of time together, that she  was
         studying for her A-levels and that she had not yet decided where to
         go to University. Her friends were willing to  help  her  with  her
         hearing difficulties and they liked to talk  about  their  hobbies.
         She only needed a special needs teacher once a month.

     16. Both representatives made their submissions, Mr Clarke  emphasising
         the importance attached to the maintenance of effective immigration
         control and the financial burden placed on scarce public  resources
         due to the particular needs of the 2nd and 3rd appellants.  Neither
         the 2nd nor 3rd appellants met the requirements of the  immigration
         rules at the date of their applications.

     17. Having carefully considered the  substantial  number  of  documents
         before me and having considered the submissions from the parties  I
         indicated that I would allow the appeals and that I  would  shortly
         issue a fully reasoned decision.

Findings and assessment

     18. I will first consider the appeal of the 3rd appellant.  She  cannot
         meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iv) because, at the  date
         of her application (29 May 2014), she had not lived in the UK for a
         continuous period of at least 7 years. There is no suggestion  that
         the 3rd appellant falls foul of any of the Suitability requirements
         in Appendix FM. The 3rd appellant can only succeed  in  her  appeal
         outside the immigration rules. It is not in dispute  that  the  3rd
         appellant has lawfully lived in the UK since 19 July 2007, some  10
         years and 6 months, having entered the UK as  a  6-year-old  child.
         The 3rd appellant remains a minor aged 17.

     19. I must ascertain the 3rd appellant's  best  interests  pursuant  to
         s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. I remind
         myself that, while her best interests are a primary  consideration,
         they are not a paramount consideration and that even though it  may
         be in her best interests to remain in the UK this can be outweighed
         by opposing public interest factors.

     20. In EV (Philippines) &  Ors  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2014] EWCA Civ  874  (at  [35])  the  Court  of  Appeal
         explained that a decision as to what is in the  best  interests  of
         children will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their  age;
         (b) the length of time that they have been here; (c) how long  they
         have been in education; (c) what stage their education has reached;
         (d) to what extent they have become distanced from the  country  to
         which it is proposed that they  return;  (e)  how  renewable  their
         connection with it may be;  (f)  to  what  extent  they  will  have
         linguistic, medical or other difficulties in adapting  to  life  in
         that country; and (g) the extent to which the course proposed  will
         interfere with their family life or their rights (if they have any)
         as British citizens.

     21. The first head note of Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions affecting
         children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 reads, "As  a  starting
         point it is in the best interests of children to be with both their
         parents and if both parents  are  being  removed  from  the  United
         Kingdom then the starting point suggests that so  should  dependent
         children who form part of their household unless there are  reasons
         to the contrary." Headnote (ii)  reads,  "Lengthy  residence  in  a
         country other than the state of origin can lead to  development  of
         social cultural and educational ties that it would be inappropriate
         to disrupt, in the absence of compelling reason  to  the  contrary.
         What amounts to lengthy residence is not clear  cut  but  past  and
         present policies have identified seven years as a relevant period."
         Headnote (iv) of the same case indicates, "Apart from the terms  of
         published policies and rules, the Tribunal notes that  seven  years
         from age four is likely to be more significant to a child that  the
         first seven years of life."

     22. I consider  and  apply  the  principles  enunciated  in  the  above
         decisions in assessing the  3rd  appellant's  best  interests.  The
         medical evidence indicates that  the  3rd  appellant  suffers  from
         partial deafness and that her hearing loss is slowly progressive on
         the right side. Her language  was  delayed  in  the  past  and  she
         sometimes misses both the linguistic structure and vocabulary  when
         conversing with other people. The 3rd appellant has lived in the UK
         since she was 6 years old and is now 17 years old.  She  has  spent
         the formative years of her life in the UK. She has studied  in  the
         UK as a minor for over 10 years.  She is currently in the middle of
         her A-Level studies and will be sitting  her  examinations  in  the
         summer. It was conceded by Mr Clarke that  she  is  at  a  critical
         stage of her education. It is clear from the school documents  that
         she has overcome a number of difficulties  caused  by  her  partial
         deafness and that she has made very good progress at school and  in
         her sixth form. It is also apparent from those documents  that  she
         is well integrated within the school community. The documentary and
         oral evidence indicates that the 3rd appellant has established good
         friendships with classmates outside her family at a time  when  she
         had no control over her immigration status. I accept  the  evidence
         that the 3rd appellant has many friends and  classmates  with  whom
         she regularly socialises. Having resided in  the  UK  for  over  10
         years and having spent the formative years  of  her  life  in  this
         country it is readily apparent that she has fully  integrated  into
         British society. This is apparent both from her school reports, her
         oral evidence, and other evidence of her integration  such  as  her
         volunteering for over 50 hours at the Manor Park Library.

     23. The 3rd appellant has never  gone  to  school  in  Bangladesh.  The
         jointly accepted facts include a finding  that  the  3rd  appellant
         spoke very little when she was in Bangladesh. I accept the evidence
         that the 3rd appellant has very limited  ties  with  Bangladesh,  a
         point not challenged by Mr Clarke. Nor was there any  challenge  to
         the assertion that  in  Bangladesh  the  3rd  appellant  would  not
         benefit from the educational support  that  she  currently  enjoys.
         Given  her  lack  of  proficiency  in  Bengali  and   her   hearing
         difficulties I find she would encounter linguistic difficulties  in
         adapting to life in Bangladesh.  I  note  however  that  she  would
         continue to have the support of her mother and that she  has  other
         extended family members in Bangladesh and therefore  a  network  of
         support.

     24. The 3rd appellant is neither independent nor  self-sufficient,  and
         remains reliant on her family, with whom she lives.  There  was  no
         suggestion by Mr Clarke that she did not have strong bonds of  love
         and affection with her mother and the 2nd appellant.  Although  the
         starting point in considering the 3rd appellant's best interest  is
         that she should remain with her  mother  and  that  she  should  be
         removed if her mother is removed,  given  her  age  and  length  of
         residence, her establishment of relationships outside her immediate
         family, the extent of her integration and the critical stage of her
         education I find, pursuant to my duty under  s.55,  that  her  best
         interests are to remain in the UK with her family.

     25. Having identified the 3rd appellant's best interests,  I  must  now
         consider whether it is proportionate to require her  to  leave  the
         UK. In undertaking the proportionality assessment I am  obliged  to
         consider the factors identified in s.117B of the 2002 Act,  and  in
         particular, s.117B(6). I must therefore determine whether it  would
         be reasonable for her to leave the UK. I proceed on the basis  that
         she would be accompanied by her mother and older  sister  and  that
         this family unit will remain intact.  In  assessing  the  issue  of
         reasonableness I have to take  into  account  all  relevant  public
         interest considerations, including her conduct and the  conduct  of
         her family (MA (Pakistan).

     26. I  note  the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective
         immigration controls, detailed in s.117B(1). I  note,  pursuant  to
         s.117B(2) and (3) that the 3rd appellant is proficient  in  English
         (her  oral  evidence  before  me  demonstrated  a  high  level   of
         proficiency), that she is not currently financially independent  as
         she is still a minor in  education,  that  the  1st  appellant  has
         attained an English-language test at CEFR Level B1.1, and that  the
         1st appellant has previously worked in the UK and would be able  to
         do so again if granted the appropriate immigration status. Pursuant
         to Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2016]
         EWCA Civ 803 and AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) I regard
         both the 1st and 3rd appellants' English language  proficiency  and
         the 1st  appellant's  ability  to  be  financially  independent  as
         neutral factors. I take into account as a relevant public  interest
         factor the fact that the appellants have always resided in  the  UK
         with lawful leave, but that their private lives  have  nevertheless
         been established  when  their  immigration  status  was  precarious
         (s.117B(5)). This is of  greater  relevance  to  the  1st  and  2nd
         appellants as the 3rd appellant has always been a minor  and  would
         have no control or influence over her  immigration  status  or  the
         precarious nature of her residence. I must attach little weight  to
         the private life established by the 1st in the UK, or  the  private
         life established by the 2nd appellant in the UK  since  she  turned
         18. In identifying and considering  the  relevant  public  interest
         factors I additionally take into account the appellants' use of NHS
         resources and the drain on the public purse of  educating  the  2nd
         and 3rd appellants. I attach particular weight  to  the  fact  that
         both the 2nd and 3rd appellant have required specialized  education
         and treatment as a result of their disabilities,  although  it  was
         not  suggested  that  they  were  not  lawfully  entitled  to  this
         specialist education and treatment as a consequence of their lawful
         residence.

     27. In MA (Pakistan) Lord Justice Elias stated, at [46],

             "Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the fact that
             a  child  has  been  here  for  seven  years  must  be   given
             significant  weight  when  carrying  out  the  proportionality
             exercise. Indeed, the Secretary of State published guidance in
             August  2015  in   the   form   of   Immigration   Directorate
             Instructions entitled "Family Life (as a  partner  or  parent)
             and Private Life: 10 Year Routes" in  which  it  is  expressly
             stated that once the seven  years'  residence  requirement  is
             satisfied, there need to  be  "strong  reasons"  for  refusing
             leave (para. 11.2.4). These instructions  were  not  in  force
             when the cases now subject to appeal were determined,  but  in
             my view they merely confirm what is  implicit  in  adopting  a
             policy of this nature. After such a period of time  the  child
             will have put down roots and developed  social,  cultural  and
             educational links in the UK such  that  it  is  likely  to  be
             highly disruptive if the child is required to  leave  the  UK.
             That may be less so when the children are very  young  because
             the focus of their lives will be on their  families,  but  the
             disruption becomes more serious as they get  older.  Moreover,
             in these cases there must be a very  strong  expectation  that
             the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
             his parents as part of a family unit, and that must rank as  a
             primary consideration in the proportionality assessment."

     28. At [47] of MA (Pakistan) Lord Justice Elias stated,

             "However, the fact that the child has been in the UK for seven
             years would  need  to  be  given  significant  weight  in  the
             proportionality  exercise  for  two  related  reasons:  first,
             because  of  its  relevance  to  determining  the  nature  and
             strength of the child's best interests; and second, because it
             establishes as a starting point that leave should  be  granted
             unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary."

     29. The 3rd appellant's removal would undoubtedly  have  a  deleterious
         impact on  the  life  she  has  established  in  the  UK.  Although
         established when her immigration status was precarious  she  cannot
         be held accountable for  the  decisions  of  her  parents  and  her
         private life was rooted through no fault of her own.  I  find  that
         she has fully integrated into British society having lived  in  the
         UK throughout the formative years of her life. Although  she  still
         has extended family in Bangladesh she has  little  recollection  or
         experience of life in that country and  can  only  speak  a  little
         Bengali and cannot write it. Her removal would  effectively  severe
         the friendships and relationships that now form  the  core  of  her
         private life and which the 3rd appellant has  struggled  to  attain
         despite her partial deafness, and while she may be able  to  retain
         some contact with her friends through remote means, the  impact  on
         her social integration is likely to be profound.

     30. The 3rd appellant is due to undertake her A-Levels this summer  and
         is consequently at a critical stage of her education. I  find  that
         the disruption caused to her education by her proposed removal,  at
         a critical stage of her studies when she is  undertaking  important
         examinations that could determine her future prospects,  especially
         when considering the language difficulties she would  encounter  at
         educational  institutions  in  Bangladesh   given   her   lack   of
         proficiency in Bengali, is likely to be significant.

     31. In assessing whether it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  3rd
         appellant to leave  the  UK  I  draw  together  the  strong  public
         interest factors identified above,  and  weight  them  against  the
         impact of removal on the  3rd  appellant  and  the  extent  of  the
         disruption to her private life. I note once  again  that  her  best
         interests are a primary but  not  a  paramount  consideration.  The
         evidence that I have carefully considered indicates that the  daily
         social and cultural experience and expectations of this 17-year-old
         girl, who has lived in the UK since she was 6 years old, have  been
         moulded by her residence to such an extent that she would encounter
         considerable difficulty integrating to life in Bangladesh,  despite
         have the support of her mother and extended family members. I  find
         also that her removal  would  cause  significant  upheaval  to  her
         education  which  is  at  a  critical  stage.  The  extent  of  her
         integration and the solidity of the 3rd  appellant's  relationships
         established in the UK are such that to uproot her from all that she
         has known and grown up with over 10� years would render her removal
         disproportionate. I consequently  find  that  the  3rd  appellant's
         removal would constitute a disproportionate interference  with  her
         article 8 rights.

     32. I will now consider the position of  the  2nd  appellant.  She  has
         lawfully resided in the UK since she was 8 years old,  albeit  that
         her immigration status has always been precarious. She  is  now  19
         years old and is undertaking a BTEC Advanced Diploma and aspires to
         go to university. Although she is profoundly deaf she  communicates
         by lip reading in English and via BSL and has managed to  establish
         a close group of friends. It  is  readily  apparent  that  she  has
         established a significant private life  in  the  UK  and  that  her
         removal would interference with that  private  life,  points  never
         challenged by the respondent at any stage of the protracted  appeal
         proceedings. Her proposed removal is in pursuit of legitimate  aims
         and in accordance with the law.

     33. In determining whether her removal would be  proportionate  I  take
         account of the public interest factors identified in s.117B. I note
         the strong public interest  in  maintaining  effective  immigration
         control. With respect to her proficiency in English, there is  some
         difficulty  in  applying  this  to  a  person  who  is  deaf.   The
         unchallenged evidence before me however indicates that she can  lip
         read in English and  communicate  via  BSL.  I  find  that  she  is
         therefore proficient in communicating in English, although this  is
         only a neutral  factor.  She  is  currently  studying  and  is  not
         therefore financially independent. Despite  her  deafness  she  may
         very well be capable of remunerated employment in the  future.  She
         is not however employed and I therefore hold this  against  her  in
         the proportionality assessment. Her immigration status  has  always
         been lawful but precarious in the sense that she has never  resided
         in a category leading to settlement. I must therefore attach little
         weight to her private life. However, each case must  be  approached
         on  its  own  particular  facts  and  the  overall  proportionality
         assessment must take account of matters specific to the  individual
         person. In this regard  I  note  that  most  of  the  private  life
         relationships established by the 2nd appellant occurred  while  she
         was a child and without any control over  her  immigration  status.
         There is no suggestion that she has ever  engaged  in  any  conduct
         that may  lead  to  a  rejection  of  leave  to  remain  under  the
         Suitability requirements of Appendix-FM or the general grounds  for
         refusal in Part 9 of the immigration rules.  I  take  into  account
         that the 2nd appellant has drawn on NHS and  educational  financial
         resources as a result of her deafness, and that she may need to  do
         so in the future, a point I hold against her in the proportionality
         assessment.

     34. The evidence from the 1st appellant, supported  by  the  downloaded
         articles relating  to  BSL  and  IPSL,  indicates  that  there  are
         substantial differences between the two forms of sign language.  It
         may take up to six years to learn IPSL. There was no  challenge  to
         this evidence from Mr Clarke. The facts agreed at the outset of the
         hearing included previous findings that  the  2nd  appellant  would
         encounter significant linguistic difficulty in adapting to life  in
         Bangladesh and that there would be a significant adverse impact  on
         her ability to communicate with others and  on  her  overall  well-
         being. The passage of time since the decisions  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal and the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  have  not  diminished
         these findings. I regard  this  as  a  significant  factor  in  the
         proportionality assessment.

     35.  Another  significant  factor  in   determining   whether   it   is
         proportionate to require the 2nd appellant to leave the UK  is  the
         concession that, were she to now make an application for  leave  to
         remain under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), she would, in all likelihood,
         be granted leave to remain. Indeed it is difficult to see  how  she
         could be refused LTR if such an  application  were  made.  She  has
         clearly resided in the UK for more than half  her  life.  The  fact
         that the 2nd appellant does notionally meet the requirements of the
         immigration rules counts very much in her favour when balancing the
         relevant public interest factors.

     36. Having considered both the public interest factors  and  the  facts
         person to the 2nd appellant, including the evidence of  the  extent
         of her private life, the length of her residence in  the  UK  as  a
         child, the linguistic  and  communicative  difficulties  she  would
         encounter in Bangladesh as a result of her deafness, and  the  fact
         that she meets the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) were she
         to  now  make  an  application,   I   find   that   it   would   be
         disproportionate to require her to leave the UK.

     37. I turn to the appeals of the  1st  appellant.  She  cannot  succeed
         under the immigration rules. I must consider the  position  of  the
         1st appellant outside the immigration rules and  determine  whether
         there are compelling or exceptional reasons for allowing her appeal
         on article 8 grounds (SSHD v SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ  387;
         MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]
         EWCA Civ 1192, at [42]). I note again that the 3rd appellant is not
         independent or self-sufficient and remains living with the 1st  and
         2nd appellants. I additionally take into account  the  unchallenged
         evidence that the 2nd appellant is dependent to a large  degree  on
         the 1st appellant. The 2nd  and  3rd  appellants  enjoy  close  and
         loving relationships with the  1st  appellant,  relationships  that
         include elements of reliance and  dependency,  and  any  separation
         would  have  a  very  significant  detrimental  impact   on   these
         relationships.

     38. In assessing  the  proportionality  of  the  proposed  removals,  I
         consider and apply the factors identified in  s.117B  of  the  2002
         Act. I attach weight to the public interest in the  maintenance  of
         effective immigration controls. I note that the 1st  appellant  has
         attained an English-language test at CEFR Level B1.1, and that  she
         previously had two jobs in the UK. The only reason  she  no  longer
         works is because  of  changes  to  her  immigration  status.  I  am
         satisfied she is proficient in English and is capable of being self-
         sufficient, although I regard these as neutral factors. I note that
         she has passed the 'Life in the UK' test. I am satisfied  that  the
         1st appellant has established a  private  life  in  the  UK  having
         lawfully resided here since July 2007, some  10�  years,  although,
         pursuant to s.117B(5) I must attach little weight to  that  private
         life. Given the relatively low threshold for establishing a  breach
         of article 8 I am satisfied that article 8 is triggered in  respect
         of the 1st appellant. I  find  that  her  proposed  removal  is  in
         accordance with the law and in pursuit of a legitimate aim.

     39. Section 117B(6) states,

             'In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.'

     40. In MA(Pakistan) the Court held, at [17],

             "Subsection (6) falls into a different category again. It does
             not  simply  identify  factors  which  bear  upon  the  public
             interest question. It resolves that question in the context of
             article  8  applications  which  satisfy  the  conditions   in
             paragraphs (a) and (b). It does so by  stipulating  that  once
             those conditions are satisfied, the public interest  will  not
             require the applicant's removal. Since the  interference  with
             the right to private or family life  under  article  8(1)  can
             only  be  justified  where  there  is  a  sufficiently  strong
             countervailing public interest falling within article 8(2), if
             the public interest does not  require  removal,  there  is  no
             other basis on which removal could be justified.  It  follows,
             in my judgment, that  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  section
             117B(6) must be read as  a  self-contained  provision  in  the
             sense that Parliament has stipulated that where the conditions
             specified  in  the  sub-section  are  satisfied,  the   public
             interest will not justify removal."

     41.  The  1st  appellant  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
         relationship with the 3rd appellant, and I have  already  concluded
         that it would be unreasonable to expect the 3rd appellant to  leave
         the UK. I consequently find  that  the  public  interest  does  not
         require the 1st appellant's  removal  even  having  regard  to  the
         countervailing public interest considerations. Having regard to the
         assessment conducted outside the immigration rules in PD and Others
         (Article 8 - conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016]  UKUT  00108
         (IAC), at [43], I am satisfied that the effect  of  dismissing  the
         1st appellant's appeal would be to stultify my  decision  that  the
         3rd appellant qualifies for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
         in  accordance  with  article  8  considerations.  Undertaking  the
         s.117B(6) balancing exercise, and in light of my previous  analysis
         and findings, I  am  satisfied  that  the  test  of  compelling  or
         exceptional circumstances  is  satisfied.  I  am  additionally  and
         independently  satisfied  that  it  would  be  disproportionate  to
         separate the 1st appellant from  the  2nd  appellant.  There  is  a
         clearly family life between them (applying Singh & Anor v Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630) and  the  2nd
         appellant remains significant dependent on the 1st appellant. Given
         the serious difficulties  the  2nd  appellant  would  encounter  in
         Bangladesh  as  a  result  of  her  deafness  and  her  ability  to
         communicate only using BSL, I find it would be disproportionate  to
         remove the 1st appellant.

Decision

The appeals are allowed on article 8 grounds outside the immigration rules

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellants  in
this appeal are granted anonymity. No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellants and to the respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]    2 March 2018
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
