
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34901/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 October 2016                    |On 1 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Nasreen [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal arises from the decision of the Secretary of State, dated
    29 May 2015, to refuse the application of the respondent (hereinafter
    "the claimant") for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of her
    private and family life. Her ensuing appeal was heard by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Manyarara.  In a decision (determined on the papers)
    that was promulgated on 29 April 2016 the judge dismissed the appeal
    under the Immigration Rules but allowed it under Article 8 ECHR outside
    the Rules.  That decision is now appealed by the Secretary of State.

 2. The claimant did not attend the hearing on 7 October 2016. I am
    satisfied that the claimant was properly notified of the hearing, and I
    note that efforts were made to telephone her on the day of the hearing.
     Having considered the overriding objective I took the view that it was
    in the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing.

Immigration History and Background

 3. The claimant, who is a citizen of Pakistan born on 12 July 1974,
    entered the UK on 20 November 2008 with leave until 4 February 2011 as
    a spouse.

 4. On 2 February 2011 she applied for indefinite leave to remain as a
    spouse of a British national partner. Her application was refused on
    the basis that the marriage was not subsisting and the claimant's
    appeal of that decision was dismissed. Her appeal rights were exhausted
    on 19 September 2012 and thereafter she remained in the UK without
    lawful leave.

 5. An affidavit of her husband refers to him and the claimant experiencing
    serious relationship problems in 2011, with these subsequently being
    resolved.

 6. On 26 November 2012 and then on 16 December 2014 the claimant applied
    unsuccessfully for leave to remain in the UK outside the Immigration
    Rules under Article 8 ECHR.

 7. In the Secretary of State's decision of 29 May 2015, she first
    considered whether the claimant could satisfy the requirements of
    Appendix FM R-LTER 1.1(d). It was accepted that the claimant's partner
    is a British citizen and that she met the eligibility and suitability
    requirements such that the matter fell to be determined under Section
    EX.1(b) of the Rules. The question, therefore, was whether there were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing with her partner
    outside the UK.

 8. The Secretary of State stated that it would not be unreasonable to
    expect the claimant's partner to relocate and therefore there were not
    insurmountable obstacles. The Secretary of State was also not satisfied
    that the requirements under paragraph 276ADE(1) were met. Nor did she
    accept that there were exceptional circumstances that would warrant
    allowing the appeal outside the Rules.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The judge first considered the claim under the Immigration Rules,
    identifying that the relevant issue was whether, pursuant to EX.1(b),
    there were insurmountable obstacles to family life between the claimant
    and her British national husband continuing outside the UK.

10. The judge, following the recent Court of Appeal authority Agyarko and
    Others [2015] EWCA Civ 440 found the evidence did not disclose very
    serious hardship in relation to family life continuing in Pakistan.

11. The judge then turned to consider Article 8 outside the Rules.  He
    highlighted that the marriage had subsisted for nine years and that as
    the claimant was a spouse when she entered the UK the relationship was
    not formed whilst she is in the UK unlawfully. At paragraph 32 the
    judge stated:

         "I find that the likelihood of the appellant being granted entry
         clearance in this case is strong. She has navigated her way through
         the suitability and relationship requirements. Although my
         consideration of this appeal does not extend to consideration of
         the outcome of any entry clearance application, I find that to
         request the claimant to return, thereby temporarily disrupting the
         established family life in this case on a procedural ground, is
         disproportionate."

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

12. The grounds of appeal argue that the decision was inconsistent with
    Chen IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC) as there was no explanation as to why
    temporary separation whilst the claimant returns to Pakistan to seek
    entry clearance would be disproportionate. At the hearing Ms Fijiwala
    briefly reiterated the arguments made in the grounds of appeal.

Consideration

13. It is well established that in a case such as this an appellant will
    need to show compelling circumstances in order to succeed in an
    application for leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules. See SS
    (Congo) [EWCA] Civ 387.

14. Although the judge, at paragraph [24], correctly identified this
    requirement, the decision does not describe circumstances which, taken
    individually or cumulatively, can properly be construed as compelling.
    Indeed, I cannot discern anything in the decision which comes close to
    being compelling.

15. Read as a whole, the judge appears to have given three reasons to allow
    the appeal on the basis that removal of the claimant would be
    disproportionate. The first is that the claimant and her partner have
    been in a subsisting marriage for nine years. The second is that the
    marriage began before the claimant moved to the UK. The third reason
    given by the judge is that the claimant's removal would be on a
    "procedural ground" as there is a strong likelihood of her being
    granted entry clearance.

16. There is no explanation in the decision as to why the judge concluded
    that there is a "strong" likelihood entry clearance will be granted.
    There are strict requirements to be met before entry clearance as a
    partner is granted including the financial thresholds in Appendix FM
    and evidence to support the same in Appendix FM-SE. I cannot discern
    from the Tribunal file how the judge could have reached a view, one way
    or the other, on whether the claimant would succeed in an application
    for entry clearance as a partner from Pakistan.

17. As made clear in Chen, there will be instances where there are not
    insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed outside the UK
    (as the judge found to be the cases in this appeal) but where temporary
    separation to enable an individual to make an application for entry
    clearance will be disproportionate. Generally, to succeed in such a
    case, an applicant will need to show that: (a) the application for
    entry clearance from abroad would be successful; and (b) there would be
    significant interference with family life by a temporary removal. See
    Chen at [39].

18. The claimant has shown neither. Firstly, she did not submit any
    evidence that would support a finding that entry clearance from abroad
    would be successful. The burden was on her to show that entry clearance
    from Pakistan would be granted. She did not discharge that burden.

19. Secondly, the judge has not identified any circumstances to support the
    view that there will be significant interference with family life
    arising from a temporary removal of the claimant. Such circumstances
    could take the form, for example, of children being affected or there
    being medical or other reasons that would prevent the claimant or her
    partner travelling to Pakistan. In the absence of any such reasons, it
    was not open to the judge to find that temporary removal to Pakistan
    would cause a significant interference to the claimant's family life.

20. Having found the above described material errors of law I remake the
    decision as follows:

21. The only realistic route by which the claimant could be granted leave
    to remain under the Immigration Rules is to show she falls within
    paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM, whereby there are insurmountable
    obstacles to the relationship with her husband continuing outside the
    UK. However, she has not submitted any evidence which shows there to be
    obstacles, insurmountable or otherwise, to the relationship continuing
    in Pakistan. Accordingly, the claimant cannot succeed under the
    Immigration Rules.

22. In considering Article 8 outside the Rules I rely on the evidence that
    was before the First-tier Tribunal (no further evidence having been
    adduced). That evidence provides only very limited information about
    the claimant and her circumstances. It shows that she married a British
    citizen in Pakistan in 2007 and entered the UK in 2008 as his wife with
    leave until 4 February 2011.  She applied, in time, for indefinite
    leave to remain but was unsuccessful (including on appeal).  An
    affidavit from the claimant's husband indicates the reason for this, as
    it refers to there being "serious relationship problems in 2011". These
    problems were subsequently resolved and the relationship is subsisting.



23. Having lived in the UK for eight years as the wife of a British
    citizen, the claimant undoubtedly has a private and family life in the
    UK that engages Article 8 ECHR. In these circumstances, given that she
    cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules, the question to be
    addressed is whether her removal would be disproportionate. In
    considering proportionality, regard must be had to the factors in
    Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as
    well as the Court of Appeal case law explaining that for a claim to
    succeed outside the Rules there needs to be compelling circumstances.

24. Turning to the Section 117B factors, it is not clear from the evidence
    if the claimant speaks English and is financially independent
    (subsections (2) and (3)). However, even if I found she was, it would
    not alter the outcome of the proportionality assessment.

25. Although there is a question as to whether the claimant's relationship
    could be said to have commenced in 2011 or 2012 (following the
    reconciliation), I accept that, looked at as a whole, the relationship
    was established before the claimant entered the UK and therefore at a
    time when her status was neither precarious nor unlawful. There is
    therefore no need to give "little weight" to the relationship under
    subsections (4) and (5).

26. Regard must also be had to Subsection (1), which states that the
    maintenance of effective immigration controls in the public interest.

27. Even though I give substantial weight to the claimant's relationship
    with her husband, I am satisfied that her removal would not be
    disproportionate under Article 8 ECHR. Assessing proportionality is a
    balancing exercise and the claimant has simply not provided evidence
    that weighs heavily in her favour. Ultimately, her case amounts to no
    more than saying she has been in the UK a long time, does not want to
    leave and her husband would not want to move with her to Pakistan. That
    falls significantly short of a compelling reason to grant the claimant
    leave to remain when she is unable to satisfy the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules.

28. I reject the contention that refusing the claimant's claim is merely a
    procedural matter or that her appeal should succeed following
    Chikwamba. As should be clear from the error of law decision, there is
    no evidence to suggest that she would succeed in an application made
    from Pakistan; or that, if she would be granted leave to enter from
    Pakistan, a temporary move to her home country in order to make the
    application would be a hardship.

Decision


29. The decision of the First Tier Tribunal contains a material error of
    law and is set aside.


30. I remake the said decision by dismissing the claimant's appeal under
    both the Immigration Rules and on human rights (Article 8) grounds.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 31 October 2016               |

