
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number IA/34142/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
       Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 14th February 2018
     On 25th April 2018


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                            MOHAMMED MAHBUB ALOM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:  In person
For the Respondent: Mr L Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of his
   family life with his partner. The application was refused and the
   Appellant appealed. His appeal was heard by Judge Farmer at Hatton Cross
   on the 26th of June 2017 and dismissed in a decision promulgated on the
   28th of June 2017.

2. In the findings which start at paragraph 8 of the decision the Judge
   rejected the credibility of the Appellant and the Sponsor. The reasons
   included amongst other things the inability of the Appellant to recall
   the dates of his civil and Islamic marriages, when and the circumstances
   in which the Appellant met the Sponsor's children, when and how the
   relationship started, whether there had been home visits before the
   marriage, attendance at the ceremonies. The Judge noted that there were
   some consistencies but found that these did not repair the damage to
   their credibility arising from the inconsistencies identified.

3. The Judge went on to correctly set out that the burden of proof was on
   the Respondent referring to a marriage of convenience. In paragraph 26
   the Judge found that the marriage was not a genuine marriage. Paragraph
   EX.1 did not apply and the Appellant was not assisted by paragraph 276ADE
   of the Immigration Rules and there was nothing exceptional to suggest
   removal would be disproportionate.

4. The grounds were described as lengthy and discursive by First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Pooler who considered the Appellant's application for
   permission to appeal. Having read the grounds Judge Pooler identified 2
   arguable errors. The first was whether the Judge erred in referring to a
   marriage of convenience in addition to the issue of whether it was
   genuine and subsisting. The second was with regard to the Appellant's
   removal and the Judge's focus in whether the Appellant had severed ties
   to his home country.


5. At the hearing the Appellant argued that the First-tier Tribunal had not
   taken account of the legal arguments, evidence had been submitted and
   overlooked and the decision was against the weight of the evidence. They
   had been interviewed twice but the house had not been visited. The Judge
   had erred on EX.1, paragraph 276ADE and article 8.


6. In submissions Mr Tarlow accepted that it might be difficult for a
   litigant in person. The Appellant disagreed with the findings but the
   Judge had made adverse credibility findings that were open to him. The
   findings were made in the context of the burden shifting to the Secretary
   of State and read as a whole there was no material error.


7. In reply the Appellant stated that there were very significant obstacles
   to his return as that would break up the family, his wife has family in
   the UK and that can be an obstacle to family life continuing elsewhere,
   her children are here.


8. Whilst the Judge should not have referred to the issue of a marriage of
   convenience that does not assist the Appellant. It is a variation on the
   genuineness of the marriage. In paragraphs 10 to 20 the Judge set out a
   number of inconsistencies in the evidence and has explained.


9. In his grounds of application the Appellant suggested that there were
   explanations, for example his reply in relation to first meeting the
   children after the wedding was because he thought that was when the
   question was referring to. There is no ambiguity in the evidence recorded
   by the Judge and nothing suggests that the question was other than a
   simple enquiry about when they first met.


10. In the circumstances the findings made and set out in the decision were
   open to the Judge. The issues considered by the Judge covered a number of
   areas of the evidence and so it cannot be said that she failed to take an
   overall approach to the evidence that was presented. In addition the
   consideration of the consistencies and the photographs adds to the fact
   that the Judge gave overall consideration to the evidence presented.


11. At paragraph 26 the Judge found that the marriage was not genuine. If
   the references to marriages of convenience are ignored the decision
   remains sustainable, the reasons given in paragraphs 10 to 20 justified
   the conclusion in paragraph 26.


12. In finding that the marriage had not been shown to be genuine it
   followed that paragraph EX.1 did not apply and so there was no error in
   paragraph 29.


13. With regard to the proportionality of the Appellant's removal the
   claimed family life could play no part in that assessment given the
   findings that the Judge had made about the genuineness of the marriage.
   Whilst family life and the family's circumstances could amount to very
   significant obstacles in finding that the marriage was not genuine the
   Judge could not then consider that in this part of the decision.


14. It would clearly have been better if the Judge had stated the correct
   test in paragraphs 30 and 31 but the reality is that the factors that
   were discussed by the Judge in those paragraphs went to the obstacles
   that the Appellant could face on return to Bangladesh. The Appellant is a
   national of Bangladesh and given the time he has spent in the UK, 10
   years as opposed to 32 years in his home country and the family ties that
   he has retained there, that his private life was established when he was
   present precariously would not have led to a different conclusion. His
   position was undermined by the findings made in relation to the marriage.
   If there was an error in the words used by the Judge as she would
   inevitably have dismissed the appeal any error is not material.


CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed:




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 20th February 2018













