
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/34832/2015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12 December 2018                   |On 20 December 2018               |
|                                      |                                  |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR SOHAIL AMIR
                                   (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Coleman, Counsel (instructed by MA Consultants)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department)
           appealed with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  I
           D Boyes on 1 November 2018 against the determination  of  First-
           tier Tribunal Judge A A Wilson who had allowed the  Respondent's
           appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds. The decision and  reasons  was
           promulgated on 12 October 2018.


      2.    The Respondent is national of Pakistan, born on  8  March  1983.
           He had entered the United Kingdom lawfully on  8  December  2004
           and became eligible for settlement under paragraph 276B  of  the
           Immigration Rules once  he  had  acquired  10  years  continuous
           lawful residence.  While the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
           Department accepted that the Respondent had indeed completed  10
           years continuous lawful residence, settlement was refused on  24
           November 2015 under paragraph  322(1C)(iv)  of  the  Immigration
           Rules, on the ground that the Respondent had  within  24  months
           prior to the date on which  his  application  was  decided  been
           convicted of or had admitted an offence for which he received  a
           non custodial sentence or other out of court  disposal  that  is
           recorded on his criminal record. The Secretary of State for  the
           Home Department was  satisfied  that  the  Respondent  had  been
           convicted of an offence on 24 November 2013,  meaning  that  the
           mandatory rule applied.


      3.    The Respondent's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was dismissed
           but the determination was set aside by the  Upper  Tribunal  for
           material error of law.  Upper Tribunal Judge Finch held that the
           certificate  of  conviction  from  the  Crown  Court   was   the
           determinative  evidence.   That  certificate  showed  that   the
           Respondent was convicted on 26  September  2013  (i.e.,  not  24
           November 2013), with the result that the  Home  Office  decision
           was clearly more than 24 months after that date.   That had been
           misunderstood by the First-tier Tribunal.


      4.    Upper Tribunal Judge Finch had noted that  paragraph  322(5)  of
           the Immigration Rules was potentially applicable:  leave  should
           normally be refused due to "the undesirability of permitting the
           person concerned to remain in the United Kingdom in the light of
           his conduct (including convictions  which  do  not  fall  within
           paragraph 322(1C), character, associations or the fact  that  he
           represents a threat to national security."  That  had,  however,
           to be read in  conjunction  with  Home  Office  policy  guidance
           (General grounds for refusal Section 1 - version 29.0 11 January
           2018) which states at page 75 that "It is unlikely that a person
           will be refused under  the  character,  conduct  or  association
           grounds for a single conviction that results in a  non-custodial
           sentence outside the  relevant  time  frame."   The  appeal  was
           remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to enable both issues to  be
           considered before another judge after hearing further evidence.


      5.    Judge Wilson found that the Respondent had been  in  the  United
           Kingdom with leave to  remain  at  all  times,  including  leave
           extended by virtue of section 3C of the  Immigration  Act  1971.
           The Home Office decision was erroneous because of the  error  of
           fact identified by Upper Tribunal Finch, so the general  grounds
           of refusal were inapplicable.  As to the discretionary  grounds,
           the judge accepted the Respondent's evidence that the conviction
           on 26 September 2013 was a single, isolated event and that there
           had been no further arrests  or  offences.   Applying  the  Home
           Office guidance identified by Upper Tribunal Judge  Finch,  none
           of the grounds under paragraph 322(5) of the  Immigration  Rules
           was applicable.  The judge applied SF and others (Guidance  post
           2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC).   Thus he  allowed  the
           human rights appeal.


      6.    Permission to appeal was granted (with reservations) because  it
           was  considered  arguable  that  the  judge  had   not   engaged
           sufficiently with the circumstances of the Respondent's conduct.




      Submissions


      7.    Mr Lindsay for the Appellant accepted that the grounds submitted
           on the Secretary of State for the Home Department's behalf  were
           lacking in clarity.   The main problem  with  the  determination
           was that the Home Office policy was  only  guidance.   Here  the
           Respondent's conduct went to the heart of the immigration system
           and  its  procedures,  which  the  Respondent  had   sought   to
           undermine.  Refusal was important as a  deterrence:  see  Hesham
           Ali [2016] UKSC 60, especially Lord Wilson at [69]. The decision
           should be set aside, the appeal remade and dismissed.


      8.    Mr Coleman for the Respondents relied  on  the  rule  24  notice
           served on the Respondent's behalf.  The Home  Office  Presenting
           Officer at the First-tier Tribunal re-hearing had asked only one
           question of the Respondent, had he been convicted of  any  other
           offences, to which the answer was no.  Thus this  was  a  single
           offence  case.   Far  from  misdirecting   himself,   the   very
           experienced judge had been guided by the Upper Tribunal  Judge's
           comprehensive decision and had applied the relevant  law  in  SF
           (above).  He submitted that the judge had been entitled to allow
           the appeal and had given adequate reasons for doing so.




      No material error of law finding


      9.    The tribunal accepts the submissions of  Mr  Coleman  and  finds
           that there was no error of law.  The  very  experienced  judge's
           determination must be read alongside the determination of  Upper
           Tribunal Judge  Finch,  as  was  plainly  intended.   The  Upper
           Tribunal had identified the key issues,  and  it  was  tolerably
           clear that they could only be decided in the Respondent's favour
           if the evidence at the remitted showed that  he  was  a  "single
           conviction" case.   That  was  Judge  Wilson's  finding  on  the
           evidence.  The absence of  any  record  of  submissions  to  the
           contrary from the Home Office Presenting Officer corresponds  to
           Mr Coleman's rule 24 notice.  In effect, once that evidence  had
           been accepted, the appeal was conceded by the Home Office.  That
           might well be thought to have left little scope for a permission
           to appeal application.


      10.   Mr Lindsay's submissions for the Appellant put  the  case  in  a
           different and possibly creative way, suggesting that there is or
           should be a special category of offence which precludes  further
           leave  or  settlement,  namely  offences  which  undermine   the
           immigration system.  He submitted that that would  be  a  proper
           exercise of discretion under paragraph 322(5).  There can be  no
           doubt  that  the  Respondent's   offence,   assisting   unlawful
           immigration into an EU member state, was in that very  category,
           although this appears to have  been  in  relation  to  a  single
           individual, which would explain the lenient sentence.


      11.   There are, however, a number of difficulties with  Mr  Lindsay's
           logical and well argued  submission.   The  first  is  that  the
           Respondent was given what by any standards  was  a  light,  non-
           custodial sentence, which the tribunal cannot  go  behind.   The
           second is that it was found to  be  a  single  offence,  with  a
           conviction  more  than  two  years  before  the  Home   Office's
           decision.  Another and possibly the greatest problem is that the
           relevant Home  Office  guidance  draws  no  distinction  between
           categories of offence, making no special exceptions for offences
           undermining the immigration system.   Perhaps  the  Home  Office
           guidance should do so, but any debate over that is not  for  the
           judges at either level of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber.
           The Home Office guidance is both  recent  and  highly  specific.
           There is no scope for any gloss.  Lord Wilson's observations  in
           Hesham  Ali  (above)  were  addressed  towards  serious   and/or
           persistent offences which lead to deportation orders.


      12.   Judge Boyes's hesitation in granting permission  to  appeal  was
           right, in the tribunal's view.   There  was  no  error  of  law.
           Judge Wilson's decision stands unchanged.


      DECISION


      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


      The original decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands unchanged.

      Signed                                  Dated 12 December 2018




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




