
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34354/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20 October 2014                      |On 24 October 2014                |
|                                        |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Waqas Rauf
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Masood, Counsel instructed by Denning
Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  a  decision  of  a
    Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appeal  of  a
    citizen of Pakistan (hereinafter "the claimant") against  the  decision
    of the appellant (hereinafter "the Secretary of State")  to  refuse  to
    issue him a residence card as confirmation of his  right  of  residence
    under Community law.  The appeal  was  allowed  under  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006 although the judge's reasons for allowing it are
    not entirely clear.

 2. The application that had been made to the Secretary  of  State  was  an
    application for a residence card  based  on  the  applicant  being  the
    husband of an EEA national exercising treaty rights.  The treaty  right
    identified was that the claimant's wife was  "a  worker".   It  is  not
    wholly clear if the First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal because  she
    was a worker of a particular kind or because she was a student.

 3. Mr Tufan's position is quite plain and it is that  whichever  of  these
    two reasons was relied on by the judge he was wrong. The appeal  should
    have been dismissed because the evidence did not support the concluding
    analysis of the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. I deal first with the suggestion that the sponsor is a worker.  If  she
    is a worker she is a worker who is not working but it is trite law that
    a person does  not  cease  to  be  a  worker  because  that  person  is
    temporarily unable to work as a result of  illness  or  accident.   The
    sponsor in this case, if I may say so respectfully, has  had  a  tragic
    personal life. He was a widow when  she  married  the  claimant.  I  am
    satisfied that she had been to the United Kingdom before 2007  although
    she rather unfortunately indicated in her witness statement  that  2007
    was her first visit. Having done some work of some sort in  the  United
    Kingdom she had the horrible experience of being  involved  in  a  road
    traffic accident in Egypt in which her then husband  was  killed.   She
    was damaged and has not properly recovered, albeit  that  the  accident
    was some eight years ago.

 5. There was medical evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  but  nobody
    had really engaged in the question of the prognosis and whether or  not
    the sponsor would ever become fit to work again.   The  answer  is  not
    obvious.  The medical evidence was plain that at the  time  of  writing
    the medical report she was not fit to work.  The  medical  practitioner
    said as much.  It is also plain that she has  some  sort  of  permanent
    disability. The sponsor is likely to need elbow crutches for  the  rest
    of  her  life  but  without  in  any  way   diminishing   the   extreme
    unpleasantness of such a disability it does not follow from  that  that
    she is never going to be able to work again.   The  fact  is  that  the
    evidence was just silent on this crucial point. It is not plain  to  me
    if the judge (a) thought that the sponsor's illness was only  temporary
    or (b) if it was only temporary how he  could  possibly  reach  such  a
    conclusion.  I reject the suggestion that it was an inference that  was
    reasonable to draw from the evidence.  It was not.  This is not a case,
    for example, where an ordinarily healthy person who  is  smitten  by  a
    winter cold. Common knowledge would dictate that a complete recovery is
    highly likely in a relatively short time even though a patient might be
    quite incapable of doing anything productive for a short time.  This is
    a case of a person who, sadly, has not been  fit  for  many  years  but
    about whom medical evidence does not say if she can expect ever to work
    again.  The evidence was just not there to support the conclusion  that
    she was temporarily unable to work.  If that was  what  the  judge  had
    decided I have to say that he was wrong.

 6. Alternatively it may be that the judge decided that the sponsor  was  a
    student. There is evidence that she is a student of some  kind  but  it
    does not follow that if she was a student she was entitled to be in the
    United Kingdom and for her husband to be here as a consequence.  It  is
    a requirement of the Rules that a student needs  comprehensive  medical
    insurance.  This was a  point  that  was  not  anticipated  before  the
    hearing and it was  not  addressed  in  the  evidence.   There  was  no
    evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that   the   sponsor   had
    comprehensive sickness insurance.  There has been an attempt to rectify
    this problem by producing a European medical card which,  according  to
    the claimant, meets the requirements of the rules.  Mr Tufan,  for  the
    Secretary of States, says very confidently that it does  not  have  the
    required effect but neither party was really able  to  help  me  decide
    with any great confidence if it was satisfactory or not.

 7. I have to say I am inclined to the view that  it  is  not  evidence  of
    insurance that satisfies the rules. It is only proof  of  a  degree  of
    emergency medical  treatment  being  temporarily  available  (see,  for
    example, Ahmad v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA
    Civ 988, particularly paragraph 71) but I am  quite  unashamed  to  say
    that I do not really know.  What is plain to me is that it was a  point
    that was anticipated before the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal
    and it should have been addressed if, in fact, it  is  the  appellant's
    case that he is entitled to be in the United Kingdom as the husband  of
    a student who is an EEA national.

 8. Here the appellant is attempting to use  Rule  15(2)(a)  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Procedure Rules to fill a hole in  the  evidence  that  should
    never have been allowed to open.  If the answer was obvious to me  then
    I may have used my discretion differently but the answer is not obvious
    and I am not prepared to admit the evidence now.  I  bear  in  mind  in
    making that decision that it does not  leave  the  claimant  without  a
    remedy.  If it is his case that he is entitled to be here  because  his
    wife is a student he can make an application and I do not think that is
    a task that would  be  particularly  expensive  or  particularly  time-
    consuming.

 9. I am satisfied, having gone through this with  considerable  care  from
    representatives who were I acknowledge both helpful and  patient,  that
    the evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  support  the
    decision to allow the appeal either on the basis that the sponsor was a
    worker or on the basis that the sponsor was a student.

10. The judge should not  have  allowed  the  appeal  and  I  substitute  a
    decision setting aside his decision and dismissing the  appeal  of  the
    claimant against the decision complained of.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 22 October 2014                |








