
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/34337/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                     |           Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 26 October 2017                    |           On 24 November 2017        |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                               mohammad saqib
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Chaudhry, instructed by Whitefield Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mohammad Saqib, was born on 29 March 1988 and is a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  He entered the United Kingdom in 2011 with  entry
    clearance as a student.  In 2014, he  married  a  Ms  Zelma  but  their
    marriage was annulled on 2 July 2015.  Subsequently, having commenced a
    relationship with a Ms Shahzadi, he made an application  for  leave  to
    remain outside the Immigration  Rules.   A  decision  was  made  on  29
    October 2015 refusing that application.  The appellant appealed to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Rosemary  Bradshaw)  which,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 6 January 2017, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The couple had married on 13 September 2016.  They have a child (S) who
    was born in June 2016.  Both S and Ms Shahzadi  are  British  citizens.
    The judge accepted that the appellant and Ms Shahzadi are in a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship.   She  concluded  that  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable to expect "such a young child to leave  the  UK  with  his
    mother and father."  [38].

 3. At Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
    (as amended) provides:

         In the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom.

 4. A qualifying child is a child who has been living in the United Kingdom
    for at least seven years or who  is  a  British  child.  Prior  to  the
    enactment of Section 117B6, the Upper Tribunal  in  Sanade  and  others
    (British children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048(IAC) had found
    as follows:



   6. Where in the context of Article 8 one parent ("the remaining  parent")
      of a British citizen child is also a British  citizen  (or  cannot  be
      removed as a family member or in their own right), the removal of  the
      other parent does not mean that either  the  child  or  the  remaining
      parent   will   be   required    to    leave,    thereby    infringing
      the Zambrano principle, see C-256/11 Murat  Dereci. The  critical
      question is whether the child is dependent on the parent being removed
      for the exercise of his Union right of residence and  whether  removal
      of that parent will deprive the child of  the  effective  exercise  of
      residence in the United Kingdom or elsewhere in the Union.


 5. The judgment in Sanade has been that qualified by statute  law  in  the
    form of Section 117B(6).  Section 117B(6) makes no distinction  between
    a qualifying child who is not a British citizen and  a  British  child;
    accordingly, it must follow that it may  be  reasonable  to  require  a
    British child to leave the EU in circumstances where an adult with whom
    he or she has a genuine and subsisting relationship is  to  be  removed
    outside the EU.

 6. The Secretary of  State  has  issued  guidance  for  its  own  officers
    (Immigration Directorate Instruction) which concern the application  of
    Section 117 and to which the Tribunal referred in the case  of  SF  and
    Others (guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017]  UKUT  00120  (IAC)  at
    [7]:

         Mr  Wilding,  however,  has  with  the  fairness  which  Presenting
         Officers always  attempt  to  apply,  drawn  our  attention  to  an
         important guidance document.  It  is  the  Immigration  Directorate
         Instruction -  Family  Migration  -  Appendix  FM,  Section  1.0(B)
         "Family Life as a Partner or  Parent  and  Private  Life,  10  year
         Routes". It is the edition of August  2015  and  therefore  not  in
         force at the date of the decision under appeal, but it was in force
         at the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing and decision, and is
         still in force. It contains important guidance about the  following
         topic at 11.2.3: Would it  be  unreasonable  to  expect  a  British
         Citizen Child to leave the UK? We will set out the relevant  parts,
         they are as follows:




         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child. This reflects the European Court of Justice Judgment in
         Zambrano.

         ...

         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.




         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, provided  that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where  the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
         otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer  in
         the UK or in the EU.




         The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:




         .     criminality falling below the thresholds set out in paragraph
         398 of the Immigration Rules;

         .          a very poor  immigration  history,  such  as  where  the
         person has repeatedly and  deliberately  breached  the  Immigration
         Rules.




         In considering whether refusal  may  be  appropriate  the  decision
         maker must consider the impact on the child of any  separation.  If
         the decision maker is minded  to  refuse,  in  circumstances  where
         separation would be the result, this decision  should  normally  be
         discussed with a senior caseworker and, where  appropriate,  advice
         may be sought from the Office of the  Children's  Champion  on  the
         implications for the welfare of the child, in order to  inform  the
         decision."




         We were not  specifically  referred  to  any  other  part  of  this
         document and we do not need to set any more out.




 7. The second paragraph of the guidance  quoted  by  the  Tribunal  in  SF
    appears to be unequivocal.  In  particular,  it  makes  no  distinction
    between families where the non-EU national is to be  removed  is  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with the child and other parent  or
    circumstances (as in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] 2 AC 166)  where  the  family
    has already split up whilst in the United Kingdom.  The guidance  makes
    no distinction between a scenario whereby, for example,  a  father  who
    has only contact with a child but does not live with him or her  is  to
    be removed and where the family members (including a British child) are
    living as a unit in the United Kingdom.  It does not indicate that  the
    British child will be "leaving the  EU"  solely  with  the  non-British
    parent or primary carer and leaving any other parent or  carer  behind.
    The ordinary meaning of the words must encompass  both  a  scenario  in
    which a British child leaves with the non-British  parent  and  one  in
    which he or she leaves with a non-British parent  and  also  the  other
    parent, whether or British or non-British; the focus in the guidance is
    entirely upon the British citizen child.

 8. Given that this is  the  unequivocal  statement  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's position then, for the reasons given by the Tribunal in SF,  it
    is very important that the Tribunal should  have  regard  to  it.   The
    Tribunal in SF at [12] does recognise that  the  Tribunal  may  find  a
    reason for departing for  such  guidance,  for  example  where  it  has
    received more information about the circumstances of the appellant than
    the Secretary of State or where a case is "exceptional".   The  present
    appeal is not such a case.  It follows, therefore, that Judge  Bradshaw
    should have been made aware of the guidance by the Presenting  Officer,
    Mrs Brewer and that she  should  have  followed  "normal  practice"  by
    taking "such guidance into account and [applying] it in  assessing  the
    same consideration" in the present appeal.  It is  unclear  whether  or
    not the guidance was brought to the  judge's  attention  but  it  would
    appear that this was not so given the  submissions  of  Mrs  Brewer  as
    recorded in the judge's decision.  I do not consider that it  was  open
    to Mrs Brewer to depart from an unequivocal statement of policy on  the
    part of the Secretary of State.  Not  surprisingly,  the  guidance  has
    been raised by the appellant on appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   Whilst
    the grounds in respect of Sanade do not  have  merit  for  the  reasons
    which I have given above, it is difficult to see how this appeal, given
    the accepted facts,  should  have  been  dismissed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In the circumstances, I set aside the First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and remake the decision allowing the appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  6  January  2017  is
set aside.  The Upper Tribunal has remade the decision.  The appeal  of  the
appellant against the decision of the Secretary of State  dated  29  October
2015 is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).


No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              date 22 November 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 22 November 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


