
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34350/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 12th May 2015                   |On the  28th May 2015                |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                               Mr Joe Bockarie
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Ukwuoma
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Joe Bockarie against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wylie in a decision promulgated on the 22nd January 2015
    following a hearing at Hatton Cross on the 6th January of this year.
    The Appellant, who is a national of Sierra Leone born in May 1959, had
    entered the UK as a student.  The college at which he was studying was
    closed.  Its licence was withdrawn and a decision was taken to curtail
    the Appellant's leave as a student.  That decision was taken on the
    10th July 2012 and he was given 60 days until the 8th September 2012, a
    standard period of time to enable students to obtain a further college
    and a further CAS letter on which they can rely for the purposes of the
    points-based system.

 2. The Appellant maintained that he had not received any notice of the
    curtailment.  However, in September 2012 he sought a variation of his
    leave on the basis of his family life with his now partner and her
    children.  That was a live issue in front of Judge Wylie and in the
    course of the decision it was found as a fact in paragraph 25 that on a
    balance of probabilities the Appellant was aware that his leave to
    remain had been curtailed and that he was seeking an alternative route
    to continue his residence in the United Kingdom.

 3. The Judge then went on to consider Article 8.  The Secretary of State
    maintains that the curtailment decision served on the Appellant brought
    his time in the UK to an end and with no removal directions it meant
    that there was no decision that could be appealed.  Therefore, having
    found that he was aware of the curtailment, there was no in-country
    right of appeal.  The Appellant has maintained in the grounds of
    application that he either was not aware of the curtailment, although
    the finding was made against him, or that he had 28 days in which to
    appeal.

 4. It really matters not which route is taken because the effect is still
    the same.  In order to be able to maintain an appeal under the ECHR
    those facts must be brought to the attention of the Secretary of State
    before the relevant immigration decision is made.  Therefore, once the
    curtailment decision had been served the Appellant could not then have
    made an application under Article 8.  The only decision that could
    possibly have been considered by the Judge would have been the
    curtailment decision.

 5. We are satisfied that the findings made by the Judge which have not
    been properly challenged at paragraph 25, that he was aware of the
    curtailment, were findings that were properly open to the Judge.  If he
    thought that he had leave until the 23rd May 2013 it is difficult to
    understand why else he would have been making a further application
    based on those grounds at that time and that is clearly what the Judge
    believed.

 6. We refused an earlier application to adjourn.  The point in this issue
    is quite straightforward.  We also note that the applicant was informed
    of the hearing today by notice of the 15th April 2015 and there has
    been plenty of time since then to prepare for this hearing and for the
    submissions that could be made but in summary we say this.  The Judge
    clearly erred in continuing to hear the appeal after the finding that
    the Appellant was aware that his leave had been curtailed.  The only
    decision available then to the Secretary of State was to grant an extra
    60 days of leave, which was done, because the Appellant had not brought
    to the attention of the Secretary of State any claims under the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  He was precluded from doing so by
    a combination of the reading of section 92 and the case of Nirula
    [2012] EWCA Civ 1436.

 7. Accordingly we find that there was an error.  We set the decision aside
    and find in this case that there was no valid appeal for the First-tier
    Tribunal to consider.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed. The decision of the First-
tier Tribunal is set aside and we remake the decision. There was no valid
appeal for the First-tier Tribunal to consider.

No anonymity direction is made.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes



In finding that there was no valid appeal there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date 27th May 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes

