
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34644/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 7 January 2015                             |On 12 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   G A P O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Harris, Counsel instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent is a citizen of Bolivia and his date of birth is 28  May
    1972.  I shall refer to the respondent  as  the  appellant  as  he  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant entered the UK having been granted  leave  as  a  Tier  2
    Migrant on 6 January 2011.  His leave was curtailed on 25 August  2012.
    On 22 August 2012 the  appellant  made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain.  The Secretary of State refused the application in  a  decision
    of 14  August  2013  noting  that  the  appellant's  partner  was  here
    illegally. It was  accepted  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with their three children here, but he
    was not able to meet the requirements of the Rules.

3.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and his appeal was allowed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Herbert
    in a decision that was promulgated on 8 October 2014 after a hearing on
    26 September 2014.  Permission was granted to the Secretary of State in
    a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes  of  24  November  2014.
    Thus the matter came before me.

The Hearing Before the First-tier Tribunal

4.   At the hearing before Judge Herbert it was agreed by the  parties  that
    the appellant had in fact first entered the UK  in  2002  and  lawfully
    resided here until 2010 when he returned to Bolivia before  the  expiry
    of his leave to make an application for entry clearance. He returned to
    the UK on 6 January 2011.  His  wife  lawfully  entered  the  UK  as  a
    student in 2002.  Her leave expired in 2009. Before the expiry  of  her
    leave she submitted an application for leave to remain  in  respect  of
    her and the couple's three children.  Their eldest child G was born  on
    4 October 2005, their second child J was born on 12 February  2008  and
    their third child S was born on 12 April 2010.

5.   It was noted by the Judge that the appellant's wife's  application  had
    been pending for two years and five  months.   The  oldest  eldest  two
    children are at school here in the UK and that  they  were  born  here.
    The appellant returned voluntarily to Bolivia in 2010 in order to  make
    an application to return.

6.   The Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a  number  of  positive
    credibility findings in relation to the  appellant  and  these  can  be
    found from [30] of the decision  onward.   The  Judge  noted  that  the
    appellant and his family had been here lawfully and that they have made
    a significant contribution to the social and economic fabric of the UK.
     He noted that they were of good character  and  are  active  in  their
    local community.  He found that the appellant left the UK when  he  was
    required to and made an application to  re-enter  lawfully.   He  found
    that there was a close nexus between his application and that  made  by
    his wife and their children.

7.   The Judge found that the appellant had no right to  remain  in  the  UK
    under the Immigration Rules.  However, he went  on  to  find  that  the
    appellant's eldest child would benefit from paragraph 276ADE because it
    would not be reasonable to expect him to leave the UK.  The Judge found
    that the family had been here for a  long  time  and  were  financially
    independent and that there were no language problems.
 8.  The Judge noted that the family were faced with  a  "stark  choice"  to
    remain here together or to be removed  or  hope  that  the  appellant's
    wife's application would be  successful.   The  Judge  found  that  the
    appellant's  wife  suffered  from  depression  when  the  family   were
    previously separated in 2010.

9.     At [51] the Judge made the following finding:

         "I find that it would not be reasonable to expect  the  appellant's
         eldest child to leave the United  Kingdom  at  this  stage  in  his
         education for a number of reasons:


         (i)  The eldest child has two younger siblings and therefore if  he
             were to be removed with his father he would lose not only  his
             relationship to his mother for a significant  period  of  time
             but also to the two younger siblings.


         (ii) The eldest  child  would  have  a  significant  break  in  his
             education and welfare development on friends and associates as
             he is nearly 9 years old and for a child of that  age  such  a
             move is a significant  change  and  one  which  would  not  be
             embarked upon without very good reason."


10.  The Judge found that it would not be  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    children to be separated from their father and it was not  certain  how
    long it would take for the appellant to make an application  for  entry
    clearance  and  for  that  to  be  granted.  Separation  would  have  a
    detrimental effect on the appellant's wife and children.

11.  The Judge found at  [69]  that  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship between the appellant and a qualifying child and it  would
    be unreasonable to expect the child to leave the UK (in the context  of
    Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).

12.  The Judge found that there would be grave consequences in terms of  the
    children's education, health and development  and  welfare  should  the
    appellant be expected to leave and this would  be  exacerbated  if  the
    family as a whole left.

The Grounds of Appeal and Oral Submissions

13.  Ground 1 argues that the Judge was wrong to conclude that it  would  be
    unreasonable to require the appellant's eldest child to leave the UK on
    the basis that he has two younger siblings present here.   The  grounds
    refer to paragraph 51 of the determination.

14.  The stark choice referred to by the Immigration Judge was as  a  direct
    result of a family who has no basis to remain in the UK.  The  children
    had no future right to be educated here.  The grounds rely on the  case
    of Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74.  The case distinguishes  between  the
    future right of a British child and a non-EEA child.  The grounds  also
    rely on the case of EV (Philippines) & Ors v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  874
    and assert that all the family are Bolivian nationals and it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the children to adjust to life in Bolivia.  It  is
    argued that it was wrong for the First-tier Tribunal to place weight on
    the appellant's wife's pending application.

15.  Ground 2 argues that the Judge erred in finding  that  the  appellant's
    stay here had not been precarious.  It was the respondent's  case  that
    the appellant's status here was precarious and as such section 117B (5)
    applied.

16.  I heard oral submissions from both parties.  Mr Tarlow  indicated  that
    he relied on the grounds of appeal and the case law cited therein.  The
    family chose to remain in the UK and it was a choice available to  them
    to return to Bolivia.

17.  Mr Harris submitted that the Secretary  of  State  disagrees  with  the
    findings of the Judge, but the grounds failed to show that the decision
    was perverse.  It is clear, having considered the  determination  as  a
    whole, that the Judge followed the recommended path and  was  aware  of
    the relevant legal aspects of the appeal.  He accepted  that  paragraph
    51(i) was not a viable prospect and not relied upon by the Secretary of
    State.  However, in his view this was not an error of law.   The  Judge
    was aware that the appellant and his family were  lawfully  present  in
    the UK.  He accepted that there was a  distinction  between  a  British
    citizen  child  and  a  non-EEA  citizen  child.   However,  a  child's
    citizenship is not determinative.  The Judge was clearly aware  of  the
    relevant jurisprudence and specific reference was made  to  [45],  [47]
    and [61] of the determination.


Conclusions

18.   Ground  1  focuses  on  the  Judge's  findings  at  [51(i)]   of   the
    determination (see [9] above).

19.  In my view the grounds are misconceived in  focusing  on  [51](i).  The
    Secretary of State was not proposing that the appellant and his  eldest
    son would return together to Bolivia leaving the remaining  members  of
    the family here. This was not a relevant consideration for  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  However, when the determination is read as a  whole  it
    is  clear  that  the  Judge  did  not  restrict   his   assessment   of
    reasonableness to this scenario. He considered at some length the  best
    interests of the children with particular emphasis on the eldest  child
    and he gave adequate reasons why it would not be in  the  child's  best
    interests to return to Bolivia and why it would not  be  reasonable  to
    expect him to leave the UK.  I refer specifically  to  [51(ii)],  [61],
    [62], [63], [67], [76] and [77].

20.  It is clear that the Judge recognised the distinction  between  British
    citizen children and non EEA Children. However, he also recognised  the
    significance of  seven  years'  residence  (this  is  recognised  as  a
    significant period  in  the  Immigration  Rules).  He  noted  that  the
    appellant's eldest child had been here  for  nine  years.  He  properly
    directed himself at [60].

21.  The grounds do not establish  that  the  decision  (that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect the eldest child to leave the UK) is  irrational
    or perverse or inconsistent with established jurisprudence. The  eldest
    child is a qualifying child for the purposes of the  2002  Act  and  in
    these circumstances (having found that it was not reasonable for him to
    leave the UK) it follows that the  appellant  would  satisfy  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  On this basis  it  was  open  to  the
    Judge to allow the appeal. Having concluded that it was not  reasonable
    to expect the eldest child to leave the UK the appellants appeal has to
    succeed under Article 8 pursuant to section 117B (6) of the 2002 Act.

22.  There was no material error of law. I maintain the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Herbert to allow the appellant's appeal and dismiss
    the application of the Secretary of State. I  have  made  an  anonymity
    direction in the light of the appellant's children.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                          Joanna McWilliam      Date 8 January 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam







