
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/34191/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 9 October 2017                     |On 23 October 2017                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 HAROT SINGH
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A Jones, Counsel instructed by Farani-Javid-
Taylor Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  a  decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal  to  allow  an  appeal  by  the  respondent,
       hereinafter "the claimant", against a decision of the  Secretary  of
       State to refuse to vary his leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
       and to remove him by way of  directions  under  Section  47  of  the
       Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

    2. The Secretary of State did not appear before the First-tier Tribunal
       when the claimant was represented by Counsel (not Miss Jones).   The
       First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision  and  reasons  shows  that  the
       claimant's application was refused because the  Secretary  of  State
       decided that he had submitted a TOEIC certificate  from  Educational
       Testing Services  that  was  obtained  improperly  as  a  result  of
       impersonation.  The Judge directed herself, correctly that where  an
       allegation of dishonesty is made it is for the Secretary of State to
       lay the evidential foundation necessary to support the contention.

    3. The Judge then examined the bundle of documents from  the  Secretary
       of State which she considered  and  summarised.   She  explained  at
       paragraph 5 of her Decision and Reasons that the Secretary of  State
       had produced a copy of the claimant's application form, form CAS, e-
       mail correspondence, a copy of the disputed TOEIC certificate and  a
       sheet headed "ETS SELT source data and MIDA match  data  sheet"  and
       the Reasons for Refusal Letter.

    4. The judge noted that the Secretary of State had chosen not to attend
       and that she  decided  to  continue  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
       absence.

    5. It is clear from  the  decision  and  reasons  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge was well aware of the decision of this Tribunal in SM
       and Qadir v SSHD (ETS - Evidence -  Burden  of  Proof)  [2016]  UKUT
       00229 (IAC).  It follows therefore that  the  Judge  knew  that  the
       Tribunal had decided that in "ETS cases" what might  be  called  the
       "usual evidence" establishes a prima facie case that  a  certificate
       was obtained improperly.  It does not follow from  this  that  every
       time the Secretary of State asserts  that  a  certificate  had  been
       obtained improperly there is evidence to show that  the  certificate
       had been obtained improperly and still less does it follow that that
       evidence was produced to support the Secretary of State's case.

    6. Significantly the judge said at paragraph 13 of her decision:

  "The difficulty with  the  refusal  letter  is  that  the  assertions  of
  "significant evidence" of fraudulent certificate are not supported by any
  material evidence.  The statements made in the refusal  letter  are  just
  that.  The two data sheets merely record the results as  being  "invalid"
  against the Appellant's name.  However, there is no  continuity  evidence
  to show how this conclusion was reached.  The burden is initially on  the
  "respondent" to show that fraud has been at play in the application.  The
  Respondent has failed to do this due to a total lack of evidence in  this
  case.  For these reasons the appeal succeeds as the refusal  was  not  in
  accordance with the law."

    7. Miss Jones took me through the necessary documents but I could  find
       nothing that  established  that  this  claimant  had  done  anything
       improper in any way.  Mr Bramble could not  say  much  against  this
       because Miss Jones and the First-tier Tribunal Judge were right. The
       evidence actually produced was not enough to show that the  claimant
       was one of those who had been identified as a cheat.

    8. The grounds supporting the application assert that the judge has not
       given proper reasons for her decision  that  no  evidence  has  been
       provided.  This  is  quite  wrong.   A  reason  has  been  given  at
       paragraph 13.  It is  that  there  a  gap  in  the  evidence.   This
       paragraph effectively answers both points.

    9. It is profoundly unsatisfactory  that  the  Secretary  of  State  is
       willing to decide that a person is a liar and a cheat who should not
       be allowed to remain in the United Kingdom but is  not  prepared  to
       put up the evidence to support that conclusion.  For my  part  I  do
       not understand why the  Secretary  of  State  does  not,  routinely,
       assemble the evidence in support of such a contention  and  identify
       it properly in the refusal letter before there is any question of an
       appeal.  Such a process might draw the attention of the Secretary of
       State to a deficiency in the evidence before a  decision  was  made.
       The evidence can then be obtained or the decision changed before any
       harm is done.

   10. I have no desire whatsoever for people  who  cheat  the  immigration
       system to be allowed to carry on cheating and if their dishonesty is
       detected they should expect short shrift but if the evidence is  not
       there the allegation should not be made.  It cannot be assumed  that
       evidence exists because the Secretary of State says that it  exists.
       It is within the experience of the Tribunal  that  there  have  been
       occasions where documents have been identified and relied upon which
       when read carefully and properly do not bear the meaning  attributed
       to  them.   This  is  not  because  the  Secretary   of   State   is
       fundamentally idle  or  malign  but  because  a  lot  of  cases  are
       processed and sometimes mistakes are made. It concerns me that there
       is a systemic failure here to  identify  and  prepare  the  evidence
       relied upon to show dishonesty before reaching the conclusion that a
       person  has  been  dishonest.   This  rather  casual   approach   is
       compounded by failing to turn up in a case where  the  Secretary  of
       State and to adduce evidence.  It is regrettable that claimants  are
       treated like this.

   11. I can find no fault whatsoever in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal and I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal against  that
       decision.







|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 20 October 2017               |
|Judge                                |                                     |



