
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34639/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 November 2018                  |On 18 December 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                     SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                           mr MD Nuruzzaman Shahin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Canter of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 1  January  1983.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 11 August 2005 with a student visa  valid
    to 31 January 2008.  He was granted three further periods of leave as a
    student between 1 February 2008 and 31 October  2010.   On  15  October
    2010 he applied for further leave as a Tier 4  (General)  Student.   He
    varied that application on 26 September 2011 when he applied for  leave
    as the spouse of a person present and settled in  the  United  Kingdom.
    That was granted from 22 January  2013  to  22  January  2015.   On  31
    December 2014 he submitted a further application for  indefinite  leave
    to remain as the spouse of a person present and settled in  the  United
    Kingdom, but that application  was  refused  by  a  decision  dated  24
    November 2015, which was made under paragraphs 322(5), 276B, S-LTR.1.6.
    and Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.   He  appealed  against  that
    decision but his  appeal  was  refused  in  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A M Black promulgated on 22 June 2017.

2.   His applications for permission to appeal  were  refused  both  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal and in the Upper Tribunal, but the Upper Tribunal's
    refusal to allow permission was quashed in the High Court of Justice on
    1 June 2018 on the basis that it was arguable that the decisions of the
    Upper Tribunal and the FTT were wrong in law and that the claim  raised
    an important point of principle.

3.   The case came before us in order for us to determine whether there  was
    any error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    grounds of appeal were  lengthy  and  need  not  be  repeated  at  this
    juncture.  We shall refer to them as we go along.  Put shortly, it  was
    asserted that the respondent had failed to follow certain  guidance  in
    relation to the process whereby the assessment of what might be  called
    "non-convictions" was undertaken, that being the  basis  on  which  the
    refusal of leave was made.  Secondly, there were a number  of  detailed
    challenges to findings of fact.  The details of the criticisms will  be
    made clear.  There was a challenge to  the  FTT's  findings  about  the
    appellant's credibility and that of his wife.  There was a challenge to
    the FTT's alleged failure to follow guidance in her assessment  of  the
    long residence requirements, particularly in  relation  to  his  family
    life.   Lastly,  the  assessment  of   insurmountable   obstacles   was
    challenged.

4.   We shall deal with each of these in turn  but  we  do  not  propose  to
    rehearse at length the contents of the FTT's decision.

Failure to Follow Guidance - Ground 1

5.   The background to all this is that many of the  matters  relied  on  by
    the respondent in refusing leave to remain predated a previous grant or
    grants.  The FTT referred to this specifically at  paragraph  20.   The
    respondent's guidance on general grounds for refusal applicable  as  at
    the date of the decision says the following:

         "Before you refuse leave to remain under paragraph 322(5), you must
         first refer your decision to a senior case worker.   ...  when  you
         consider such a case you must only take  into  account  information
         which is new and was not known to the Home Office at  the  time  of
         any previous decision.  You must not  take  action  on  information
         which was known to the Home Office at  the  time  of  the  previous
         decision, unless advised by a senior caseworker."

    Paragraph 20 goes on as follows:

         "This guidance does not preclude basing a decision  on  information
         already known to the respondent at the date of an earlier decision;
         it requires that a senior case worker is consulted.   The  guidance
         is consistent with Omojudi v UK (Application 1820/02) in which  the
         ECtHR held that,  although  the  applicant  had  committed  several
         earlier offences, these had been effectively waived by the UK  when
         granting him indefinite leave to remain.  So only the  most  recent
         offence which caused his imprisonment  and  subsequent  deportation
         was to be weighed against him in the Article 8  balance.   In  that
         case, this was outweighed by the applicant's  length  of  residence
         and strong family ties in the UK."

    The FTT went on to say that the respondent must have taken into account
    the appellant's "non-convictions"  when  deciding  to  grant  leave  to
    remain as a spouse of a British citizen  and  it  could  be  reasonably
    inferred that she did not consider those matters  engaged  the  general
    grounds of refusal.  She took account of the fact that  the  respondent
    did not consider matters predating January 2013  to  be  sufficient  to
    engage the general grounds.  She found however that those events  might
    nonetheless be of relevance to the respondent's decision in 2015.   The
    respondent was entitled at that time to take  a  holistic  approach  in
    assessing the appellant's conduct and character  at  that  time,  given
    that she had been alerted by the police  that  his  history  gave  them
    cause to believe he was a sexual  predator.   To  have  done  otherwise
    might have undermined her assessment  of  any  risk  arising  from  his
    remaining in the UK.  It was not inappropriate for her  to  assess  new
    information in the context of the pre-2013 information.


    Mr Canter did not refer to Omojudi but relied on  SF  (Albania)  [2017]
    UKUT 00120 (IAC).  There was no ground of appeal in  the  instant  case
    that the decision was "not in accordance with the law" but that did not
    matter since SF stated that

         "Even in the absence of a 'not in accordance with the  law'  ground
         of appeal, the Tribunal ought to  take  the  Secretary  of  State's
         guidance into account if it points clearly to a particular  outcome
         in the instant case.  Only in that way can consistency be  obtained
         between those cases that do, and those  cases  that  do  not,  come
         before the Tribunal."

    He accepted that this was not a judicial review but the Tribunal  ought
    to take the guidance into account.  Even if it were to be thought  that
    the pre-2013 matters should  be  considered  as  part  of  the  overall
    picture it was not legitimate to look at non-sexual matters,  of  which
    there were a number, as will be shown later.


    Unfortunately for this argument, it was pointed out by Mr Jarvis,  both
    in his skeleton and in his argument that in  fact  the  case  had  been
    considered by a senior caseworker so the guidance  had  been  followed.
    Mr Canter was unaware of this but did not dispute what was said  by  Mr
    Jarvis.  He pointed out however that there was no evidence  before  the
    FTT about it.  In our opinion, even if there had been no referral to  a
    senior  caseworker  this  would  not  have  prevented  the   FTT   from
    considering all of the evidence.  The guidance relates to the  question
    of processing of the application  and  it  is  difficult  to  see  what
    difference it would make to the FTT's assessment of the evidence if  it
    were or were not referred to a senior caseworker.  We  accept  that  it
    was so referred, however, and we do not consider it necessary for there
    to have been any evidence about  it.   Any  challenge  to  the  process
    should have been made by way of judicial review.  SF (Albania)  was  of
    no assistance to the appellant.  There was no question of the  guidance
    pointing clearly to a particular outcome in the instant  case.   As  Mr
    Jarvis pointed out in his skeleton, it  was  impossible  reasonably  to
    suggest that the Home Office would do anything other than re-refuse  on
    the basis of the post-2013 evidence, to which we shall turn.

6.   There is accordingly nothing in the first ground of appeal.

Ground 2: Failure Properly to Assess "Non-Convictions"

7.   In order to understand the context of this  it  will  be  necessary  to
    give a brief outline of the basis of the refusal of leave to remain.

     The appellant had no convictions but the  refusal  letter  referred  to
    eleven "non-convictions", being three counts of rape of a  female,  two
    sexual assaults, one offence of controlling prostitutes, one possession
    of Class B drugs with intent to supply, two  malicious  communications,
    one of which was with criminal damage, and one harassment.  It was said
    that the appellant was well-known for running an  escort  agency  which
    offered extra services such as sexual intercourse.  His presence in the
    UK was said not to be conducive to the public good because his  conduct
    made it undesirable for him to remain in the UK.  He had completed  ten
    years' residence in the UK with lawful leave but did not qualify  under
    the  long  residence  provisions  in  paragraph  276B  because  it  was
    undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave to remain.   His  ties
    to the UK were not sufficiently strong to outweigh the  conclusions  in
    the police evidence.  His presence in the UK was not conducive  to  the
    public interest (paragraph S-LTR.1.6.).  Paragraph EX.1. of Appendix FM
    had been considered in the light of his relationship with  his  British
    partner who was serving a prison sentence and was due to be released on
    11 August 2016.  He could maintain contact with her as he currently did
    while she was in prison if he were removed to Bangladesh.   There  were
    no insurmountable obstacles to the couple continuing their family  life
    in Bangladesh.  As regards his private life there were  no  significant
    obstacles  to  his  integration  on  return  to  Bangladesh  (paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi)).

      The  respondent  produced  a  bundle  containing  certain   supporting
    documentation, a statement of a DC Yau, the  appellant's  passport  and
    the Reasons for Refusal Letter as well as  two  supplementary  bundles,
    all as set out in paragraph  6.   The  appellant  lodged  a  bundle  of
    documents, as detailed in paragraph 7, including his own and his wife's
    further statements dated 24 May 2017.

     The judge sets out the evidence which she heard and that  contained  in
    the various documents.  Except for one or two particular criticisms, no
    substantive criticism was made of the manner in  which  she  summarised
    the evidence.

8.   The respondent's representative made a  number  of  additional  points.
    The  Metropolitan  Police  Service  had  provided   evidence   of   the
    appellant's criminal history and intelligence as  to  his  conduct  and
    character.  His evidence and that of his wife was not credible.  It was
    inconsistent, particularly as regards his escort agency business.   His
    circumstances which gave rise to his various arrests  as  a  result  of
    complaints by potential employees of the escort  agency  were  similar,
    albeit he had not been convicted of any offence.  His own  evidence  as
    regards complaints was not consistent.  He  had  visited  his  wife  in
    prison but those visits were few and far between.  Full details of  the
    submissions can be found in paragraph 4.

     The grounds of appeal are summarised in paragraph 5  and  need  not  be
    repeated here.

     The FTT's findings and  conclusions  commence  at  paragraph  12.   She
    correctly identifies that the approach in Farquharson (removal -  proof
    of conduct) [2013] UKUT 146 (IAC), had to  be  followed.   She  made  a
    number of specific findings in relation to  allegations  of  particular
    conduct and we will turn to those now when dealing with the  particular
    criticisms of them

9.  The first matters  dealt  with  are  said  to  be  criminal  damage  and
    malicious communication on 14 January and 4 February 2009.   These  are
    referred to in paragraphs 24 to 28. Mr Canter was content  to  rely  on
    the FTT's summary of evidence.  He submitted that the  complainant  did
    not  see  the  appellant  break  the  window  but  there  was   certain
    circumstantial  evidence.  The  appellant  was  not  charged  with  any
    offence.  The respondent's position was that the  finding  was  plainly
    lawful and followed the guidance derived from Farquharson.  The  ground
    of appeal was simply a disagreement and re-argument.  The  CRIS  record
    was that the complainant had  worked  for  an  escort  agency  and  the
    appellant had paid for her company.  He had become infatuated with  her
    and this led to him making phone calls and texts  which  had  made  her
    feel uncomfortable.  She was at home one evening and that was  why  she
    ignored the text from the  appellant.   He  was  standing  outside  her
    window shouting at her.  He would not leave and wanted her to  look  at
    the text message.  She heard the glass in the window, which he had been
    knocking,  break.   An  argument  ensued  and  he  clapped  his  hands,
    whereupon five males appeared and stood beside him.  Two days later she
    received a message which she believed was from the appellant and  which
    referred to his having broken her window because of her  having  a  sex
    client with her.  The criminal damage matter was not taken any  further
    because the complainant did not see the appellant break the window.  We
    are quite satisfied that there was ample evidence for the FTT  to  draw
    the  inference  that  the  appellant  broke  the  window,  despite  the
    complainant not actually seeing it, at least to the civil, if  not  the
    criminal, standard.  Paragraph 26 refers to the  complainant  being  at
    home alone when she received a text from the appellant  threatening  to
    kill her.  Several attempts were made by the police to contact  her  in
    order to provide her telephone as evidence, but she did not respond  to
    repeated messages and the case  was  closed.   The  appellant  did  not
    accept anything which was said within the allegation, according to  his
    statement.  The text threatening  to  kill  her  was  recorded  by  the
    police.  There was ample evidence upon which the FTT Judge could  reach
    the conclusion which she did.

10.  The second incident relates to harassment between 1 and 9 August  2009.
     This is  dealt  with  from  paragraphs  29  to  35.   The  complainant
    contacted officers regarding threatening messages he had received.   He
    had met the appellant while studying at London Metropolitan  University
    and  referred  to  the  appellant  running  an  escort   agency.    The
    complainant worked  for  him  over  the  previous  three  months.   The
    appellant had become upset because the complainant had undertaken other
    work for another escort agency.  Police  had  seen  prints  of  e-mails
    dated 9 August 2009:

         "... implying there will be violence, the  susoect  (sic)  is  also
         asaid  (sic)  to  have  attended  the  old  address  of   the   VIW
         (victim/informant/witness) with a large group of males and demanded
         to know where he was.  He was told by the landlady that he was away
         on holiday and this prompted the suspect to  text  the  VIW  saying
         that a named associate had a brother who worked in the  police  and
         that they could track him down at the press of a button".

     The e-mail address on the e-mails was in the name of the  appellant  at
    London Metropolitan University.  The complainant decided to change  his
    telephone number, block the appellant from emailing him and move  to  a
    new address.  The police concluded that apart  from  vague,  ambiguous,
    veiled threats, the suspect had  not  actually  done  anything  to  the
    complainant.  When they spoke to the appellant he said that he and  the
    complainant  were  best  friends.   He  was  given  a  first   instance
    harassment warning and told to cease contact with the complainant.   He
    complied with this.  The  complainant  withdrew  the  allegation  on  3
    September 2009 on the basis that it had  been  a  misunderstanding  and
    that they were friends again.  However, on 2 October 2009  he  reported
    he had received threatening texts from the appellant and  that  he  was
    going to cut him up.  He also threatened to beat up the complainant and
    break into his property. The complainant went and told  the  police  he
    did not want any further action to be taken  and  that  he  had  become
    friends with the appellant again.  A police  officer  later  considered
    the original text messages and formed  the  view  that  these  did  not
    contain any threats and also thought  the  complainant  was  not  being
    completely  open  and  honest.   Reasons  for  that  were  given.   The
    appellant had complied with the terms of  the  harassment  warning  and
    there was a dearth of evidence to substantiate the  second  allegation.
    It was considered that the complainant had given false information with
    regard to the date of changing his mobile telephone  number.   The  FTT
    thought that the fact that a first instance warning had been given  was
    indicative of threats having been perceived by the complainant to  have
    been made by him, albeit on their face the  texts  did  not  appear  to
    amount to threats per se.  This was corroborated in  her  view  by  the
    fact that the appellant accepted the warning.  It was pointed out by Mr
    Canter that there was no question of accepting  the  warning.   He  was
    just given it and that was it.  He accepted however  that  he  complied
    with  it.   The  FTT  found  that  the  appellant  had   harassed   the
    complainant.  We are satisfied that this was a  finding  open  to  her.
    She was not obliged to reach the same  view  as  the  police.   In  any
    event, even if she was wrong about this it is of no materiality in  the
    overall context of this case.

11.    The next matter was possession of cannabis with intent to  supply  on
    29 October 2009.  This is set out at paragraphs 36 to 40.   It  appears
    that an informant called the police because someone was trying  to  get
    into his house and he was concerned for his key worker who was  waiting
    outside.  The police attended and met a complainant with mental  health
    or learning difficulties.  He said that the appellant had been  invited
    into the premises by another person  and  had  "taken  it  over".   The
    complainant wanted the police to take the appellant's  belongings.   He
    told them that he had found a large bag of herbal cannabis  within  his
    belongings.  He also reported that the appellant ran an escort  agency.
    Officers found four mobile telephones with the appellant's  belongings,
    which they took, including  the  drugs.   The  appellant  attended  the
    police station and was arrested on suspicion of possession with  intent
    to supply and the theft  of  various  personal  documents  including  a
    driving licence, cheque book  and  banking  correspondence  in  another
    person's name.  He denied any involvement when he was interviewed.   He
    said he had been  duped  into  renting  a  room  in  the  complainant's
    building and that there were ten other people at the address.   He  had
    heard a named individual and others talking about drugs  and  about  an
    escorting company and that they were dealing on the kitchen table.   He
    sold bankcards and driving licences.  He  was  asked  why  he  did  not
    report this to the police and he said he wanted to find a  new  address
    first and be safe before he told the police.  He said he had given  the
    passport and his laptop to the named individual  and  others  and  that
    they were using his mobile telephone for calls. He denied knowing about
    the cannabis or  the  documents  in  other  people's  names.   Forensic
    examination revealed that the  cannabis  had  been  widely  handled  by
    occupants at the address and the police took no action.  There  was  no
    evidence that the drugs belonged to the appellant.  They were found  in
    a flat with multiple occupants and handed to the police by a vulnerable
    adult.  There was no suspicious  reporting  of  duplicate  licences  or
    stolen licences.  No suspicious activity had been  noted  on  the  bank
    accounts.  The appellant had said that cannabis was being sold from the
    address.  He did not deny that cannabis was found in his belongings nor
    that he had four mobile telephones or a  driving  licence  and  banking
    documentation in the name of another person.  The FTT  found  that  his
    account that he did not report the matter  to  the  police  because  he
    wanted to wait until he had found somewhere safe did not have the  ring
    of truth about it.  It would not have been  necessary  for  him  to  be
    identified as the source of  the  information.   The  evidence  of  the
    complainant to the effect that he had taken over  the  property  had  a
    ring of truth about it.  The appellant's reference to another  resident
    running an escort agency was noted.  It was found incredible  that  the
    appellant who was a computer science student at the time would give the
    passport on his laptop and lend his mobile phone to people whom he knew
    to be dealing in drugs when he intended to report them to  the  police.
    On balance the First-tier Tribunal preferred the account given  to  the
    police by the vulnerable complainant who had the  support  of  his  key
    workers.  The fact that he went to the police was consistent  with  the
    appellant having moved into  the  property  and  "engaged  in  criminal
    activity there".  Mr Canter criticised this finding.  The cannabis  had
    been widely handled by  others  and  there  was  no  evidence  that  it
    belonged to the  appellant.   The  judge  did  not  say  what  criminal
    activities she found that he  was  involved  in.   The  fact  that  she
    disbelieved what he had to say did not prove anything.  She should have
    said that she did not accept his evidence but the  allegation  was  not
    proved.


    We do not agree that the FTT in rejecting the appellant's account found
    that that proved the opposite.  There is no basis for saying  that  she
    did anything other than put it to the side.  The other evidence set out
    in the paragraph to which we have referred seems  to  us  to  be  quite
    sufficient  to  find  that  the  appellant  was  in  fact  involved  in
    possession  of  cannabis  with  intent  to  supply.   It   is   perhaps
    unfortunate that she did refer to that crime specifically.  It  is  not
    clear whether she accepted that he was dealing in drugs or  dealing  in
    stolen property and we agree with  Mr  Canter  that  the  reference  to
    "criminal activity" is not clear enough to enable the appellant to know
    precisely what she found him to be doing.   However,  given  the  other
    findings which she made, and which we find she was entitled to make, we
    do not consider this to be material.


12.  The next incident referred to is on 23 September 2010 and is  described
    as "malicious communications".  It is dealt with in  paragraphs  41  to
    44.  This relates to an entry in the CRIS report about the  complainant
    attending a bank and lending the appellant �2,000.  In  due  course  he
    contacted the appellant by telephone to ask for the money back and  the
    appellant said he had no intention of repaying it and  became  abusive.
    Certain detailed threats are set out in paragraph 41.  The  complainant
    said he did not wish to pursue the  investigation.   A  first  instance
    warning was given to the appellant by  telephone.   The  appellant  now
    accepted that he owed this person money and that he could not  pay  him
    back straightaway but said he was racially abused by him.  There is  no
    mention of this in the CRIS report.  The FTT noted that she would  have
    expected this to have been noted.  The appellant made no  reference  in
    his statement to having been given a first instance warning.  She found
    therefore that his evidence was not an accurate reflection of events as
    recorded in the CRIS report and downgraded the outcome.   The  FTT  was
    satisfied that the threats were made.   Mr  Canter  accepted  that  the
    appellant did not say that he had been given a warning but said it  was
    wrong to say that his account was not an  accurate  reflection  of  the
    CRIS report.  We disagree.  The failure to refer to the warning renders
    his account of events inaccurate and the FTT was entitled to  make  the
    finding which she did.

13.   The next event referred to is a sexual  assault  on  a  female  on  31
    January 2011.  Mr Canter said that the FTT had  fairly  summarised  the
    CRIS report.  She dealt with the matter between paragraphs 45  and  50.
    Mr Canter submitted, however, that her conclusions were perverse.   The
    alleged sexual assault, the details of which are set out  in  paragraph
    45 and which we need not repeat, was said to  have  taken  place  in  a
    dormitory.  The police spoke to other people who were in the dormitory.
     None of them heard or saw anything.  The police  were  concerned  that
    the complainant did not tell her friend about the  assault  and  indeed
    fell asleep next to her alleged attacker after the alleged assault.

     Mr Canter accepted that this would not necessarily show  that  she  was
    not telling the truth.  However, she was  never  cross-examined.   That
    was a fundamental criticism of  the  Nexus  system  and  indeed  was  a
    criticism which he made in  respect  of  a  number  of  the  particular
    instances of conduct referred to in the decision.  He did  not  indulge
    in a root and branch criticism of the Nexus system but it brought  into
    focus the standard of proof.  It showed the importance  of  being  very
    careful in analysing evidence.  In a theme which he developed later, he
    said it was important not to make mistakes.   Given  the  circumstances
    set out in the paragraphs  to  which  I  have  referred,  there  was  a
    significant level of doubt and it was perverse to find on  the  balance
    of probabilities that this conduct  occurred.   The  skeleton  argument
    pointed out the fact that the judge, in paragraph 50,  referred  to  an
    alleged inconsistency in the appellant's evidence in that  on  the  one
    hand he said he fell asleep when the  complainant  was  standing  naked
    nearby and on the other he was excited (at another stage) when  he  saw
    her naked body.  There was said to be  no  necessary  inconsistency  in
    this account and indeed this was not a point raised by  the  respondent
    but was something that the judge raised  for  the  first  time  in  the
    decision.  It was not put to the appellant and he had no opportunity to
    respond to it.  The judge said that she gave little weight to the  fact
    that other residents did not hear the complainant during  the  assault.
    It was not a prolonged incident and occurred at night when others would
    have been asleep.  Nor  did  she  consider  it  unreasonable  that  the
    complainant went back to sleep in her bunk near the appellant.  She had
    repelled  him  and  he  had  complied  with  her  instruction  to  stop
    assaulting her.  This was a dormitory and she would have drawn  comfort
    from the presence of others in the room who would have come to her  aid
    if the appellant had assaulted her again  or  refused  to  stop.   This
    latter finding perhaps enters into the realms of  speculation  but  her
    overall finding that the conduct took place is unchallengeable.  It was
    a matter for her to determine  whether  the  appellant's  evidence  was
    inconsistent.  She was entitled to find that it was.  It was  suggested
    in the skeleton that she had  reversed  the  burden  of  proof  in  her
    reasoning.  We do not accept that.  She has rejected the account of the
    appellant but has not as a result believed the opposite.

     We do not consider that there is  anything  in  the  criticism  of  her
    findings.

14.    The next matter is the rape of a female over 16 years of  age  on  19
    July 2011.  This is set out between paragraphs 51 and 66.  The  offence
    was said to have taken place at the appellant's  residence.   The  CRIS
    noted that the appellant ran an escort agency from these  premises  and
    two witnesses described in the CRIS as "employees of the company"  were
    also on the premises at the time.  The complainant was there for a  job
    interview.  The appellant allegedly took her into a bedroom and  locked
    the door  while  the  witnesses  remained  in  the  living  room.   The
    complainant and the appellant emerged about 30 minutes  later  and  the
    complainant said she was going to call the police because the appellant
    had had sexual intercourse with her against her will.  She then  called
    the police and the appellant was arrested.   During  a  search  of  the
    property police found a camera containing sexually explicit  images  of
    individuals.  The complainant told the police that the company name was
    "Soulmate".  She discussed the job with him and was  told  it  involved
    rich people paying for time/company with  no  sex  involved.   She  was
    asked to take off her T-shirt to see her size  and  she  complied  with
    this.  She  then  gave  an  account  of  the  appellant  having  sexual
    intercourse with her even though she told him that she did not want  to
    have sex.  One of the witnesses gave an account recorded  in  the  CRIS
    report.  She had put an advertisement on Gumtree offering her  services
    for babysitting and had received a call from the appellant saying  that
    he was calling from Soulmate escort agency.  He  said  she  could  earn
    �400 on a bad night and �700 on a good night.   When  she  attended  he
    told her that prostitution was illegal and the escort agency  was  just
    for spending time with others and keeping them company.   She  reported
    that the appellant had told her to go into a bedroom and had asked  her
    to expose her breasts and kissed her before pushing her onto  the  bed.
    He said that he had thought she was open-minded and he had made it  his
    job to check her out as he did not want just anyone  working  for  him.
    He could not give her a job if he did not check her over.  She did  not
    really want to have sex with him but she wanted the job  and  had  sex.
    He then took photos of her for his website.  She left and  arranged  to
    return to two days later.  The appellant was not there but  he  arrived
    later and told her that she had missed loads of jobs over the  weekend.
    He told her that two girls were coming to be interviewed and then  said
    that he had cancelled one as she was Romanian and  already  experienced
    and she already had a pimp.  Later another girl turned up but he stated
    that he did not like her and he did not have  sex  with  her.   Another
    girl (recorded  as  the  complainant),  was  coming  for  an  interview
    according to the appellant and she  arrived  half-an-hour  later.   The
    appellant took her into the bedroom while the others  remained  in  the
    living room.  He called one of them in the living room to  bring  in  a
    condom.  When they came out the complainant started crying  saying  she
    felt cheap and dirty and that he had "come  up  her".   She  asked  the
    appellant for money for the morning after pill but he refused  to  give
    her any as she worked for him.  He then said he had  changed  his  mind
    about giving her a job and called her names.  The complainant  said  if
    he did not give her the money she would call the police and she did so.
     This account was corroborated by the second  female  who  was  in  the
    living room when  the  alleged  rape  occurred  in  the  bedroom.   The
    complainant did not co-operate with the police and said  that  sex  had
    been consensual.  The appellant gave an account which was  recorded  on
    CRIS.  He said that in about 2008 he bought the  domain  name  for  the
    Soulmate escort agency.  He was not running the  business  himself  but
    was completing work on the website, ensuring the company name came  out
    top when searched for in Google.  The name  was  rented  out  to  other
    agencies for short periods of time and was given back.  He  decided  to
    run the agency himself in 2009.  The agency suffered due  to  financial
    constraints.  He married in April 2010 and continued running the agency
    without his wife's knowledge.  He and his wife did not live together at
    the time.  He made a further attempt with the agency and  began  trying
    to recruit girls.  He had a number of checks and procedures  that  were
    followed during interviews, including checking ages and addresses.   He
    explained to the girls that he was only selling their time and not  for
    prostitution.  He also made sure they were open-minded for the clients.
     He did not like to say "don't do sex".  He told the  police  that  the
    complainant had asked him more than once in the bedroom if he wanted to
    have sex.  He told her it was not part of the interview process but she
    had stated that she needed to have sex with him as  she  was  desperate
    for a job.  They had unprotected sex and she went to  the  bathroom  to
    clean  herself.   He  was  asked  why  it  was  necessary  to  see  the
    complainant naked if the agency was only selling  her  time.   He  said
    there was no need to do that nor was there a need to touch them.   This
    had been optional and none of the girls had  to  accept.   He  accepted
    that this was  for  his  own  gratification.   He  agreed  it  was  not
    necessary but stopped short of agreeing to deliberate manipulation.  In
    short all three women reported that they had  sexual  intercourse  with
    the appellant in the course of the interview by him and this  had  been
    at his behest.  The complainant initially said it  took  place  without
    her consent but the other two did not object.  Semi-indecent images and
    advertisements  of  the  agency  were  found  on  examination  of   the
    appellant's laptops and cameras.  The CPS concluded that the  case  did
    not pass the evidential threshold test.  The appellant's account in his
    first appeal statement is set out at paragraph 61.  He accepted  having
    consensual sex with the complainant but did not rape her.  He regretted
    it because it was wrong as he was married.

     The FTT found at  paragraph  64  that  the  alleged  rape  occurred  in
    similar circumstances to the earlier  sexual  assault,  namely  in  the
    course of an interview  for  work  with  Soulmate's  with  complainants
    reporting that the appellant had taken them into the bedroom, told them
    to take their tops off and assaulted them.  The police report  referred
    to a website "dedicated to the support  of  and  advice  for  escorts".
    There was a post regarding Soulmate agency in which a girl stated  that
    Shahin asked her to have sex with him in order to get a job.   She  was
    in contact with the police  and  referred  to  being  manipulated  into
    having sex with the appellant.  If she did not she would  not  get  any
    work in London.   The  police  accepted  this  might  not  be  criminal
    behaviour but noted it displayed ongoing manipulation,  propensity  for
    lying and encouragement/incitement of prostitution.

     In paragraph 65 the FTT noted that she agreed with the  police  comment
    that there was no reason for the appellant  to  tell  women  to  remove
    their clothing in interview or to have sex with him if they were merely
    being employed to provide companionship.  The manner  in  which  sexual
    contact occurred, namely in the course of  a  so-called  interview  for
    work at the agency, was consistent with the witnesses and complainants'
    evidence of manipulation and abuse.  There was a significant  imbalance
    as between the appellant and each of the women.  She was satisfied that
    the number of reports by witnesses suggested the appellant  did  indeed
    engage in sexual touching and on occasion sexual intercourse with girls
    he was interviewing for roles within Soulmate.  She could see no reason
    to do so other than that put forward by the witnesses, namely  that  he
    wanted to check them out before  deciding  whether  to  take  them  on.
    There would also have been an element  of  sexual  gratification.   The
    similarity of their accounts was telling.  She found that  irrespective
    of whether or not the  complainant  told  the  appellant  she  did  not
    consent to sexual intercourse, she was manipulated into having sex with
    him during the interview and that she did not want to take part in that
    intercourse.

     Mr Canter said that there was an error in paragraph 64  where  the  FTT
    said that the alleged rape occurred in  similar  circumstances  to  the
    earlier sexual assault, namely in the course of her interview for  work
    with Soulmate's.  The earlier assault referred to was of  course  in  a
    dormitory in a hostel.  Mr Canter is right that there is an error.   He
    submitted that her findings in 65 and 66 in  relation  to  manipulation
    were  equivocal.   There  had  been  no  opportunity   to   cross   the
    complainant.  We accept that an error was made since the earlier sexual
    assault referred  to  did  not  involve  an  interview  for  work  with
    Soulmate's.  However, the allegation of rape was not found to have been
    proved by the FTT and, pace what Mr Canter was to say  in  relation  to
    paragraph 71, we do not consider this error to be material.  While  the
    FTT was wrong about the circumstances in which the first alleged sexual
    assault took place, had she approached the matter by looking  at  later
    assaults she would undoubtedly have come to the  same  conclusion,  and
    quite rightly in our view.

15.  Reference was then made to an alleged sexual assault on a female on  30
    October 2011.  The details of that are set out in her paragraphs 67  to
    71.  The complainant in this case contacted the appellant via a website
    to enquire about a job as an escort and was interviewed.  She said that
    the appellant told her that while it was not a requirement for  her  to
    have sex with her clients "it was expected".  The appellant  "asked  to
    have sex with her to say how she would react".  She consented in  order
    to get the job.  He took pictures  of  her  naked  for  the  Soulmate's
    website.  She stayed in the appellant's home at his proposal and in the
    early hours of the morning she woke  to  find  him  in  her  room.   He
    started touching her, including rubbing her vagina and she told him  to
    stop.  He became annoyed and left.  She told him that she did not  want
    to work for him any longer and he threatened to shoot her and  to  stab
    her.  She told the police and he was arrested.  She  reported  that  he
    had uploaded naked photographs of her on her own Facebook account and a
    friend  had  witnessed  these  photographs.   The  police  seized   the
    appellant's laptop, memory  stick,  memory  card,  digital  camera  and
    mobile phones.  He answered "No comment" to questions put at interview.
     It was not clear why no action was taken in relation to  the  Facebook
    account.  The FTT found that the allegations of threats  to  shoot  and
    stab the complainant were similar to those made in other  circumstances
    and to that extent were consistent with other  witnesses'  descriptions
    of the appellant's short temper and threatening behaviour.   This  gave
    credence to  the  complainant's  account.   The  allegation  of  sexual
    assault was similar to others made against the appellant  by  girls  in
    similar situations, namely either at the  interview  stage  or  in  the
    early days of working for him as an escort.  There was no motive for  a
    false allegation by the complainant.  The appellant's response  in  his
    first appeal statement was to reiterate his denial to the police at the
    time and maintain that denial.  The FTT preferred the  account  of  the
    complainant and went on to say that  it  was  "consistent  with  other,
    earlier, allegations of  sexual  assault  which  I  have  found  to  be
    reliable".  This was set out in paragraph 71 and Mr  Canter  said  that
    while the modus operandi was similar  to  that  in  the  second  sexual
    assault allegation (that of 19 July 2011) the  judge  fell  into  error
    when she said that it was consistent with  other  earlier  allegations.
    Had she said another earlier allegation instead of allegations  such  a
    criticism could not have been made.  It seems to us with  respect  that
    this is a very minor matter indeed, if indeed it is a mistake  at  all.
    While the circumstances of the offence are more similar  to  the  later
    allegation which involved an interview, they are also  consistent  with
    the allegation of sexual assault which did not  involve  an  interview.
    They were similar to the first allegation, for example, in respect that
    they involved an assault on the complainant when she  was  in  the  bed
    which had been allocated to her.   They  were  similar  to  the  second
    allegation in respect that they  were  at  or  about  the  time  of  an
    interview.

     In our view there is nothing in this point.

16.    The next matter was the alleged rape of a female  over  16  years  of
    age on 30 May 2014.  This was the first of what might be called the new
    non-convictions, in other words, the first matter which  postdated  the
    earlier grants of leave.

     The details are set out from paragraphs 72 to 76.  It was not cited  in
    the police statement of DC Yau (referred to in particular at  paragraph
    17 of the decision) and the judge found it was not proved.

17.  The next allegation related to a matter on  3  September  2014,  namely
    the alleged rape of a female over 16 years of age.  Details of this are
    set out at paragraphs 77 to 80.  At paragraph  79  the  FTT  said  that
    given the poor mental health of the complainant she was unable to  find
    her allegation of rape reliable.  But nonetheless she gives some weight
    to her evidence that the  appellant  wanted  sex  at  the  time  of  an
    interview and that he was a pimp.  The  complainant  had  worked  as  a
    prostitute in the past.  Her willingness to disclose to the police that
    she had worked as a prostitute suggested a degree  of  honesty  in  her
    evidence.  She was unable to make a finding as to whether  or  not  she
    consented to sex or whether or not she told the appellant as such,  but
    she did accept that the complainant had had sexual intercourse  in  the
    course of  an  interview.   She  also  accepted  that  the  complainant
    believed the appellant to be a pimp.  At paragraph 80 the  FTT  pointed
    out that the appellant said in his second statement that  he  found  it
    "very unfair that an allegation made by this kind of  person  could  be
    used against me by the Home Office".  She  commented  that  a  person's
    evidence is not unreliable merely because she is  a  prostitute  and/or
    has mental health issues and that this remark by the appellant  was  an
    indicator of his lack of  respect  for  vulnerable  women.   Mr  Canter
    criticised this.  She did not  find  the  allegation  proved  and  that
    should have been the end of it.  We disagree.  In our opinion the judge
    was perfectly entitled to note what  the  complainant  said  about  the
    appellant being a pimp, that was her  impression  of  the  matter,  and
    wanting sex during an interview as being  a  common  thread  throughout
    much of the allegations of adverse conduct.  We agree with Mr  Jarvis's
    comments to that effect.  We are satisfied that  she  was  entitled  to
    have regard to his attitude to women in her overall assessment  of  the
    appellant's credibility.

18.   The next matter is an allegation that the  appellant  was  controlling
    prostitution for gain.  It is dealt with at paragraphs 81 to  87.   The
    CRIS referred to a number of reports to the police over previous  years
    in which escorts alleged that sexual offences  were  committed  by  the
    appellant and an investigation was lodged as a result into  whether  or
    not he was involved  in  controlling  prostitutes  for  gain.   He  was
    arrested at his home  and  various  items  seized,  including  computer
    equipment and telephones.  He made no comment in response to  questions
    at interview.  The CRIS report stated that downloads were to be checked
    on the iPad, iPhone and two disposal phones.   The  laptop  was  to  be
    submitted to the  lab  for  e-mails.   There  was  no  indication  that
    downloads were to be  checked  on  the  laptop.   The  forensic  report
    confirmed that the appellant's emails showed  that  he  ran  an  escort
    agency called Soulmate's but there was no indication that it was  being
    used for the purposes of  prostitution.   The  FTT  inferred  from  the
    entries in the CRIS that only the e-mails were checked on  the  laptop.
    There was no  indication  that  deleted  files  had  been  accessed  or
    retrieved by the police.  It was noted in the CRIS that the phones  and
    laptop showed that the appellant was the manager  of  the  company  and
    that male customers did enquire about sex via e-mail but there  was  no
    evidence to suggest that sex was being offered or paid for.  There were
    no witnesses who were willing to give evidence of prostitution  and  at
    that time there was no other evidence to  support  a  charge.   In  his
    first appeal statement the appellant averred  that  the  escort  agency
    provided companionship to users of the  website.   He  considered  that
    some girls were sent by competitors to cause trouble  with  his  agency
    but this did not explain the similarities of the witnesses' evidence as
    regards his activities, conduct and behaviour.  He said that the  women
    were not permitted to offer any sexual services.  The FTT  pointed  out
    that this statement was at odds with the evidence  of  a  witness  that
    they were expected to do so.  The FTT did not accept that she  was  put
    up to this by a competitor and indeed no competitor had been identified
    by the appellant in any event.  The appellant said he would in the past
    agree to take photographs of  the  female  escorts  but  there  was  no
    explanation as to why he would take sexually  explicit  photographs  of
    the type found in his camera.  They  would  not  have  been  needed  to
    promote an agency providing  merely  companionship.   Such  photographs
    suggested he was providing sexual services to customers.  At  paragraph
    86 the FTT said that she found the appellant's evidence that he was put
    up  to  giving  a  "No  comment"  interview  by  his  solicitor  to  be
    disingenuous.  If that were the case, he would have been advised to  do
    so because it was in his  best  interests.   The  inference  from  such
    advice was that his account might incriminate  him.   We  are  somewhat
    uncomfortable with this paragraph in that not only does it  involve  an
    element of speculation but it might tend to indicate  an  inversion  of
    the onus of proof and  an  undermining  of  the  appellant's  right  to
    silence.  Nonetheless, given the vast quantity of material available to
    the FTT we do not consider this to be material in the circumstances.

19.  In oral argument Mr Canter said that the police  conducted  a  detailed
    and thorough investigation in April 2015 and no charge resulted.  There
    was support for the appellant's case as a whole.  At paragraph  87  the
    FTT said that she gave little weight to the appellant's suggestion that
    the lack of any incriminating  evidence  on  his  computers  and  other
    electronic  devices  indicated  he  was  not  involved  in  controlling
    prostitution for gain.  She said that the forensic examination  of  his
    computer and other devices appeared to have  been  limited  to  his  e-
    mails.  However, the CRIS said at page 32 that there were a  number  of
    forensic downloads.  The FTT's  conclusion  that  the  examination  was
    limited to e-mails was unsustainable.  This vitiated her findings.

     In our opinion this paragraph has to be read as a whole.  The FTT  went
    on to say that it was most unlikely he would have  mentioned  providing
    anything illegal in e-mails.  But, more  significantly,  she  said  the
    following:

         "In any event, I do not consider the lack of forensic  evidence  is
         sufficient to counter the various witnesses' evidence, cited in the
         CRIS reports, to the effect  that  the  appellant  was  engaged  in
         running a prostitution business through  his  escort  agency.   The
         evidence on the issue in  the  CRIS  reports,  citing  as  they  do
         various witnesses with personal experience of the  appellant's  own
         and his business activities, is sufficient to demonstrate that this
         is the case on the balance of probabilities."

     In our view the FTT in that passage was proceeding on  the  basis  that
    there was nothing to be found on any of the  electronic  devices.   She
    found that even if that were the case the other evidence  available  to
    her was sufficient to demonstrate that the appellant  was  involved  in
    controlling prostitution.  While Mr Canter pointed out that she did not
    specify who these witnesses  were,  we  are  satisfied  that  when  her
    findings as to the appellant's activities as a  whole  are  considered,
    including what she says at paragraphs 54 and 55, as well as  paragraphs
    64 and 65, she was entitled to reach the conclusions which she did.

20.    The last two matters are the alleged rape of a female over  16  years
    of age on 17 July 2015 and a sexual assault on a female on 23  December
    2015.  These two matters were added after the refusal letter,  bringing
    the total number of allegations to 13.  The first  of  these  is  dealt
    with at paragraphs 88 to  95  and  the  graphic  details  contained  in
    paragraph 89 in particular provide an ample basis for the  FTT  finding
    at  paragraph  95  that  the  appellant  was  engaged  in   controlling
    prostitution for financial gain.  This complainant was  a  student  who
    had been interviewed by the appellant and who had told her it was  part
    of the interview process that she had sex with him.  She knew of  other
    females who had been treated in the same way  and  gave  very  detailed
    evidence to the police about the alleged rape.  He told her  about  the
    types of sex she might be required to engage in with clients and showed
    her a list of terms or acronyms for different types of  activity.   She
    said the appellant threatened to kill her and said  he  was  "unhinged,
    paranoid and hell bent on controlling the girls.  He would always  snap
    at them".  She worked as a prostitute for him  for  about  three  weeks
    before realising she had caught a sexually transmitted disease from one
    of the clients.  She did not report the rape at the time.  At paragraph
    90 the FTT noted that the appellant was arrested in  January  2016  and
    provided a prepared statement to the effect that he had never  had  any
    sexual contact with  the  alleged  complainant,  with  or  without  her
    consent; the allegation was false.  He denied all  the  allegations  in
    her statement  and  answered  "No  comment"  to  a  lengthy  series  of
    questions at interview.

     The matter was reviewed by a Detective Inspector  who  decided  not  to
    take  it  further,  having  concerns  about  whether   the   rape   was
    sufficiently made out from an evidential point of  view.   The  reasons
    for that are set out at paragraph 91.

     At paragraph 93 the FTT noted that  "The  appellant  does  not  address
    this matter in his appeal statements or his oral evidence."

     Mr Canter said that this was wrong.  In his supplementary statement  he
    said, at paragraph 6 that:

         "The second incident relates to a report that was made  against  me
         in July 2015.  I did not have any sexual contact with  this  person
         and she did not go on to work as a  prostitute  for  me.   I  would
         emphasise that no further action was taken against me."

      Mr  Canter  criticised  the  FTT  for  not  taking  account  of   this
    supplementary statement.

     In our opinion, however, there is nothing in this.   The  supplementary
    statement in essence adds nothing to what is recorded at paragraph  90.
    The FTT knew perfectly well what the appellant's position was and  also
    knew that no action was taken against him.  The error at  paragraph  93
    is immaterial.

21.    A similar complaint  was  made  by  Mr  Canter  in  relation  to  the
    December 2015 matter.  This was an alleged sexual assault on  a  female
    said to have occurred at the appellant's home  address.   It  is  dealt
    with between paragraphs 96 to 98.  It  appeared  that  the  complainant
    attended his flat for an interview,  having  previously  worked  as  an
    escort.  Shortly after her arrival the appellant made advances to  her,
    which she rebuffed.  He tried to kiss her and she punched  him  on  the
    face.  The appellant called the police and, unaware of his  background,
    accepted at face value his account that  he  had  been  assaulted.   He
    asked  that  the  complainant  be  removed  from  the  premises,  which
    infuriated her.  Despite her explanation the police took no action.  On
    return to the station the officer learned of the  appellant's  previous
    history and this led him to believe the  complainant's  account.   They
    spent the next few days  trying  to  redress  the  situation  with  the
    complainant, without success.  She would not engage with them and as  a
    result no further action was taken against the appellant.

     At paragraph 98 it was said that the appellant had not  addressed  this
    issue in his evidence for the appeal.  She went  on  to  say  that  the
    appellant would have received the respondent's refusal decision  before
    this event took place and would have been  aware  of  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse his application because of the previous allegations.
     This would explain his  decision  to  call  the  police  when  he  was
    rebuffed by the  complainant.   He  would  have  appreciated  that  the
    complainant might report the assault to the police and that this  would
    reflect badly on him, given his previous history with the police.   She
    accepted the complainant's account, which was similar to that of  other
    complainants before her.

22.  As a matter of fact,  the  appellant  did  address  the  issue  in  the
    supplementary statement to which we  have  referred.   In  paragraph  5
    thereof he said the following:

         "The first stems from an incident on  23rd  December  2015  when  I
         called the police to make a complaint of  assault.   The  statement
         contains a summary of my account of the incident which is  correct.
         The woman attacked me after I told her that I could not help her by
         providing her with work as a prostitute.  I reject what is said  by
         DI Smithson 2nd page of PC Balderston's statement at  page  628  of
         the bundle) (sic) and emphasise that no further  action  was  taken
         against me."

23.  Mr Canter said there was no reference to this at all  in  the  judgment
    but paragraph 97 sets out the account which he gave to the  police  and
    the FTT's failure to notice what is in essence a repetition  of  it  in
    his  supplementary  statement  is  immaterial.   When  PC  Balderston's
    statement was examined by us it was  apparent  that  the  FTT  had  had
    regard to it, given the markings on it, and indeed that is reflected in
    her findings at paragraph 97.

Credibility Findings

24.  At paragraph 37 of his skeleton argument Mr Canter said that the  judge
    made it clear that she did not believe that the appellant and his  wife
    were credible witnesses (paragraph 100).  She gave reasons for this but
    some of the reasons did not stand up to scrutiny and therefore vitiated
    the conclusion.  The appellant had said that he lived together with his
    wife since his marriage and that was not necessarily inconsistent  with
    his wife spending significant amounts of time staying at  her  mother's
    house.  The FTT had thought that it  was  inconsistent.   Further,  the
    appellant's evidence that there was no  room  for  him  at  his  wife's
    parents' house was not necessarily inconsistent  with  the  appellant's
    wife initially hiding the marriage from  her  parents  and  then  later
    informing them and the parents not being happy about  it.   We  do  not
    consider that there is any force in  these  criticisms.   The  FTT  was
    entitled to find that these were inconsistencies, although other judges
    might not have done so.

Failure to Follow Policy Guidance

25.  This ground was similar to ground 1.  It was argued at the  hearing  of
    the appeal before the FTT that the decision did not give any weight  to
    the fact that the appellant was married to a British citizen  and  that
    this was not in accordance with the respondent's published guidance  on
    the application of the long residence requirements which appear in  the
    document "Guidance - Long Residence - Version 13.0 (8 May  2015)".   At
    page 39 of this document it states the following:

         "You  must  take  an  applicant's  strength  of  connections   into
         consideration in cases when you are considering refusing  on  other
         relevant points under paragraph 276B(ii). You must consider whether
         an applicant's connections with the UK would weigh against refusal.




         The family life a person has in the UK must be taken  into  account
         in assessing the strength of their connections to the UK. This  may
         be particularly strong if they are married to or have established a
         similar relationship with a settled person.  The  person  may  have
         other close relatives settled in the UK. The strength and closeness
         of the relationship will determine how strong a factor this may be.
          Similarly, if a person's close relatives are not in the  UK,  this
         may call into question the strength of the person's  connection  to
         the UK."

     The FTT had found, at paragraph 109, that the appellant's  family  life
    was "limited" but that it was accepted that the appellant  was  married
    and that the marriage was genuine and subsisting.  The  respondent  was
    obliged by her policy  to  take  this  into  account  in  reaching  her
    decision on long residence and the judge was obliged to take account of
    this in her decision.  Reference was made  again  to  the  case  of  SF
    (Albania).

     Mr Jarvis's position was that this challenge was  without  merit.   The
    guidance to  the  decision  maker  was  just  that  and  there  was  no
    requirement in the guidance or in the law for the SSHD to detail  every
    element of this consideration in their Reasons for Refusal Letter.   On
    appeal it was for a judge to consider the  relevant  Rule  schemes  and
    make findings of her own on the requirements.  Equally,  there  was  no
    longer any power for the  judge  to  expressly  find  that  the  SSHD's
    decision was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law.   Additionally,  the
    guidance was in discretionary terms and not expressly  binding  on  the
    judge in any event.  The judge's reasoning at paragraph 110 was  lawful
    and clear.  The particular nature of the relationship had to  be  taken
    into account and she did that.  It was  wholly  unsurprising  that  the
    judge should come to the conclusion which she did.

26.    The judge found, at  paragraph  110,  that  the  relationship  was  a
    shallow one, while  the  marriage  was  genuine  and  subsisting.   The
    appellant's wife gave inconsistent evidence about it.  The  couple  had
    rarely,  if  ever,  lived  together.   Their   evidence   about   their
    relationship was wholly unreliable.  The documentary evidence of  their
    contact during the two-and-a-half years the  appellant's  wife  was  in
    prison was notable for its irregularity.  Personal  contact  and  phone
    calls were  few  and  far  between.   This  did  not  suggest  a  close
    relationship.  Even now they did not live together full-time.  The fact
    they had had so little contact over the years and that they had limited
    contact now suggested that the relationship was not  a  close  one  and
    that they lived separate lives, albeit their marriage was  genuine  and
    their relationship was subsisting.  These are findings to which the FTT
    was entitled to come.  In any event, the  nature  of  the  relationship
    between the parties was something which the FTT was entitled to explore
    in considering the appellant's human rights claim.  She was entitled to
    reach her own conclusions on the  matter,  whatever  was  said  in  the
    guidance.  In any event, in our opinion, the appellant's  case  insofar
    as it is based on human rights grounds does not in  fact  get  off  the
    ground.  It is very weak indeed.

Insurmountable Obstacles

27.  It was pointed out by Mr Canter that at paragraph  111  the  FTT  found
    that there were no insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's and  his
    wife's family life continuing if he had to return to  Bangladesh.   Her
    task was to assess whether or not there were "insurmountable obstacles"
    that might  prevent  family  life  from  continuing.   She  had  become
    distracted by her findings on the quality of the family life.   In  one
    part of the appellant's wife's evidence (which the  judge  appeared  to
    accept) she said that the relationship was "a lot better than  before".
    Even if the family life between the couple  was  "shallow"  a  decision
    which meant that the two would be in different countries would  prevent
    family life from continuing.  Visits would not be possible because  her
    criminal licence which prevented her from leaving the UK did not expire
    until 2019.  The judge should have considered that.

28.   In  the  first  place  we  found  this  argument  to   be   distinctly
    unattractive.  The implications of it were that a couple  who  required
    to leave the UK for one reason or another but who had not committed any
    offences would just have to go.  On the  other  hand,  if  one  of  the
    partners had committed an offence which led to imprisonment and release
    on licence then they would be entitled to stay until  the  licence  had
    expired.  We do not consider  that  this  is  what  the  references  to
    "insurmountable obstacles" in the Rules  are  designed  to  cater  for.
    There are public policy considerations which weigh heavily against  the
    argument.  Mr Canter, we think, recognised this but nonetheless  argued
    that this was a matter which the FTT should have considered.

29.  In the second place, however, we  agree  with  Mr  Jarvis's  submission
    that this matter does not arise at all.  The FTT  had  found  that  the
    appellant did not meet the suitability  requirements  (S-LTR.1.6.)  and
    therefore he was precluded from taking any  benefit  from  Appendix  FM
    (see  R-LTRP.1.1.(c)(i)  and  R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(i)).   EX.1.  was  not   a
    freestanding  provision.   The  whole  argument  about   insurmountable
    obstacles was a "red herring".  We agree.

30.  Looking at  the  matter  in  the  whole,  we  agree  with  Mr  Jarvis's
    submission that, with a few minor exceptions which we have  noted,  the
    decision of the First-tier Judge was meticulous and  admirable  in  its
    application of the law and assessment of the  often  complex  evidence.
    She followed the approach in Farquharson.   The  complaints  about  the
    judgment were semantic and, in our opinion such errors as were shown to
    exist were immaterial.  The evidence that the appellant  committed  the
    sexual assaults and was controlling prostitution,  in  particular,  was
    overwhelming and we do not consider it remotely feasible  that  another
    judge considering it would have reached a  different  conclusion.   Not
    only was the judge entitled to find that the individual complaints  had
    the "ring of truth" about it as she said on some  occasions,  but  when
    the evidence was considered in the round there was a clear  pattern  of
    similar facts showing the appellant's temper, his reaction when he  was
    crossed, and his sexual predations.  While some of these did not amount
    to criminal offences, even on the  basis  of  the  evidence  which  was
    accepted, many of them did, at least on the balance  of  probabilities.
    Obviously there were a number of dissimilarities as well in the conduct
    but that is only to be expected.

31.  At paragraph 99 the FTT said the following:

         "Taking the CRIS entries as a whole, excluding the alleged  offence
         for which no CRIS report  has  been  provided,  together  with  the
         various reports of the witnesses and complainants (again, excluding
         those which are unsupported by  CRIS),  I  am  satisfied  that  the
         appellant has been running an escort agency  as  a  front  for  the
         control of prostitution for gain.  In the vernacular, he is a pimp.
          The consistency of the evidence, from various sources, with regard
         to his actions in the course of interviewing  prospective  workers,
         his photographic naked interviewees, his posting of photographs  of
         naked girls on the internet, his possession  of  sexually  explicit
         photographs on his camera, his threats to kill and harm individuals
         and their property together suggest a man with a very short  temper
         and no respect for vulnerable women who have appealed  to  him  for
         work.  This is a man who is a serious threat to women, particularly
         those who are vulnerable or needy.  His conduct and  character  put
         vulnerable women at risk."

     This is a finding which she was perfectly entitled to  make  and  which
    was plainly supported by the evidence.

32.   At paragraph 100 and 101 the FTT set out  various  criticisms  of  the
    evidence of the appellant and his wife.  In paragraph 101 she said  the
    following:

         "Generally, I find the evidence of the  appellant  to  be  evasive,
         vague and designed to confuse.  He prevaricated  in  his  responses
         and  failed  to  answer  many  questions  directly.   He  has  been
         selective in extracting certain parts of the CRIS reports which  he
         considers favour his appeal.  He has not provided a  positive  case
         as regards each of the allegations against him.  In most  cases  he
         simply relies on the fact the police took no further action against
         him.  That said I  bear  in  mind  it  is  for  the  respondent  to
         demonstrate the appellant's conduct  is  such  as  to  justify  the
         refusal."

     There can be no suggestion, in light of that, that in  considering  the
    totality of the evidence, she was not alive to the fact that it was for
    the respondent to make out the case, despite what she  said  about  the
    "No comment" interview.

Notice of Decision

33.  We find that there is no error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  The appeal is accordingly refused.

34.  No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:

[pic]


                                                            pp LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                      Date: 14 December 2018

