
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34548/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 7 March 2018                       |On 9 March 2018                      |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           Anthony Chijioke Akunne
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimant: Mr N Garrod, instructed by Obadiah Rose Solicitors
For the appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State' appeal against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Greasley promulgated  27.6.17,  allowing  on  human
    rights grounds the  claimant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State, dated 12.11.15, to refuse his application  for  LTR
    in the UK on private and family life grounds.

 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Pooler  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    18.12.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 7.3.18 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons summarised below, I found such  error  of  law  in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  as  to  require  the
    decision to be set aside and remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The grounds first assert that the  judge  erred  in  law  by  making  a
    material misdirection by failing to properly apply s117B  of  the  2002
    Act. In particular, it is asserted that the judge allowed the appeal on
    the basis set out at [26] of  English  language  ability  and  what  is
    assumed to be a typo for financial independence. Following  AM  (s117B)
    Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260, an appellant can gain  no  credit  for  either
    factor.

 6. Both the Rule 24 response and Mr Garro in  his  submissions  appear  to
    misunderstand the nature of  the  specific  complaint  in  relation  to
    s117B. It is not that s117B was not considered or taken  into  account,
    but rather that impermissible credit was given for factors that are  at
    best neutral. The way in which [26] is worded indicate that  the  judge
    gave credit for these factors in the public interest considerations.

 7. The judge mistyped, or failed to check the  dictation  of,  the  second
    sentence of [26] but it is clear that  the  judge  intended  to  state:
    "Both  of  these  two  aspects  suggest  that   the   public   interest
    considerations weigh in the appellant's favour as he is someone who can
    be deemed to better integrate into the UK society  generally."  Instead
    of 'weigh in,' the judge put "weighing,"  which  makes  no  grammatical
    sense. To state that these two factors, being able to speak English and
    to be financially independent (in relation to which there  was  another
    typo: "financially dependent"), is to  make  an  error  of  law;  those
    factors do not weigh in the appellant's favour at all. It was  on  that
    basis that Judge Pooler granted permission to appeal.

 8. The second ground, is that the judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    overarching public interest and failed to explain why 120 days  was  an
    unreasonable period for the processing of a visa application and  be  a
    disproportionate interference with family life.

 9. I find that the decision is  devoid  of  any  adequate  proportionality
    balancing exercise between on the one hand the properly assessed public
    interest and on the other the rights of the appellant and  his  family.
    No weight was given to the failure to comply  with  Immigration  Rules.
    The only public interest factor referred to  was  that  in  maintaining
    immigration control. At [25] the judge found that  immigration  control
    did not necessitate the refusal of the application but failed  to  give
    any reasoning for that conclusion. There is no adequate  assessment  to
    explain why the family life needed to be enjoyed  in  the  UK  at  all.
    Neither the appellant nor  any  member  of  his  family  is  a  British
    citizen. His wife did not have settled status. There was no  assessment
    as to why family life could not be enjoyed in Nigeria, or whether there
    were insurmountable obstacles to enjoying family life outside  the  UK,
    factors that would be relevant to an adequate proportionality balancing
    exercise.

10. In all the circumstances, I find that the decision was  flawed  and  in
    obvious error of law.

Remittal

11. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge vitiate the findings of fact and  the  conclusions  from
    those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of  the
    issues in the appeal.

12. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the Secretary of State of a fair  hearing
    and that the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is  such  that,
    having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with  cases
    fairly and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I  find  that
    it is appropriate to remit this appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusion & Decision

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

                       I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier Tribunal.


                    Signed


                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.


                    Signed


                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated

