
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34850/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6th March, 2014                            |On 3rd April 2014            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



                                   Between

                            DOLAPO SUSAN ODUWUSI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ojukokola, SLA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Ghana, who was born on  6th  June,  1971.
    He claims to be married to the sponsor, Samba Mbimbi, who is a  citizen
    of France and as such is an EEA national,  and  who  was  born  on  2nd
    December, 1982.  The appellant first  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
    July, 2003, using a multiple visit visa valid until 23rd January, 2004.
    The appellant was issued with two further visas valid from, 5th  April,
    2004, to 5th April, 2006, and from 6th April, 2006, to 6th April, 2011.
     On 11th December, 2011, he applied for a residence card as the  spouse
    of an EEA national who was  exercising,  or  who  wished  to  exercise,
    treaty rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.   On  6th  August,  2013,  the
    respondent issued a refusal to  issue  a  residence  card  and  it  was
    against that refusal that the  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

2.   The appellant did not seek an oral hearing and the matter was  disposed
    of by way of an appeal without an oral hearing by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge B J Clarke, sitting in  Birmingham.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Clarke was concerned  that  the  marriage  between  the  appellant  and
    sponsor was a ceremony of marriage by proxy in Oyo State,  Nigeria  and
    was not satisfied, looking at the documents provided to him, that  they
    were sufficient to prove that there was a valid marriage  ceremony  and
    registration as claimed by the appellant.  He dismissed the appeal.

3.   The appellant challenged the determination, asserting that the  parties
    had entered into a genuine  marriage.   At  the  hearing  before  me  I
    referred the appellant's representative to the case  of  Kareem  (Proxy
    marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 24 (IAC)  and  Mr  Ojukokola  indicated
    that he was familiar with that  case,  since  he  acted  on  behalf  of
    appellant in that appeal.  I raised with him the issue of  whether  the
    EEA national could demonstrate that the marriage between  her  and  the
    appellant was valid in French law.  He submitted that that was  not  an
    issue before the Tribunal.  The issue was one  first  of  validity  and
    secondly, of recognition.  He claimed that the marriage  was  valid  in
    Nigeria and should therefore  be  recognised  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Regulation 7 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 did not require the appellant to prove that the marriage was valid
    in France.

4.   I adjourned briefly to consider Kareem  and  on  resuming  pointed  out
    that under Regulation 7 the appellant was must show that  the  marriage
    is valid.  If it is  not  then  the  Tribunal  should  have  considered
    Regulation 8.5.

5.   Mr Harrison pointed out that Regulation 8(5) was  never  raised.   This
    was a Regulation 7 application and the Secretary of State was concerned
    as to the validity of the marriage.  Where the Secretary of State finds
    Regulation 7 not met, normally she then considers the application under
    Regulation 8(5) and were the matter to be considered  under  Regulation
    8.5, she may well allow it.  He invited me  to  allow  the  appellant's
    appeal to the extent that it remains for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    consider the matter under Regulation 8.5.  It  is,  he  submitted,  the
    practice of the Secretary of State when refusing under Regulation 7  to
    go on and consider Regulation 8.5 and she should have done so  in  this
    case.  He urged me therefore to allow the appeal to the extent that  it
    remained for the Secretary  of  State  to  consider  the  matter  under
    Regulation 8.5.

6.   Mr Ojukokola did not seek to persuade me to adopt another course.

7.   Having refused the appellant's application under  paragraph  7  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, I am  told  that
    it is her practice  that  the  Secretary  of  State  should  then  have
    considered whether the appellant  might  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 8.5 by demonstrating that he is  in  a  durable  relationship
    with an EEA national exercising treaty rights.

8.   As urged to do by the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department's
    representative, I allow the appellant's appeal to the  extent  that  it
    remains  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  consider  the  appellant's
    application under Regulation 8.5.
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
