
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34413/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 October 2015                    |On 26 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                           mr khawar jahangir baig
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Chohan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Pakistan.   He  appeals  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal with permission from Upper Tribunal Judge Craig who  found  an
    arguable error in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (FTT).   The
    FTT dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's  decision
    to refuse to grant the appellant a residence card on the basis that  he
    had failed to establish a durable relationship  with  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in this country.  That decision was on 16 July
    2013 but there was an earlier appeal to the FTT  which  the  respondent
    challenged.

Background Facts

2.   The appellant was born on 21 January 1956.  It appears  that  he  first
    entered the UK on 7 March 2003.  The application for a  residence  card
    was first made on 5 March 2013 on  the  basis  that  he  had  formed  a
    relationship with an EEA  national,  namely,  Zinaida  Petrauskiene,  a
    Lithuanian national who was born on 15 May 1959  and  is  female.   The
    appellant claimed to be in a relationship of partnership with her.  The
    application was, however, rejected on 16 July 2013.

3.   The FTT decision presently impugned was made by  Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Ford (the Immigration Judge) on 23 January 2015 following
    a hearing on 5 January  2015.   The  Immigration  Judge  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.

4.   Following a notice  of  appeal  dated  13  April  2015  the  respondent
    submitted a Rule 24 response.

Grounds of Appeal

5.   These allege that the Immigration Judge reached a perverse finding  but
    because the appellant and his EEA  partner  used  the  services  of  an
    interpreter at the Tribunal hearing they could not adequately  converse
    in English.  This was the principal ground on which  Judge  Craig  gave
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

The Hearing

6.   At the hearing I heard submissions by both representatives.  Mr  Chohan
    pointed out there may be a number of reasons why a litigant may require
    an interpreter, not least of which is that he may be  less  comfortable
    in a foreign  language  than  his  own.   The  Immigration  Judge  also
    attached weight to the fact that the tenancy agreement was not  in  the
    appellant's name.  There had been evidence given that the  sponsor  had
    lived at the property before they had  met.   Indeed  it  was  a  large
    property, larger than was required  for  their  own  use,  because  the
    sponsor's  son  also  lived  at  the  address.   On  the   balance   of
    probabilities the evidence  was  sufficiently  strong  to  satisfy  the
    Tribunal that the application was bona fide.  The application had  been
    going on for four years.

7.   By way of response Mr Duffy said that the lack of English  between  the
    parties did go to the heart of the case.   The  challenge  against  the
    Immigration Judge's decision was based on perversity.  That was a  very
    high hurdle to overcome.  I was reminded that if I allowed the appeal I
    should direct the respondent to issue a residence card.

8.   The appellant pointed out  by  way  of  reply  that  both  parties  had
    confirmed that the sponsor's child was the stepson of the appellant and
    the appellant was treated as the biological father.

9.   At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision as  to  whether  there
    was a material error of law and if so what steps  to  take  to  put  it
    right.

Discussion

10.  The burden rested on  the  appellant  to  show  he  was  in  a  durable
    relationship  with  an  EEA  national.   In  practice   a   period   of
    cohabitation of approximately two years is  required  in  order  for  a
    Tribunal to be satisfied that the relationship  is  akin  to  marriage.
    The appellant claimed that his relationship with Ms Petrauskiene was  a
    "permanent relationship" akin to marriage.

11.  The  present  appeal  has  a  long  history.   The  application  for  a
    residence card was made on 5 March 2013.  The respondent considered the
    application  on  16  July  2013  under  the  "extended  family  member"
    provisions of  the  EEA  Regulations.   However,  having  set  out  the
    requirements of Regulation 8(5) (which sets out  the  requirement  that
    there should be a "durable relationship"  with  an  EEA  national)  the
    respondent assessed the period to be met  on  the  documents  supplied.
    The only documents of note were documents showing  that  the  appellant
    lived at the same address as the sponsor.  Unfortunately, this did  not
    prove they  were  in  a  "durable  relationship".   Evidence  of  joint
    financial commitments, for example the joint  payment  of  utility  and
    council tax bills and joint bank accounts, were not included.   Because
    of this lack of evidence the respondent refused the  application  under
    Regulation 8(5) of the  EEA  Regulations.   The  respondent  considered
    Article 8 of the ECHR but decided it  did  not  add  anything  and  the
    appellant was invited to voluntarily return to Pakistan.

12.  The matter has come before the First-tier  Tribunal  on  two  occasions
    and I note that on the first appeal Judge Grimmett  (in  January  2014)
    noted the appellant's  poor  English.   However,  due  to  finding  the
    appellant overall to be credible, he had established his entitlement to
    a residence card based on his durable relationship  with  the  sponsor.
    It was subsequently returned by the Upper Tribunal to the  First  -tier
    Tribunal which resulted in the hearing before the Immigration Judge.

13.  In the present appeal the Immigration Judge was faced  with  a  similar
    lack of evidence that the respondent had faced when she  first  refused
    the application.  It appears the parties claim to have met at  a  party
    in August 2010, despite their poor English.  Given that this  was  four
    years before the hearing before Judge Grimmett one can well imagine why
    the Immigration Judge considered that  the  extent  of  their  language
    ability was an important issue  in  the  appeal  before  him.   Several
    assertions were made in the witness statements  as  to  the  extent  of
    detailed conversations about their lives and life experiences.  Neither
    the appellant  nor  the  sponsor  spoke  each  other's  language.   The
    Immigration Judge made it clear at  the  outset  of  the  hearing  (see
    paragraph 5 of his  determination)  that  he  considered  it  to  be  a
    "complete rehearing" and that the issues were not limited to the length
    of cohabitation but also extended to  the  fact  of  cohabitation.   He
    found the parties had been co-occupiers of a  large  house  with  three
    double  bedrooms  together.   This  was  not  indicative  of  a   close
    relationship.

Conclusions

14.  The Immigration Judge made a finding that was not justified  merely  by
    the use of Tribunal interpreters. This was not by itself an  indication
    that they spoke poor English.  One can understand that parties who come
    before the Tribunal feel uncomfortable in a formal  setting  accurately
    relaying contents of their evidence and answering searching  questions.
    However, the  Immigration  Judge  gave  ample  additional  reasons  for
    dismissing the appeal.  These included the fact that  medical  letters,
    bank statements and other documents were all addressed to the appellant
    at the property where he lived with the sponsor (see paragraphs  8  and
    13).  The Immigration Judge rightly attached little weight to the  fact
    that the tenancy agreement relating to the property  where  they  lived
    was solely in the sponsor's name. However, he felt unable to ignore the
    fact that there was inadequate evidence of a pooling of  resources  and
    joint  outgoings  as  well  as  other  indicia  of   a   close   family
    relationship.  I accept that the  Immigration  Judge  placed  excessive
    reliance on the requirements of the appellant and  the  sponsor  for  a
    Tribunal interpreter but I do not  find  that  the  other  reasons  for
    dismissing the appeal lack cogency or, as it was put, were perverse.

15.  I find that the Immigration Judge was entitled  to  find  the  size  of
    accommodation  was  not  commensurate  with  the  size  of  the  family
    occupying it. In addition, there was a lack of evidence of cohabitation
    as opposed to co-occupation.  There was  an  absence  of  corroboration
    from independent third parties as to the  extent  of  the  relationship
    between  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor.   Although  there  was   no
    requirement as  such  for  corroboration,  the  Immigration  Judge  was
    entitled to look at the overall quality of the  evidence  produced  and
    ask himself whether the civil standard of  proof  was  discharged.   It
    would have been possible to call witnesses to say whether  or  not  the
    appellant and the sponsor had been observed  talking  in  English,  but
    such evidence was not produced.

16.  Although the decision could have been better expressed  and  I  do  not
    think that the appellant and  the  sponsor  should  be  admonished  for
    utilising the Tribunal's interpreter facilities, I  have  decided  that
    overall the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was sufficiently cogent
    to be sustainable.

Notice of Decision

For the reasons given I find there was no  material  error  of  law  in  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal therefore stands  and  the  decision
of the respondent to refuse a residence card also stands.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make any direction for anonymity  or  a  fee
award and there is no challenge to those decisions.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
