
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
ia/34702/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20th May 2016                          |On 31st May 2016                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                        mr ebenezer lawrence adebisi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Oremuyiwa (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Dean, promulgated on 15th October 2015, following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 29th September 2015.  In the determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the  appeal  of  Ebenezer  Lawrence  Adebisi,  whereupon  the
    Appellant applied for, and was granted, permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Nigeria,  who  was  born  on  8th
    February 1981.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 18th August 2014, refusing his application for
    a residence card as a spouse  of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom under the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.  The person in question is Ms  Akalonu  Sussey,
    and she is Dutch national.  Whereas  the  Appellant  was  born  on  8th
    February 1981 (and was 34 years of age), his partner, was born on  26th
    December 1960, and was 54 years of age.

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he is entitled to a residence card on the
    basis of his marriage with an EEA national, and that  the  marriage  is
    genuine and subsisting, and the two of them have been cohabiting  at  [
                                                  ].

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge found the marriage not to be a  genuine  one,  but  to  be  a
    "marriage of convenience" such that the refusal of the  residence  card
    was entirely justified by the Respondent Secretary of State.  A primary
    issue in the legal proceedings was the absence of a marriage  interview
    record, on the basis of which the Respondent had formed the  conclusion
    that the marriage was  one  of  convenience,  and  not  a  genuine  and
    subsisting one.  This marriage interview record had not  been  produced
    for inspection by the Appellant, despite repeated requests  to  do  so.
    At the same time, there  was  the  leading  Tribunal  determination  of
    Papajorgji [2012] UKUT 00038, which had  established  that  the  burden
    does not lie on the  claimant  at  the  outset  of  an  application  to
    demonstrate that his  marriage  to  an  EEA  national  is  not  one  of
    convenience.  It is for the Secretary of State, as  the  maker  of  the
    allegation, to carry that burden.

 5. The  judge  stated  that  the  issue  of  the  marriage  being  one  of
    convenience was "The sole issue to be determined in this appeal because
    Regulation 2 of the 2006 Regulations states that a  'spouse'  does  not
    include a party to a marriage of convenience" (see paragraph 10).

 6. With respect to the absence of the marriage interview  record,  at  the
    hearing before the judge, the Appellant's representative, Mr Oremuyiwa,
    had indicated that there had still been no disclosure of the  interview
    record.  At this point, the  judge  recorded  that,  "In  view  of  the
    submission the Respondent's representative stated  he  was  content  to
    make it available for consideration".  The judge then went  on  to  say
    that, "Accordingly,  having  examined  the  marriage  interview  I  was
    satisfied that the RFRL accurately reflected the answers given  by  the
    Appellant and his wife in the interview" (paragraph 8).  The judge went
    on to dismiss the appeal and to uphold the decision of the Secretary of
    State.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the Respondent  did  not  make  a
    record of the marriage interview available after the interview  and  as
    such its contents ought to have been disregarded.

 8. On 12th April 2016, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 20th May 2016, Mr Oremuyiwa submitted  that
    I should set aside the decision of Judge Dean  because  he  had  relied
    upon a marriage interview record, which had not been disclosed  to  the
    Appellant in the Respondent's bundle, by the time that the hearing  had
    commenced before Judge Dean.  He  explained  that  a  letter  had  been
    written by the Appellant  himself  to  the  Respondent  requesting  the
    interview  transcript.   It  had  not  been  responded  to.   Yet,  the
    Secretary of State relied upon this very document and the judge used it
    as a basis for his decision to refuse.  He submitted that he still  did
    not have a copy of the transcript of the interview.

10. Given that Mr Oremuyiwa had attended the hearing before Judge  Dean,  I
    asked him to explain further what happened given  that  the  judge  had
    recorded (at paragraph 8) that, because the marriage interview had  not
    been   served   in   the   Respondent's   bundle,   "The   Respondent's
    representative  stated  he  was  content  to  make  it  available   for
    consideration" (paragraph 8).  Mr Oremuyiwa explained that, "We had  no
    time to sit and go through the transcript interview  if  it  was  being
    handed up on the day of the hearing".  He submitted that  he  also  did
    not apply for an adjournment so as to prepare further on the  basis  of
    what was disclosed in the interview transcript.  Instead, Mr  Oremuyiwa
    submitted that he was under express instructions  from  his  client  to
    proceed with the hearing as things stood.

11. For his part, Mr Tufan submitted that the substance  of  the  interview
    record had already been included in the refusal letter and it was well-
    known that the main issue was that of a "marriage  of  convenience"  in
    this case.

12. Second, at the hearing  itself  the  Presenting  Officer  was  all  too
    prepared to hand up a copy of  the  interview  transcript  but  it  was
    declined by Mr Oremuyiwa himself, who was under express instructions to
    proceed with the hearing.  No opportunity was even taken to adjourn for
    a few moments to look at what was included in the interview  transcript
    to see whether it was at loggerheads with the refusal letter.  Instead,
    the parties themselves chose to proceed with  the  hearing.   Therefore
    there could be no prejudice.

13. Third, the judge did not just base his decision to refuse the appeal on
    the basis of what transpired in the interview transcript.  If one looks
    at  the  determination,  the  judge  throughout  demonstrates  why  the
    marriage is one of convenience on the basis of the  discrepancies  that
    exist between the answers given by both parties.   For  example,  there
    were no photographs of the wedding ceremony which took  place  on  28th
    October 2013 at Greenwich and no photographs of the Appellant  and  his
    wife together "on any other occasion in this country"  (paragraph  13).
    In oral evidence the Appellant was  asked  if  he  had  a  new  tenancy
    agreement and he stated "Not here" whereas his  wife,  when  asked  the
    same question, stated that "She did not have the tenancy agreement  and
    that the Appellant signed the new agreement" (paragraph 14).

14. A witness by the name of Mr Agbana turned up, and despite  his  alleged
    closeness and regularity of contact with the parties, "Did not know the
    family name used by the Appellant's wife, neither did he know where she
    works or what her job is" (paragraph 15).  Furthermore,  the  Appellant
    stated in oral evidence that "He pays the council  tax  and  that  this
    goes out of his bank account" whereas the Appellant's wife stated  that
    "She gives him money to pay, although  the  account  is  in  her  name"
    (paragraph 17).  These are all matters that lay outside  the  interview
    transcript, that the judge was properly able to take into  account,  in
    coming to the decision that he did.  There was no error of law.

Reply

15. In reply, Mr Oremuyiwa submitted that the Appellant's wife was  not  in
    attendance today because she was out of the country but she would  like
    the opportunity to give evidence again.  He submitted that the marriage
    has not been attacked as such and it was a genuine marriage.  He stated
    that the marriage interview transcript had prejudged  the  veracity  of
    the Appellant's oral evidence together with the evidence of  his  wife.
    Therefore, its inclusion in the determination by the judge was an error
    of law.

No Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.  First, whilst it is true that the interview transcript had
    not been produced before  the  hearing,  so  that  Mr  Oremuyiwa  could
    discuss its contents with the Appellant and his partner, the  fact  was
    that it was produced at the hearing itself and the  Presenting  Officer
    was all too keen to disclose it to Mr Oremuyiwa so that  he  could  see
    for himself why the refusal letter was in the terms that it was.

17. At that stage, Mr Oremuyiwa himself took instructions directly from his
    client, the Appellant, and they decided to proceed  with  the  hearing.
    They did not even ask for a short adjournment so that they could have a
    perusal of the interview  transcript.   In  fact,  they  did  not  even
    request a copy so that by the time they that arrived at  this  hearing,
    they still did not have the interview transcript at all.

18. Second, both  the  Appellant  and  his  partner,  Akalonu  Sussy,  gave
    evidence, and the judge found there to be significant discrepancies  in
    the evidence given by three witnesses on the day of the hearing.  These
    discrepancies are set out above and they show that the decision arrived
    at by the judge was entirely one that was open  to  him.   Indeed,  the
    approach taken by the judge was to say that,

         "When taken in the round I found that the evidence of the Appellant
         and his wife contains material  inconsistencies  and  discrepancies
         which do not dispel the doubts and concerns that the  marriage  was
         entered into for the sole purpose  of  securing  residence  rights"
         (paragraph 19).




    That was a decision that the judge was entitled to  come  to.   All  in
    all, the fact that the  marriage  interview  transcript  had  not  been
    disclosed to the Appellant's side prior to the date of the hearing  was
    not a matter that caused the Appellant's side any material prejudice in
    the manner that is now being contended for by Mr Oremuyiwa.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 28th May 2016
