

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/34255/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 23rd September 2014                       |On:  24th October 2014       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                             ANGELA OWUSU-ANSAH
                           (no anonymity direction)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:            Ms Tetteh, Counsel instructed by Gharweg
Advice Centre
For the Respondent:     Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Ghana date of birth 11th  January  1963.
    She has permission to appeal against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge North) to dismiss her  appeal  against  a  decision  to
    refuse to issue a residence card in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006.


 2. The basis of the Appellant's application had been her relationship with
    James Kwame Oppong, a Dutch national. She submitted that she was  in  a
    durable relationship with Mr Opping, and in the alternative  that  they
    were married according to Ghanaian customary law.

 3. The Respondent did not consider there to be sufficient evidence to show
    that the couple were in a  durable  relationship.  In  respect  of  the
    Ghanaian customary marriage the Appellant had not shown her marriage to
    comply with the requirements of the  Ghanaian  Customary  Marriage  and
    Divorce  (Registration)  Law  1985.   In   particular   the   statutory
    declaration provided did not state the places of residence at the  time
    of marriage of either the Appellant or Sponsor.

 4. On appeal the First-tier  Tribunal  agreed  with  the  Respondent.  The
    statutory declaration supplied did not expressly  give  the  places  of
    residence of the parties to the marriage. It did not  therefore  comply
    with the  formalities  required  by  section  3  (1)  of  the  Ghanaian
    Customary Marriage and Divorce (Registration) Law 1985.   The  Tribunal
    had regard to the country guidance case of NA (Customary  Marriage  and
    Divorce -Evidence) Ghana [2009] UKAIT 00009 had found, contrary to  the
    submissions on behalf of the Appellant, nothing therein to  state  that
    the registration of marriages under the Act is optional.  There was not
    sufficient evidence to warrant a finding that  the  couple  were  in  a
    durable relationship. In a determination dated the 23rd  December  2013
    the appeal was therefore dismissed.

 5. The grounds of appeal submit that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  the
    following respects:

       i) NA does state that registration is optional and the determination
          is wrong to state that the guidance therein had no application to
          this case;


      ii) NA in fact makes clear that customary marriages are valid without
          registration;

     iii) There was a failure  to  take  relevant  evidence  into  account,
          namely the letter from  the  Marriage  Registry  in  Accra  which
          stated that the marriage certificate was "duly issued,  authentic
          and genuine": this led to a failure to recognise the marriage  as
          valid in Ghana and to apply CB  (Validity  of  Marriage  -  proxy
          marriage) Brazil [2008] UKAIT 00080.  The Tribunal further failed
          to note that the places  of  residence  of  the  parties  to  the
          marriage were identified on the face of the certificate itself.


      iv) Complaint is  further  made  that  the  determination  refers  to
          regulation 8 whereas it  should  have  read  regulation  7,   and
          states that the Appellant was unrepresented when in fact she  was
          not.






      Error of Law

 6. Following a hearing on the 12th May 2014 I made the following  findings
    on the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal.  The  Respondent  was
    that day represented  by  Mr  Jarvis,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.


         "Paragraph 6 of the determination addresses the decision in  NA  as
         follows: "on my reading of that decision it relates to  the  lawful
         dissolution of marriage and that the registrations of  dissolutions
         is optional. So much  is  a  completely  different  matter  to  the
         formalities required for the  celebration  of  a  valid  marriage".
         Before me Mr Jarvis agreed that the First-tier  Tribunal  has  here
         erred in applying an unduly restrictive reading of NA. Much of  the
         evidence in NA,  and  indeed  the  findings,  also  relate  to  the
         registration of marriage.    That  decision  sets  out  the  expert
         evidence given by Mercy Akman, a barrister qualified in the UK  and
         Ghana, about the validity of customary marriage. Having set out the
         formalities required for a customary marriage  Ms  Akman  addressed
         the question of statutory registration  [at  paragraph  13  of  the
         decision]:


           "12. Customary Marriage and Divorce (Registration) Law 1985
           (P.N.D.C.L. 112) provided for mandatory registration of
           customary marriages and divorces after 1985, but was this law
           was amended in 1991 by the Customary Marriage and Divorce
           (Registration) Amendment Law 1991 (P.N.D.C.L. 263) to make the
           registration of marriages and divorces optional. This is the
           current position of the law. The parties to a customary marriage
           may choose to register the marriage at any time after the
           marriage with the Registrar of Marriages and Divorce but this is
           not mandatory and records show that registration of marriages
           have declined over the years. Whereas in 2004 1172 marriages
           were registered, only 677 were registered in 2007. If the
           marriage is registered, the couple are issued with a certificate
           and the notification is entered on the register."

         The  Upper  Tribunal  approve  that  evidence  at   paragraph   24,
         confirming that the registration of customary marriage in Ghana has
         been optional since 1991; even  when  registration  was  mandatory,
         failure to do so did not invalidate the marriage.   Ms  Akman,  and
         the Tribunal, recommend that where the validity of a marriage is in
         doubt, other evidence,  such  as  confirmation  from  the  Ghanaian
         authorities, can be sought.


         In this case the Appellant sought to rely on  confirmation  of  the
         validity of her marriage from the Marriage Registry  in  Accra.  It
         does not appear that the First-tier  Tribunal  took  this  evidence
         into account.


         I am satisfied for the reasons set out above  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal erred in finding that this customary  marriage  needed  to
         comply with the formalities in respect of  registration  before  it
         could be considered valid. It is clear from  NA  that  a  customary
         marriage in Ghana can be valid even if it is not registered at all.
          There was other evidence confirming the validity of  the  marriage
         and there was a failure to take this evidence into account.    That
         evidence is sufficient to discharge the burden of  proof  and  show
         this marriage to be valid in Ghana"

 7. Notwithstanding his concession that NA had been too narrowly read,  the
    HOPO on the 12th May 2014, Mr Jarvis, submitted that any error was  not
    material since the Appellant could not,  on  the  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, have discharged the burden of  proof  set  out  in
    Kareem  (Proxy  Marriages  -EU  law)  [2014]  UKUT  00024  (IAC).   The
    Appellant had provided no evidence that her marriage would be  regarded
    as lawful in the Netherlands. Ms Tetteh not unreasonably protested that
    this had  never  been  the  Respondent's  case  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.   Kareem had been promulgated in  the  hiatus  between  leave
    being granted to the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the  May  hearing  and  the
    Respondent had not raised  it  as  an  issue  until  now.  I  therefore
    adjourned the proceedings to  give  the  Appellant  an  opportunity  to
    produce the relevant evidence before the matter was re-made.




    The Re-Making


 8. On the 23rd July 2014 the matter came back before me. By that time  the
    Appellant had obtained an  opinion  from  a  Dutch  lawyer,  a  Mr  O.K
    Hyiaman, Co-ordinator of 'Law  Stichting  Scientia  Potentia  Est'.  Mr
    Hyiaman states that in principle the  Netherlands  will  recognise  any
    monogamous marriage  contracted  abroad  which  is  recognised  by  the
    country in which it takes place. In respect of customary marriages this
    can be established by  requesting  that  the  marriage  certificate  is
    "legalised" by a competent authority such as the Dutch embassy  in  the
    country in question.  In a 2003 case the Dutch  Court  of  Appeal  held
    that  the  existence  of  a  customary  marriage  in  Ghana  could   be
    demonstrated and accepted by reliance  on  the  'Form  of  Register  of
    Customary Marriages', used  in  Ghana  to  register  such  unions.  The
    citation of this case is given as ECLI: NL: GHSGR:  2003:  AO5800  case
    number  603-R-03.   There  are  a  number  of  other  Court  of  Appeal
    decisions to the same effect, and Ms Tetteh had obtained a  translation
    of one of these.  She pointed out that the Appellant had always had the
    'Form of Register of Customary Marriages' - this  might  be  considered
    acceptable by the Dutch Court of Appeal,  but  not  apparently  by  the
    Respondent.  Mrs  Kenny,  who  represented  the  Respondent  that  day,
    confirmed that to be the case. She relied on Kareem (Proxy marriages  -
    EU law) [2014] UKUT 24 and  TA  and  Others  (Kareem  explained)  Ghana
    [2014] UKUT 316  (IAC)  as  authority  for  the  proposition  that  the
    Tribunal had held that customary marriages are not in  fact  recognized
    by Dutch law.  I indicated that  this  is  not  what  either  of  these
    decisions say. All  they  say  is  that  the  burden  of  proof  is  on
    appellants to establish that their marriages  are  so  recognized,  and
    simply  pointing  to  the  Dutch  Civil  Code,  without   any   further
    elaboration or expert opinion  on  how  the  code  is  interpreted,  is
    insufficient.  I nevertheless  agreed  to  the  joint  request  of  the
    parties that the matter  be  further  adjourned  to  enable  the  'best
    evidence' to be produced,  namely  "legalization"  of  the  Appellant's
    marriage certificate by the Dutch embassy in Accra. I was told that the
    original was in the Home Office file and that the Respondent would need
    a week to retrieve it and give it to the Appellant. She would then need
    further time to send it to Ghana and get it back.


 9. On the 17th September 2014 I received an  email  from  Lorna  Kenny,  a
    Senior Presenting Officer at  Angel  Square.  The  gist  of  it  is  as
    follows:

         "despite the best efforts of all concerned, including  searches  at
         the file's last known location and intended  destination,  attempts
         to trace the file have provides unsuccessful and the file  has  not
         therefore been made available to me to date.  We  acknowledge  that
         this constitutes a failure to comply with directions and imposes an
         inability on the Appellant to progress her case in so much as  this
         document is concerned".


10. The case resumed on the 23rd September  2014.  Ms  Isherwood  indicated
    with apologies that the Respondent had still not managed to locate  the
    file. I heard submissions from both parties.


11. The problem with the evidence in Kareem, and indeed TA,  was  that  the
    Tribunal had nothing before it except isolated extracts from the  Dutch
    Civil Code. Of this the Kareem Tribunal said the following:

         "The appellant's evidence includes extracts from  the  Dutch  Civil
         Code.   Although  this  is  presented  as  evidence,  there  is  no
         indication as to whether  the  version  provided  is  up  to  date.
         Furthermore, we have been given no assistance as to how  it  should
         be interpreted or as to whether the appellant's  marriage  ceremony
         would be regarded as a lawful marriage under the Dutch Civil Code".



12. In this case I have the contemporary and expert opinion of a lawyer who
    indicates that the Dutch  Civil  Code  is  interpreted  in  the  manner
    summarised above at paragraph 8. The Respondent has been in  possession
    of that opinion since July and had not introduced any evidence to rebut
    the assertions made  by  Mr  O.K  Hyiaman,  nor  have  any  alternative
    authorities from the Dutch courts been produced. The  Appellant  cannot
    produce the 'best evidence' discussed  at  the  hearing  in  July.   On
    balance I am satisfied that she has discharged the burden of proof  and
    she has shown that her marriage is recognised by the Dutch authorities.
    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.


      Decisions

13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and the decision is set aside.


14. The appeal is allowed.





                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           13th October 2014
