
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/34736/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 6 December 2017                    |On 19 January 2018                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR Ranjit Singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Mehtab Malhotra instructed by Shri Venkateshwara
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a citizen of India, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 1st  September  2015
    to refuse his application for further leave to  remain  as  a  student.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Swaney allowed the Appellant's  appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 9th March 2017.  The  Secretary  of  State  now
    appeals to this Tribunal with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Doyle on 18th September 2017.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant  first  arrived  in
    the UK on 1st October 2009 in possession of a visa conferring leave  to
    enter until 8th June 2013.  He was subsequently granted  further  leave
    to remain from 2nd July 2013 until 6th October 2014.   On  6th  October
    2014 he made an application for leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant.  That application was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of
    State on 1st September 2015.  The application was refused in accordance
    with paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules on the basis that,  with
    his application made on 4th June 2013, the Appellant  had  submitted  a
    TOEIC certificate from Educational Testing Service (ETS) to his Sponsor
    in order for them to provide him with a Confirmation of Acceptance  for
    Studies (CAS).  The Secretary of State said that ETS have declared  the
    Appellant's test to be invalid because it was  undertaken  by  a  proxy
    tester who sat the test in his place and the scores had therefore  been
    cancelled.  The Secretary of State was satisfied that  the  Appellant's
    certificate was fraudulently obtained and, as a false document had been
    submitted in relation to his previous  application,  the  Secretary  of
    State  refused  this  application  under  paragraph   322(2)   of   the
    Immigration Rules.  The second main reason for refusing the application
    was that the Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS) submitted  by
    the Appellant in connection with this application was  checked  on  1st
    September 2015 and that check revealed that the CAS had been  withdrawn
    by  the  Sponsor.   Accordingly  the  Appellant  was  not  awarded  the
    requisite points for attributes - CAS or for maintenance (funds).

 4. In considering the Appellant's appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    found at paragraph 16 that the Appellant was a credible witness who was
    a genuine student  based  on  the  evidence  before  him  that  he  had
    completed the courses he had enrolled on and  obtained  qualifications.
    The judge took into account a number of factors in relation to the  ETS
    English language certificate including the fact that the Appellant  had
    passed an IELTS English language test which he sat in India  and  which
    was used in his application for entry clearance [16]. The  judge  noted
    that there was no suggestion by the Respondent  that  that  certificate
    was not genuine.  The judge also took into account that  the  Appellant
    had undertaken and passed a further  IELTS  examination  in  connection
    with his studies at South Chelsea International College Ltd.  The judge
    also took into account the fact that  the  Appellant  had  pursued  his
    studies in the UK and had  obtained  qualifications  demonstrating  his
    ability to follow the courses of study [18].  Although  accepting  that
    the Appellant's English may have improved since April 2013,  the  judge
    took into account the fact that the  Appellant  spoke  English  at  the
    hearing.  The judge considered the evidence supplied by  the  Secretary
    of State including the 'look up tool' in relation to this Appellant and
    found that this was not specific to this Appellant and did not  contain
    any information as to why the  Appellant's  test  result  was  declared
    invalid.  Accordingly the judge concluded that the Respondent  had  not
    established that the Appellant submitted a false document in support of
    his previous application for leave to remain. The judge concluded  that
    the Secretary of State's decision to refuse this application was not in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules.  The judge went on  to  consider
    the issue of the Appellant's CAS and found that the Secretary of  State
    had failed to comply with her policy guidance which would have required
    that she enable the Appellant an opportunity to obtain a fresh  CAS  or
    make a fresh application for leave to remain  within  a  period  of  60
    days.  Accordingly the judge concluded that the Secretary of State  had
    failed to give reasons for  not  applying  her  policy  to  afford  the
    Appellant a 60 day period within which to find a new college and obtain
    a new CAS and the judge allowed the  appeal  to  the  extent  that  the
    Respondent must follow her published policy and afford the Appellant an
    opportunity to obtain a new CAS and then re-determine the  application.



 5. In the Grounds of Appeal the Secretary of State contends that the judge
    failed to give adequate reasons for findings on a material matter.   It
    is contended that the judge placed too much reliance on the Appellant's
    ability to speak English and failed to take into account other matters.
     Reliance is place on the case of MA Nigeria [2016]  UKUT  450  and  in
    particular to the guidance given at paragraph 57.  It is contended that
    the judge failed to take into account that the Appellant may  have  had
    other reasons for securing a test  certificate  by  deception.   It  is
    contended that the Secretary of State's evidential burden was  met  and
    that it then fell upon the Appellant to offer an  innocent  explanation
    and that the evidence from the Appellant in this case does  not  amount
    to an adequate innocent explanation.

 6. In granting permission First-tier Tribunal Judge  Doyle  considered  it
    arguable that the judge's findings at paragraph 17 that  the  Appellant
    had given a plausible explanation in  relation  to  the  allegation  of
    fraud had  not  been  adequately  reasoned.   It  was  also  considered
    arguable that the judge had not set out adequate reasons for  rejecting
    the evidence relied  upon  by  the  Respondent  had  not  followed  the
    guidance in MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 00450 and SM and Qadir
    (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC).

Error of Law

 7. In his submissions Mr  Richards  submitted  that  this  was  a  reasons
    challenged.  He contended that the judge had in effect found that there
    was no reason for the Appellant to have fraudulently arranged  for  the
    test to be undertaken by a proxy. In his submission, in relying on  the
    Appellant's ability to speak English as  at  the  date  of  hearing  in
    February 2017, the judge had taken into account an  immaterial  matter.
    In his submission the judge had failed to  appreciate  that  there  may
    have been reasons why someone who can speak English may arrange  for  a
    proxy as set out in MA Nigeria.  He submitted that the judge was  wrong
    to find that the Appellant had met the burden upon him in this case.

 8. In my view the starting point in this decision is the  judge's  finding
    at paragraph 16 that the Appellant is a credible  witness.   This  must
    mean that the judge accepted the evidence put forward by the  Appellant
    who submitted a witness statement and give oral  evidence  in  English.
    In the Appellant's witness statement  he  set  out  at  paragraph  8(i)
    details of the examination centre, his  journey  to  that  centre,  the
    location of that centre and details of the timing of all of the modules
    and of the modules undertaken.  It  must  be  assumed  by  the  judge's
    finding that the Appellant was a credible witness that the  judge  took
    this evidence into account  in  reaching  her  decision.   I  note  the
    guidance given in SM and Qadir at paragraphs 68 and 69.  In  particular
    at paragraph 69 the Tribunal gives the following guidance:

         "69.         We turn thus to address the legal burden. We accept Mr
         Dunlop's submission that in considering an allegation of dishonesty
         in  this  context  the  relevant  factors  to  be  weighed  include
         (inexhaustively, we would add) what the person accused has to  gain
         from being dishonest; what he has to  lose  from  being  dishonest;
         what is known about his character; and the culture  or  environment
         in which he operated. Mr Dunlop also highlighted the importance  of
         three further considerations, namely how the  Appellants  performed
         under cross examination, whether the Tribunal's assessment of their
         English language  proficiency  is  commensurate  with  their  TOEIC
         scores and whether their academic achievements are such that it was
         unnecessary or illogical for them to have cheated. "

 9. In this case the judge took into account the fact  that  the  Appellant
    was a credible witness.  The  judge  took  into  account  a  number  of
    factors including the fact that the Appellant was a genuine student who
    had  completed  the  courses  he   had   enrolled   in   and   obtained
    qualifications.  The judge also took into account  that  the  Appellant
    had undertaken an  English  language  test  and  passed  that  test  in
    connection with his application for entry clearance and that there  had
    been  no  suggestion  that  that  certificate  was  not  genuine  [16].
    Although accepting that the Appellant's English may have improved since
    April 2013 when the ETS test was taken, the  judge  took  into  account
    that the appellant spoke English at the hearing [18].  The  judge  took
    into account the fact that the Appellant had obtained a further English
    language certificate since 2013 [18].  At paragraph 90 the  judge  took
    into account the evidence submitted  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and
    pointed to what she considered to be deficiencies within that  evidence
    in relation to this Appellant including the  fact  that  there  was  no
    evidence or information as to why the test result was declared  invalid
    despite a question on the document giving an  opportunity  for  further
    comments to back up the refusal or clarify information.

10. I also take  into  account  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  gave  oral
    evidence.  Although he was not cross-examined  as  there  was  no  Home
    Office Presenting Officer in attendance it is clear that the judge  had
    an opportunity to assess his oral evidence.  In my  view  it  is  clear
    that the judge took into account the guidance at paragraph 69 of  SM  &
    Qadir.

11. In MA Nigeria the Tribunal gave guidance in relation  to  circumstances
    where an Appellant has demonstrated through other sources that  he  can
    speak English.  However in this case I am satisfied that the judge  was
    aware of the possibility that  the  Appellant's  English  had  improved
    between the date of the ETS test and the hearing so therefore  did  not
    attach undue weight to the fact that the Appellant spoke English at the
    hearing. Instead she took into account all of the background and all of
    the circumstances in reaching her decision.

12. At paragraph 19 the judge considered that the Respondent had  not  made
    out the allegation of fraud.  There is no  specific  challenge  in  the
    grounds to the way in which the judge  considered  this  evidence.   At
    paragraph 6 of the grounds  it  is  contended  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's evidential burden had been met and the burden  then  fell  upon
    the Appellant to offer an innocent explanation.   At  paragraph  19  it
    appears that the judge did not accept that the Secretary of  State  had
    discharged the evidential burden but in any event even if this were  in
    error it is not material because at  paragraphs  16  to  18  the  judge
    considered all of the relevant evidence before her in relation  to  the
    Appellant's background and concluded that she accepted the  Appellant's
    explanations in relation to the ability to speak  English.  Accordingly
    the judge must therefore have accepted the Appellant's  explanation  in
    relation to the sitting of the test.

13. Mr Richards also submitted that the judge's findings were irrational in
    finding that the Appellant's command of English in  February  2017  was
    evidence that he had sufficient  command  of  English  in  April  2013.
    However I do not accept that submission as the judge  was  specifically
    aware of this and indicated such at paragraph 18.

14. In all of the circumstances considering the evidence before  the  judge
    and the reasons given in the decision I am  satisfied  that  the  judge
    gave adequate reasons for her conclusions based on the evidence  before
    her.  There is no material error disclosed in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 15th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date: 15th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
