
IAC-AH-co-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/34815/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 24th March 2015                            |On 15th April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               Zunaid Hossain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lucas, promulgated on 9th December 2014, following a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 28th November 2014.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant to the extent that it was  remitted
    back to the Secretary of State  for  a  further  reconsideration.   The
    Respondent Secretary  of  State,  subsequently  applied  for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, who was born on 11th November
    1983.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary  of
    State, dated 8th August 2013, to refuse to grant him further  leave  to
    remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under  paragraph
    245ZX(c) of HC 395 (as amended).

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that the decision by his college  to  withdraw
    his CAS is "completely unknown" (paragraph 4) as he had leave to remain
    in the UK between 28th December 2009 and 31st May 2013.  He referred to
    the tier policy document (Version 07/2013 page 64), which states that,

         "If your permission to stay has expired whilst you are  awaiting  a
         decision on your application, you will delay the  refusal  of  your
         application for 60 days to allow you to obtain a  new  CAS  from  a
         different Sponsor and vary your application for leave  in  the  UK"
         (see paragraph 5 of the determination).

 4. The Appellant argued that the Respondent Secretary  of  State  had  not
    followed the applicable guidance in place at the time  with  regard  to
    the 60 day period.

 5. The judge allowed the appeal to the extent that the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to allow the Appellant a further 60 days to obtain a new  CAS.
    The appeal was allowed to that extent.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge had misapplied the Tier
    4 policy document (Version 07/2013), because the reference to  page  64
    therein, is a reference to the Tier 4 Sponsor's Licence having expired,
    being revoked, or having been surrendered.  This was not such  a  case.
    In this case,  it  was  the  college  itself  that  had  withdrawn  the
    Appellant's CAS.  This  was  a  matter  between  the  college  and  the
    Appellant.

 7. On 29th January 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 24th March 2015, there was no attendance by
    the Appellant.  Nor, was there any explanation for his  non-attendance.
    Nor indeed,  was  a  legal  representative  present.   Miss  Isherwood,
    appearing on behalf of the  Respondent,  submitted  that  the  case  of
    Rahman [2014] EWCA Civ 11 was decisive.  In this case,  the  court  had
    said (at paragraph 32) that, :-

         "... Nevertheless, I agree with the  Tribunal  that  the  situation
         here is very different from that in Naved and that fairness did not
         require the Secretary of State to give the Appellant an opportunity
         to address any deficiency in the CAS.  There  was  no  question  in
         this  case  of  the  Secretary  of   State   obtaining   additional
         information without reference to the applicant and relying on it to
         refuse the application.  The Secretary of State simply applied  the
         terms of the Immigration Rules themselves.  Under the Rules it  was
         the Appellant who had  the  responsibility  of  ensuring  that  his
         application was support by a CAS that  met  the  requirements  laid
         down."

 9. Accordingly, Miss Isherwood submitted, that  the  judge  was  wrong  to
    remit the matter back to  the  Secretary  of  State.   The  appropriate
    course of action was to dismiss the appeal outright.

Error of Law and Re-making the Decision

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law, for the reasons that had been
    given by Miss Isherwood before me, and that  I  should  set  aside  the
    decision and remake the decision (see Section 12(1) and  Section  12(2)
    of TCEA 2007).  There is a  distinction  between  a  Sponsor's  Licence
    having expired, or revoked, or surrendered, and a student's CAS  number
    having been withdrawn by the college itself.  The  case  of  Rahman  is
    decisive.

11. There is no duty on the Secretary of State to do other  than  to  apply
    the terms of the Immigration Rules themselves.  The  Appellant  is  not
    entitled to a 60 day period that he claims.  The matter is between  the
    Appellant and the college.  This is clear from Annex 2: Tier 4  Sponsor
    Duties and Licence Status, of the policy  document  relied  on.   Given
    that the judge has erred, I proceed to remake  the  decision.   I  have
    remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original judge,
    the evidence before him, and the submissions that I have  heard  today.
    I am dismissing the appeal for the reasons  that  I  have  given.   The
    Appellant did not have a CAS.  He could not succeed  under  the  Rules.
    The Appellant has not attended today and has not put forward any  other
    submissions.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original  judge.   I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.   This  appeal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        11th April 2015
