
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34221/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham     |         Decision & Reasons         |
|                                           |Promulgated                         |
|On 14th January 2016                       |         On 12th February 2016      |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                           Mr rizwan baseer shaikh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McDade, promulgated on 9th December 2014, following a hearing  at
    Stoke-on-Trent on 31st October 2014, in which the judge  dismissed  the
    appeal of Rizwan Baseer Shaikh, whereupon the latter applied  for,  and
    was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of  India,  who  was  born  on  28th
    January 1983.  He appealed against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse the Appellant further leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 Student, in a decision dated 13th August 2014.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim is that he was unable to sit his  B2
    examinations due to the fact that his passport had been retained by the
    Home Office and therefore the test centres would not permit him to  sit
    the  tests  without  sight  of  the  original  passport.   Without  the
    passport, and the results from the B2 examinations, the Appellant would
    not have been issued with a fresh CAS letter, which he needed.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed how the Appellant entered the UK on 6th October 2012
    with a valid IELTS certificate.  He had been granted leave  until  11th
    February 2014.  On 28th January 2014 he applied for  further  leave  to
    remain and on 23rd May 2014, the Home  Office  notified  him  that  his
    college, Leyton College, was no longer listed on  the  Tier  4  Sponsor
    register as its licence had been revoked.  The  Home  Office,  however,
    sent the Appellant a letter stating that  he  had  60  days  to  choose
    another college and to obtain a new CAS.

 5. However, the Appellant's IELTS had expired and he  was  required  under
    the Rules to produce an up-to-date certificate.  He then sat and failed
    the examination.  The Appellant's explanation for this is that  he  was
    given very short notice of the examination.  The judge held  that  this
    was not a good reason for failing or a good excuse  for  failing.   The
    fact was that the Appellant's ability in English should have been  more
    advanced than it was when he originally obtained  his  IELTS  over  two
    years earlier.  Since that time, not only had the Appellant been in the
    United Kingdom for one and a half years but he had been undertaking  an
    academic course of study.  There was simply no  justification  for  his
    poor level of English.

 6. The judge went on to observe how the Appellant then attempted to re-sit
    the examination but the institution was not  satisfied  with  the  poor
    copy of his passport that he had provided (the original one being  with
    the Home Office).  The institution asked him to produce "A  good  clear
    copy of the main details page of the passport, certified  by  the  Home
    Office".

 7. The Appellant appeared to believe that he was  required  to  produce  a
    colour copy of the passport and he requested this from the Home Office.
     The Home Office were unable to comply with this request for a coloured
    copy.

 8. Finally, the judge observed that it is notable that when the  Appellant
    sat the exam, which he failed, the Home Office did provide a  certified
    copy of his passport at that time.  This was sufficient to allow him to
    sit the exam.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application  state  that  the  judge  did  not  consider
    Article 8 ECHR even though this had been  pleaded  in  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal and this was an error of law.

10. Permission to appeal was granted on 2nd February 2015 on the basis that
    Article 8 had been pleaded and that, "Although the Appellant's  chances
    of success are very small, it is arguable that it is material".

11. On 20th February 2015, a Rule 24 response was  entered  to  the  effect
    that,

         "Although the judge did not deal with Article 8 per se it is  clear
         that on the factual basis of this case there could be  no  prospect
         of a successful Article for the Appellant.   This  is  because  the
         Supreme Court in Patel [2013] UKSC 72 had stated (at paragraph  57)
         that, 'The opportunity for a  promising  student  to  complete  his
         course in this country, however desirable in general terms, is  not
         in itself a right protected under Article 8'."

The Hearing

12. At the hearing before me, the Appellant was unrepresented.  I  enquired
    of him why he was unrepresented and whether he wished to  proceed.   He
    said that his representative had told him that the  representative  did
    not need to go to the hearing and that, "If you want to go yourself you
    can".  On behalf of the Home Office,  Mr  I  Richards,  a  Senior  Home
    Office Presenting Officer, was in attendance.  I asked the Appellant if
    he wished to say  anything  in  relation  to  the  matter  before  this
    Tribunal.  The Appellant submitted that,

         "I am a victim of the system.  I don't want to study here.  I  want
         to go home.  But I don't want to have  a  bad  record  to  stop  my
         career back home.  It is not my fault that the college  I  attended
         closed down.  It is not my fault that the  Home  Office  failed  to
         provide me with my passport".

13. For his part, Mr Richards  submitted  that  there  was  no  reason  put
    forward why the decision is wrong in terms of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    As far as Article 8 is concerned the Rule 24 response  makes  it  clear
    that there would have been no prospect of success had  Article  8  been
    considered.  The case of Patel [2013] UKSC 72 makes it clear that there
    is no human right to complete a course that one has  been  engaged  in.
    In the present case the Appellant was not such a  student  whose  human
    rights to study can be said to have  been  interfered  with  given  his
    track record.

14. In reply the Appellant said that he had now sat the test.  He held up a
    certificate.  He said that he had achieved a "distinction"  at  another
    centre.  To this other centre he had sent a Xerox copy of his passport.
     However, what he is not allowed to do is to sit an IELTS test  because
    they require the original passport.

Decision on Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  judge is not one
    that points to a material error of law, such that I should set it aside
    and remake  the  decision.   Under  the  Procedure  Rules,  "The  Upper
    Tribunal may (but may not) set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (see Section 12(2)(a)).  Although Article 8 is pleaded,  there
    is no evidence that it was expressly raised at the hearing before Judge
    McDade, even though the Appellant was represented at  that  time.   The
    judge should have considered Article 8  in  any  event.   However,  the
    failure to consider it is not a material error in the circumstances  of
    this case.  It would not have affected the outcome of  this  case.   It
    cannot for that reason be germane to the eventual decision  reached  by
    the judge.

16. The Appellant's ultimate complaint is that he was not provided  with  a
    colour copy of his passport, but as the judge found the Home Office did
    provide a certified copy of his passport when the Appellant did sit the
    exam which he failed.  The Appellant was not in any  way  disadvantaged
    by the actions of the Home Office and the judge  makes  this  clear  in
    saying that the provision of the copy of the passport, "Was  sufficient
    to enable the institution to allow him to sit the  exam"  when  it  was
    first sat.  The judge also went on to say that it is the responsibility
    of the Appellant, "To ensure  that  the  appropriate  documentation  is
    provided to enable him to sit the IELTS examination.  He did not do so,
    the reason being that he asked the Home Office for a  colour  copy  but
    they simply did not have the facilities to provide".

17. If the Appellant asks for more than he is entitled  to,  he  cannot  be
    surprised if  the  Home  Office  cannot  comply  with  an  unreasonable
    request.  In the end, the Supreme  Court  judgment  in  Patel  governs.
    There is no right, and there would have been no right in a case such as
    the present, for the Appellant to complete his course in this  country,
    "However desirable in general terms" this might be.   It  is  all  very
    well for the Appellant to produce a certificate before  me,  which  the
    Home Office have not had the opportunity to examine, to say that he has
    now  reached  the  level  of   distinction,   after   sitting   another
    examination, which is not the IELTS examination,  as  approved  by  the
    authorities.  It does not mean that his claim has any merit at the time
    of its consideration by the Respondent Home Office.

Decision

18. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

19. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th February 2016


