
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/34868/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 11 March 2015                     |On 12 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            SAMUEL IZUCHI AMAZIRO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Mahmud, instructed by West Ham Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whilst this is an appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, for  convenience  I  will  refer  to  the  parties  in  the
    determination as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant, a  national  of  Nigeria,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  his
    application for  a  residence  card  as  confirmation  of  a  right  of
    residence as the partner of a Hungarian national, Aniko  Kovacs,  being
    an EEA national living in the UK. The reason given for the  refusal  in
    the reasons for refusal letter is that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
    provide  sufficient  evidence  to  demonstrate  that  his  partner   is
    currently a qualified person in the UK as a worker in  accordance  with
    regulation 6 of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  (the  2006
    Regulations). First-tier Tribunal Judge C Burns allowed the appeal  and
    the Secretary of State now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 3. The relevant provisions of the 2006 Regulations  for  the  purposes  of
    this appeal are as follows;

         "Family member


             7....

                  (3) Subject to paragraph (4), a person who is an  extended
                  family member and has  been  issued  with  an  EEA  family
                  permit, a registration certificate  or  a  residence  card
                  shall be treated as the family member of the relevant  EEA
                  national for as  long  as  he  continues  to  satisfy  the
                  conditions in regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or (5) in relation
                  to that EEA national and the permit, certificate  or  card
                  has not ceased to be valid or been revoked.

                  ...

         "Extended family member"


             8.  (1) In these Regulations "extended family member" means a
                  person who is not a family member of an EEA national under
                  regulation 7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the
                  conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

                  ...

                  (5) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if
                  the person is the partner of an EEA national (other than a
                  civil partner) and can prove to the decision maker that he
                  is in a durable relationship with the EEA national.

                  (6) In these Regulations "relevant EEA national" means, in
                  relation to an extended family member, the EEA national
                  who is or whose spouse or civil partner is the relative of
                  the extended family member for the purpose of paragraph
                  (2), (3) or (4) or the EEA national who is the partner of
                  the extended family member for the purpose of paragraph
                  (5).

         Issue of EEA family permit


             12.       (1) An entry clearance officer must issue an EEA
                  family permit to a person who applies for one if the
                  person is a family member of an EEA national and-

                      (a) the EEA national-

                           (i)is residing in the UK in accordance with these
                           Regulations; or

                           (ii) will be travelling to the United Kingdom
                           within six months of the date of the application
                           and will be an EEA national residing in the
                           United Kingdom in accordance with these
                           Regulations on arrival in the United Kingdom; and

                      (b) the family member will be accompanying the EEA
                      national to the United Kingdom or joining the EEA
                      national there.

                      ...

                  (2) An entry clearance officer may issue an EEA family
                  permit to an extended family member of an EEA national who
                  applies for one if-

                      (a) the relevant EEA national satisfies the condition
                      in paragraph (1)(a);

                      (b) the extended family member wishes to accompany
                      the relevant EEA national to the United Kingdom or to
                      join him there; and

                      (c) in all the circumstances, it appears to the entry
                      clearance officer appropriate to issue the EEA family
                      permit.

                  (3) Where an entry clearance officer receives an
                  application under paragraph (2) he shall undertake an
                  extensive examination of the personal circumstances of the
                  applicant and if he refuses the application shall give
                  reasons justifying the refusal unless this is contrary to
                  the interests of national security.

                  (4) An EEA family permit issued under this regulation
                  shall be issued free of charge and as soon as possible.

                  ...

         Issue of residence card


             17. (1) The Secretary of State must issue a residence card to
                  a person who is not an EEA national and is the family
                  member of a qualified person or of an EEA national with a
                  permanent right of residence under regulation 15 on
                  application and production of-

                      (a) a valid passport; and

                      (b) proof that the applicant is such a family member.

                  (2) The Secretary of State must issue a residence card to
                  a person who is not an EEA national but who is a family
                  member who has retained the right of residence on
                  application and production of-

                      (a) a valid passport; and

                      (b) proof that the applicant is a family member who
                      has retained the right of residence.

                  (3) On receipt of an application under paragraph (1) or
                  (2) and the documents that are required to accompany the
                  application the Secretary of State shall immediately issue
                  the applicant with a certificate of application for the
                  residence card and the residence card shall be issued no
                  later than six months after the date on which the
                  application and documents are received.

                  (4) The Secretary of State may issue a residence card to
                  an extended family member not falling within regulation
                  7(3) who is not an EEA national on application if-

                      (a) the relevant EEA national in relation to the
                      extended family member is a qualified person or an
                      EEA national with a permanent right of residence
                      under regulation 15; and

                      (b) in all the circumstances it appears to the
                      Secretary of State appropriate to issue the residence
                      card.

                  (5) Where the Secretary of State receives an application
                  under paragraph (4) he shall undertake an extensive
                  examination of the personal circumstances of the applicant
                  and if he refuses the application shall give reasons
                  justifying the refusal unless this is contrary to the
                  interests of national security.

                  ..."

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the appeal on  the  papers  in
    accordance with the appellant's request. He considered the  documentary
    evidence and found that the appellant's partner is working  as  claimed
    and is therefore a qualified person in accordance with regulation 6 (1)
    (b) of the 2006 Regulations. The Judge allowed the appeal stating  that
    the appellant is entitled to a residence card under regulation 17.

 5. The sole ground of appeal is that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred
    in allowing the appeal outright. It is contended that he should instead
    have returned the matter to the Secretary of State for the exercise  of
    her discretion under regulation 17 (4) and  (5).  Mr  Clarke  submitted
    that the Judge did not have jurisdiction to allow the  appeal  outright
    as the Secretary of State had not  yet  exercised  her  discretion.  He
    relied on the decision of the Tribunal  in  MO  (regulation  17(4)  EEA
    Regulations) Iraq [2008] UKAIT 00061.

 6. In the instant appeal the appellant's passport shows that he was issued
    with an EEA Family Permit in Warsaw on 18 December 2013 valid until  18
    June 2014 on the basis of his relationship with his partner. He entered
    the UK on 22 January 2014. According to the reasons for refusal  letter
    he applied for a  residence  card  on  13  June  2014.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge stated at paragraph 5 of the determination that  because
    the appellant was issued with an EEA family permit he is treated  as  a
    family member by virtue of regulation 7 (3) of the 2006 Regulations.

 7. The appellant was issued with an EEA Family Permit and  applied  for  a
    residence card during the currency of that  Family  Permit.  Mr  Mahmud
    relied on UKVI modernised guidance which advises  caseworkers  that  in
    such cases it is necessary only to  consider  whether  the  appellant's
    partner is a qualified  person  and  not  to  go  on  to  consider  the
    remaining three stages which relate to the relationship, the qualifying
    conditions and the extensive examination of  the  appellant's  personal
    circumstances. He submitted that this demonstrates the  application  of
    regulation 7(3).  However this guidance was issued in January 2015. The
    parties endeavoured to obtain the guidance applicable before  then  and
    agreed that the previous, undated, guidance only set out the provisions
    of regulation 7  (3)  without  advising  as  to  the  necessity  to  be
    satisfied as to all the elements of regulation 17 (4).

 8. In these circumstances  I  must  revert  to  the  ordinary  meaning  of
    regulation 7(3) read with the Regulations as a whole and in  particular
    regulation 12.  Subsequent  to  the  hearing  I  became  aware  of  the
    Tribunal's decision in Ewulo (effect of family permit - OFM) UKUT  238.
    Neither party drew my attention to this decision but it is relevant  to
    the issue to be determined in this appeal and is a reported case and in
    the public domain. That was an appeal chaired by the then President  of
    the Tribunal, Mr Justice Blake. The decision is summarised in the  head
    note as follows;

         "i) Where a family permit has been issued by an ECO  after  inquiry
         pursuant to regulation 12 of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006 and is used to enter the  United  Kingdom  a
         subsequent application for a residence card  is  to  be  determined
         under regulation 7(3) of the Regulations.

         ii) Where the validity of the issue of the  family  permit  is  not
         contested by the Secretary of State and the  permit  has  not  been
         revoked, the issue is whether there has been a material  change  of
         circumstances since arrival with the consequence that the  claimant
         no longer qualifies as an extended family member"

 9. Having noted that no case had been made  that  the  EEA  family  permit
    should be revoked and that findings had been made that the appellant in
    that case continued to meet the requirements  for  being  the  extended
    family member of an EEA national,  the  Tribunal  concluded  that  "...
    regulation 7(3) requires the respondent to treat  the  appellant  as  a
    family member of a qualified person and, under  regulation  17(1),  the
    issue of a residence card to such a person is mandatory."

10. This gives further support to Mr Mahmud's submission. He submitted that
    the ECO had already exercised discretion in this  case.  I  agree  that
    regulation 12 requires the ECO to exercise discretion and undertake  an
    extensive  examination  of  the  appellant's  circumstances.   Further,
    regulation 17 (4) states that it does not apply to an  extended  family
    member covered by regulation 7 (3). It seems to me that if   regulation
    7 (3) does not mean that the appellant, having been issued with an  EEA
    Family Permit which remained valid when  he  applied  for  a  residence
    card, should be treated as a family member for  the  purposes  of  that
    application, it is not at all clear when regulation 7 (3) can apply.

11. Accordingly I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  not
    make an error of law in the determination of this appeal. He was  right
    to treat the appellant as a family member in accordance with regulation
    7 (3) and, in light of his findings as to the substantive  issue  which
    are not challenged, was right to allow the appeal outright. In light of
    the Judge's findings the appellant  is  entitled  to  the  issue  of  a
    residence card under regulation  17  (1).  He  is  not  treated  as  an
    extended family member subject to the discretion in regulation 17 (4).

Conclusion:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on point of law.



Signed      Date: 11 March 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

