

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34498/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 29th January 2016                     |                On 4th February 2016 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      MISS ARKEYIA YANEISA BIANCHA BISH
                        (NO anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M H Kotas,  Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Hannah of Corban Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.  This is an appeal against a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Harris promulgated on 24th  July  2015  in  which  he
       allowed an appeal against a decision made by the Secretary of  State
       on 22nd August 2012 that removal of Miss Bish to Jamaica  would  not
       be in breach of the Immigration Rules or Article 8 ECHR.


    2. The appellant before me, is the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department and the Respondent to this appeal, is Miss Arkeyia  Bish.
       However for ease of reference, in the  course  of  this  decision  I
       shall adopt the parties' status as  it  was  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.  I shall in this decision,  refer  to  Miss  Bish  as  the
       appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


    3. The findings made by the Judge insofar as  the  application  of  the
       Immigration Rules is concerned, are far from  clear.   At  paragraph
       [10] of his decision the Judge states "It is argued that  she  meets
       the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(i),  (ii)  and  (vi)."   At
       paragraph [12], the Judge then states "There is no dispute over  the
       appellant satisfying  in  this  appeal  paragraph  276ADE(1)(i)  and
       (ii).".  Be that as it may, the Judge went on at paragraphs [14]  to
       [17] of his decision to consider whether the appellant was  able  to
       meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the  Immigration
       Rules.  He concluded at paragraph [18]:


             "It may be challenging for the appellant to return to  Jamaica
            but,  on  the  evidence  before  me,  I  am  not  satisfied  she
            demonstrates there would be very significant  obstacles  to  her
            integration into that country."


    4.  The Judge  found  at  paragraph  [19]  that  the  decision  of  the
       respondent was in accordance with the immigration  rules.   He  then
       went on to carry out an assessment  of  the  appellant's  Article  8
       claim, outside the rules, having particular regard to  the  presence
       of the appellant's son T in the UK.  T was born on  2nd  July  2008.
       His father is O R.  The Judge states at paragraph [36]:


             "...I accept that the appellant is the primary carer of T.  It
             is clearly in the childs best interests to be with his mother.
              However, it is also raised by the appellant that  he  has  at
             least weekly contact with his father.  This  contact  has  not
             been disputed before me."


    5. The Judge goes on at paragraphs [37] to  [42]  of  his  decision  to
       state:


             "37. ....the respondent treats the father as having no  lawful
             status in the UK and so considers  that  she  cannot  consider
             this to be an exceptional circumstances to allow the appellant
             and her son to remain in the UK.


             38.   Yet,  although  not  focussed   upon   particularly   in
             submissions by the appellant before me, somewhat buried in the
             poorly paginated bundle of the appellant at the second of  the
             two pages numbered 69 are  passport  details  for  the  father
             being a British citizen moreover a British citizen at the time
             of T's birth in this country.


             39.   Before  me  the  respondent  did   not   challenge   the
             reliability of these passport details. In the circumstances, I
             find I have to treat the respondent as making a material error
             about the immigration status of the  father  when  considering
             the appellant and her child's case under s.55 of the 2009  Act
             and her exceptional circumstances policy. This is unlawful.


             40.   This  is  relevant  not  only  to  the   assessment   of
             interference with the family life between child and father but
             also to the status of T. If the child's father was  already  a
             British citizen at the time of the child's birth, on the  face
             of it T could well be a British citizen himself  under  s.1(1)
             British Nationality Act 1981.


             41.  If T is a British citizen, then the appellant is able  to
             rely upon policy concerning the best interests of  the  child,
             published by the respondent in Immigration Directorate  Family
             Migration:  Appendix  FM  1.0b  November  2014,   particularly
             section 11.2.3.


             42.  These are matters that are directly relevant to assessing
             whether it is proportionate and  in  the  public  interest  to
             require T to uproot the  ties  he  has  to  this  country  and
             relocate with his mother to Jamaica and which are  capable  of
             being compelling reasons that outweigh factors  going  against
             the appellant. "


    6. In light of the concerns that he had about the potential nationality
       of T, the Judge  considered  that  he  was  not  properly  armed  to
       consider the best interests of the child because the  respondent  is
       in a better position  than  the  Tribunal,  to  verify  whether  the
       passport details of the father do establish that T should be treated
       as a British citizen.  The Judge allowed the appeal to  the  limited
       extent that the appellant's case is remitted back to the  respondent
       for further consideration.


 The Grounds of Appeal


    7.  The  respondent  appeals  on  sole  the  ground  that  the  Judge's
       understanding that Ts father is a British  Citizen,  is  flawed  and
       misconceived.  The respondent submits that evidence had in fact been
       provided by the Presenting Officer on the day  of  the  hearing,  to
       show that the child's father is an overstayer in  the  UK.   In  the
       circumstances, the Judge should have gone on to make  an  assessment
       of the Article 8 claim on the basis that Ts father is not a  British
       Citizen, and has no lawful basis upon which he himself can remain in
       the UK.


    8. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Hollingworth on 12th November 2015.  The matter comes before  me  to
       consider whether or not the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Harris involved the making of a material error of law,  and  if  the
       decision is set aside, to re-make the decision.


 Discussion


    9. In light of the very narrow issue in this appeal, I  can  deal  with
       the matter in short form without rehearsing the  background  to  the
       appeal.  At the hearing before  me,  Ms  Hannah  on  behalf  of  the
       appellant conceded that there is a material  factual  error  in  the
       decision of the Judge.  She informed me that the father of T  is  in
       fact a Jamaican national, who she understands, has no  lawful  basis
       to be in the UK.  It is T's grandfather who is a British Citizen.


   10. The parties agreed that following on from the error of  fact  as  to
       the nationality of T's father, the Judge failed to consider the best
       interests of  the  child,  and  they  agreed  that  further  factual
       findings will be necessary in that respect.  T is now over  the  age
       of seven and both parties submit that the matter should be  remitted
       to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.


   11. Having read the decision of the Judge and  it  being  common  ground
       that T's father is not a British Citizen, I am  satisfied  that  the
       Judge made a material error of law in his decision.


   12. I note that the Upper Tribunal in accordance  with  Part  3  of  the
       Practice Statement for the Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber  of  the
       Upper Tribunal is in terms of disposal of appeals,  likely  on  each
       occasion to proceed to remake the decision, instead of remitting the
       case to the  First  Tier  Tribunal  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
       satisfied that the effect of the error of the  First  Tier  Tribunal
       Judge has been to deprive a party before the  First  Tribunal  of  a
       fair hearing or other opportunity for that parties case  to  be  put
       to, and considered by the First Tier Tribunal.


   13. In my view the most fair and proportionate way in which to deal with
       this case given the nature and extent of the factual findings to  be
       made, is to remit the matter for a de novo hearing in the First-tier
       Tribunal.


 Notice of Decision


   14. The appeal is  allowed  and  the  matter  is  remitted  to  a  newly
       constituted First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing of the appeal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


   15. No application for an anonymity  direction  was  made,  and  no  such
       direction is made.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Tribunal declined to make a fee award.  Whether or not a  fee
award is appropriate can be determined by the First-tier  Tribunal  when  it
decides the appeal.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
