








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34733/2014
                                                               IA/34736/2014
                                                               IA/34737/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|on 29 February 2016               |on 15 April 2016                         |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


               the secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mrs Momotaj Sheren
                         Miss Jannatul Ferdous Alam
                              Miss Sumayia Alam
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                 Respondents

Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A A Rahman, MQ Hassan Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as "the secretary of state" and to  the
      respondents as "the claimants."


   2. The claimants are nationals of Bangladesh and are a family unit.  They
      are the mother and two children born on 1  January  1973,  31  January
      1999 and 24 August 2000 respectively. I shall refer to Mrs  Sheren  as
      "the claimant."


   3. The claimants appealed against the decisions of the  respondent  dated
      19 August 2014 refusing their applications for leave to remain in  the
      UK, and to issue removal directions.


   4. In a decision promulgated on 13 April 2015,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge allowed their appeals under the Immigration Rules.


   5. The second and third claimants contended that they had resided in  the
      UK for a continuous period of seven years and that  it  would  not  be
      reasonable to expect them to leave the  UK.  They  claimed  that  they
      satisfied  the  requirements  of  paragraph   276ADE(1)(iv)   of   the
      Immigration Rules.


   6. The claimant contended under Appendix FM section EX.1 that she  has  a
      genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  the  children  who
      have lived in the UK for seven years and it would not be reasonable to
      expect the children to leave the UK. It was also contended  that  they
      should succeed outside the rules under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights
      Convention [2].


   7. The secretary of state was not represented at the hearing.


   8. The evidence before the First-tier Judge was that before coming to the
      UK, the claimant  and  her  daughters  had  lived  for  two  years  in
      Bangladesh. Prior to that they lived in Saudi Arabia  and  Abu  Dhabi.
      The second claimant (Jannatul) had a problem with  her  speech  before
      coming here. She had been enrolled in  a  school  in  Bangladesh.  Her
      daughter, Sumayia, did not go to school in  Bangladesh.  She  did  not
      speak much. She is able to speak now. She and her daughters have  been
      in the UK for seven years and eight months [5].


   9. The family only visited Bangladesh once since coming to the UK, for  a
      period of about 3-4 weeks. The claimant's father  passed  away  during
      that visit. Her mother was still alive in  Bangladesh  but  was  "very
      old." The claimant confirmed that  she  still  had  three  sisters  in
      Bangladesh with whom she kept in contact by telephone [6].


  10. When the claimant's husband left for Bangladesh in 2013, the claimants
      stayed in the UK. Since February 2013, her children  have  lived  with
      the  claimant.  She  has  been  responsible   for   maintaining   them
      financially. She used to work but has stopped working for one  of  the
      companies and only has one job.  She  looks  after  her  children  and
      provides their care here. [7]


  11. The children do have contact with their father from time to  time.  He
      does not provide financial support for them as  he  has  "very  little
      income" [7].


  12. The claimant confirmed that her husband was currently in Spain and has
      been there since December 2014.  She said that her  husband  paid  for
      their  eldest  daughter's  education;   the  latter  is  currently  at
      university. For the last two  years  her  husband  had  not  made  any
      financial provision for the children.


  13. The claimant took the decision  to  stay  in  the  UK  and  allow  her
      daughters to finish their education here when  she  saw  the  progress
      that they had made at school. On account of his  work  situation,  her
      husband was required to leave for Bangladesh.


  14. When her husband was  in  Bangladesh,  she  often  needed  an  instant
      decision which her husband was not able to offer.  She  took  all  the
      decisions herself regarding what was good for the children [9].


  15. The Judge heard evidence as to how Jannatul was doing at  school.  She
      was doing well and was going  to  sit  her  GCSE  using  British  Sign
      Language and had a place at college. The claimant asserted that if her
      daughter had to go back to Bangladesh she would be admitted to a class
      5 or 6 classes below her present grade.  She  would  not  be  able  to
      continue her studies. She would be cut off  from  the  outside  world.
      That would impact on her mental and physical welfare.


  16. The claimant stated in evidence that Sumayia spoke  very  little  when
      she was in Bangladesh. She was also in a support group in a school  in
      the UK. She is required to use a head microphone and hearing  aid.  If
      she went back to Bangladesh, she would have difficulty in adjusting as
      she was used to the UK. Her studies have been in  English.  She  would
      not be able to adjust to Bangladesh. It would be difficult for her  as
      she will sit her GCSEs "next year". [12] She does not know Bengali and
      has never spoken it. If returned to Bangladesh, her children would not
      be able to access the supports for their deafness that they had in the
      UK and the facilities are not there.


  17. Sumayia speaks a little bit of Bengali at home but  cannot  write  it.
      Nor could Jannatul write any Bengali.


  18. The Judge in his "Conclusions" had no hesitation in finding  that  the
      claimant was a credible witness. He found her evidence  regarding  the
      level of input her husband has in relation to decisions affecting  the
      children to be credible.


  19. He had regard to s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
      2009 regarding the best interests  of  the  child,  which  must  be  a
      primary consideration.


  20. He considered  the  children's  appeals  first  under  the  rules  and
      considered the issue of the best interests of the child  in  assessing
      whether it is reasonable for them to return to Bangladesh.


  21. He found that the decision of the respondent dated 19 August 2014  was
      flawed as it incorrectly stated that the second  and  third  claimants
      did not live continuously in the UK for seven years [24].


  22. The claimants have been in the UK lawfully  throughout.  They  entered
      the UK in 2007 with entry clearance and their visas were extended with
      leave granted until 30 May 2014. They applied  for  further  leave  to
      remain on 29 May 2014 [25].


  23. The Judge had regard to EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 at
      [35]. He also had regard to Azimi-Moayed regarding the best  interests
      of the children [26-27].


  24. He found that the claimant would be able to work in Bangladesh and  be
      in a position to financially support and provide for  the  second  and
      third claimants. There was no reason why she would be unable to return
      to Bangladesh to set up a home there and work  to  provide  for  them.
      There is also an extended family still living in Bangladesh.


  25. The second and third claimants have been residing  in  the  UK  for  a
      period in excess of seven years. They  have  been  here  during  their
      formative years in their development from aged 8 in the  case  of  the
      second claimant and aged 6 in the case of the third [29].


  26. They have spent more than seven years in education  here.  The  second
      claimant has  a  disability  and  is  profoundly  deaf.  She  accesses
      education through the use of British Sign Language and has  specialist
      educational support. She is able to  lip  read  in  English.  She  has
      reached an important stage in her education and  will  be  taking  her
      GCSEs this year [30].


  27. He had regard at [30] to the COI report dated  30  December  2012.  He
      found that the  second  claimant  would  have  significant  linguistic
      difficulty in adapting to life in Bangladesh,  having  regard  to  her
      disability. She would be  unable  to  communicate  effectively  there.
      Here,  her  communication  difficulties  are  supported  and  she  can
      communicate with others around her  more  effectively.  She  has  made
      friends here, particularly through school. If required to leave the UK
      this  will  have  significant  adverse  effects  on  her  ability   to
      communicate with others and on her overall well being [30].


  28. She has become distanced from Bangladesh and only visited the  country
      once since residing here. That was for  a  short  period.  She  cannot
      speak or read Bengali. It would be difficult for her to adapt to  life
      in Bangladesh, which would have a detrimental effect on her education.
      [31]


  29. Her best interests are that she should remain in the UK and be allowed
      to complete her education. It would be inappropriate  to  disrupt  her
      education, given her disability and the absence of compelling  reasons
      to the contrary.


  30. Accordingly, the Judge found that it would not be reasonable to expect
      the second claimant to return to Bangladesh [33].


  31. With regard to the third claimant,  he  noted  that  she  also  has  a
      disability. She is not profoundly  deaf  but  has  bilateral  moderate
      hearing impairment. She uses hearing aids  and  requires  intervention
      from a specialist speech and language therapist and from a teacher  of
      the deaf to develop her listening, learning  and  communication  [34].
      She is on the school special educational needs register.


  32. Her disability is not so severe as that of the  second  claimant.  The
      Judge found that her disability would also make it very difficult  for
      her to adapt to life in Bangladesh. Her return would significantly set
      back the progress she has made in her education here [34].


  33. He found that it would be in her best interests as well to  remain  in
      the UK and complete her education.


  34. The Judge accordingly allowed the appeals  of  the  second  and  third
      claimants under the Immigration Rules.


  35. He then considered whether their mother can succeed under  the  Rules.
      It was contended that she met the requirements of the Rules for  leave
      to remain as a parent under  Appendix  FM  EX.1.  He  found  that  the
      children are not leading independent lives and are living  in  the  UK
      and have lived here continuously for at least seven years.   He  found
      that the claimant  had  sole  responsibility,  having  regard  to  the
      decision of the Court of Appeal in TD (Yemen) v SSHD [2006] UKAIT 0049
      [38].


  36. He had regard to the respondent's assertions that  she  did  not  have
      sole responsibility for the reasons set out at [39]. He found that her
      husband had returned  to  Bangladesh  in  February  2013.  Nor  is  he
      referred  to  as  being  present  at   any   meetings   with   medical
      professionals after 2012 [39].


  37. He found that the claimant had sole responsibility for the second  and
      third claimants. In particular, she makes any major decisions in their
      lives in relation to their education and which school they attend, and
      where they should live. Whilst their father had been involved in their
      upbringing when he was residing in the UK, the Judge found that  since
      he returned to Bangladesh in February 2013 and then moved to Spain  in
      December 2014, he has played very little part in their lives  and  has
      "in effect abdicated responsibility for them" [40].


  38. Accordingly the claimant satisfied the requirements of EX.1. He stated
      at [41]  "that  for  the  reasons  already  given"  it  would  not  be
      reasonable to expect the second and third claimants to leave  the  UK.
      The claimant therefore satisfies the requirements under the Rules.


  39. No human rights claim under Article 8 was considered. At the  hearing,
      the Judge noted that Mr Rahman submitted at [2] that if the Judge  was
      not satisfied that the claimants met the requirements under the rules,
      the appeals should be allowed under Article 8. It does not appear that
      the submission was made that their appeals  should  in  any  event  be
      considered under the Human Rights Convention. There has been no  cross
      appeal by the claimants on the basis that there has been an  error  of
      law given that the First-tier Judge failed to  consider  claims  under
      Article 8.


  40. On 27 July 2015, Upper Tribunal Judge Keki� granted the  secretary  of
      state permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and in particular in
      respect of the  Judge's  assessment  of  the  best  interests  of  the
      children and the "flawed finding" relating to the  duration  of  their
      residence. It was arguable that at the date of  application  they  had
      not spent seven years in the UK. The Judge's  findings  regarding  the
      mother's sole responsibility for her children were  also  "criticised"
      as the father has not abdicated  responsibility  for  them  and  makes
      financial contributions.


  41. Ms Isherwood at the outset referred  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the
      rules. This set out the requirements to be met for an application  for
      leave to remain on the grounds of private life. It  is  a  requirement
      that at the date of application, the claimant,  inter  alia,  must  be
      under the age of 18 and have lived continuously in the UK for at least
      seven years, and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to
      leave the UK. That  also  applies  to  section  EX.1  (a)(i)  (cc)  if
      applicable.


  42. The children's applications were refused  under  paragraph  276ADE  as
      they had not lived in the UK continuously for  at  least  seven  years
      immediately preceding the date of application. The  applications  were
      all made on 29 May 2014 and they entered the UK on 19 July 2007,  i.e.
      less than seven years earlier.


  43. It is also  a  requirement  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(ii)  that  the
      applicant has made a valid application for  leave  to  remain  on  the
      grounds of private life in the UK.


  44. On behalf of the claimants, Mr Rahman submitted that  the  issues  are
      narrow but "technical".  He relied on his Rule 24  response  dated  24
      November 2015, in which he contended at paragraphs 3 onwards, that  it
      was  open  to  the  Judge  to  conclude  that  the   claimants   lived
      continuously in the UK for seven years prior to the application within
      the meaning of paragraph 276ADE(1).


  45. Mr Rahman relied on paragraph 276AO of the Rules, which  provided  (as
      at the date  of  lodging  their  appeal)  that  for  the  purposes  of
      paragraph 276ADE the requirement to make a valid application will  not
      apply when the Article 8 claim is raised as part of an  asylum  claim;
      or where removal directions have been set pending an imminent removal;
      or in an appeal or in response to a one stop notice issued under s.120
      of the 2002 Act. Such a notice was issued in respect of the claimants.




  46. He submitted that where paragraph  276ADE  is  relied  on  during  the
      course of an immigration appeal, it is  the  date  of  appeal  hearing
      which is material as the requirement to make a  valid  application  is
      waived. He referred to paragraph 276ADEO which provides that  for  the
      purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1)  the  requirements  to  make  a  valid
      application will not apply when the Article 8 claim is  raised  in  an
      appeal. He submitted that the Article 8 claim was meant to include  an
      Article 8 claim made under the rules.


  47. He submitted at paragraph 11 of his  "further  submissions"  that  the
      application is a valid one if it complies with all the  provisions  of
      paragraph 34 of the Immigration Rules. He submitted at paragraph 12 of
      the submissions that the claimants made  valid  applications  as  they
      were considered.


  48. Nor is the secretary of state's contention that paragraph 276ADE is to
      be judged strictly by reference to  the  actual  date  of  application
      consistent  with  other  statutory  provisions,  including  s.120  and
      s.85(4) of the Nationality Asylum and Immigration Act 2002.


  49. He submitted at paragraph 9 of the response  that  in  this  case  the
      claimants had acquired seven years before consideration  and  decision
      of their applications. Accordingly the relevant date  here  should  be
      the date when they acquired seven years' stay on 19 July 2014, (whilst
      the application was still pending) as the application  is  varied   by
      change of circumstances and on a true  interpretation  of  the  matter
      that would be the date of application.


  50. He relied for that submission on the decision in  Qureshi  (Tier  4  -
      Effect of Variation) App  C  Pakistan  [2011]  UKUT  00412  (IAC).  He
      submitted  that  the  same  principle  in  Qureshi  will   apply   and
      consequently the First-tier Judge made no error in allowing the appeal
      as the appellants had acquired seven years whilst the application  was
      still pending. He contended that the application was "varied by change
      of  circumstances".  Even  though  Qureshi  involved  a  points  based
      application, "by analogy" the same principle applied  in  relation  to
      paragraph 276ADE(1) of the rules.


  51. He further submitted that the grounds raised no arguable error of  law
      and that it would not be reasonable to expect the claimants to  return
      to Bangladesh. The argument that the Judge did not conduct "a balanced
      judgment" on this issue was "very vague".


  52. He submitted that if the requirement of a valid application  has  been
      dispensed with when human rights  are  raised  in  an  appeal,  or  in
      response to a s.120  notice,  a  necessary  consequence  is  that  the
      reference to "prior to application" is not relevant. Hence  the  seven
      years shall be decided by reference to the point when it was raised in
      appeal. In this case it was raised with the notice of appeal.


  53. He also submitted at paragraph 22 of his further submissions that  the
      seven year "fact" was not a new matter as it was already accrued  when
      the application was pending and the secretary of state was duly put on
      notice.


  54. Ms Isherwood on behalf of the secretary of state  submitted  that  the
      decision in Qureshi had no bearing on the appeal. The letter dated  29
      May 2014 at 'D' of the respondent's bundle constituted the application
      for limited leave to remain on the grounds of private  life.  However,
      it was noted there that the applicants' residence in the UK  would  be
      seven years on  19  July  2014,  which  was  another  six  weeks.  The
      application was accordingly made earlier as their leave  would  expire
      on 30 May  2014.  That  is  why  they  had  to  make  "this  premature
      application" (page 2).   This  did  not  'in  any  way  constitute  an
      application to vary'.


  55. She referred to a further letter from the claimant's solicitors  dated
      11 August  2014  following  a  letter  from  the  secretary  of  state
      requiring further documents. These are set out. There  was  a  further
      explanation as  to  why  Ms  Mariam  Allam  is  not  applying  for  an
      extension.


  56. Ms Isherwood repeated her contention  that  unlike  the  appellant  in
      Qureshi, there has been  no  attempt  to  vary  the  application.  The
      claimants were required to meet the relevant requirements at the  date
      the  application  was  made.  The  argument  presented  amounts  to  a
      submission  that  the  secretary  of  state  should   have   exercised
      discretion in the circumstances.


  57. Ms Isherwood submitted that a valid application under the  Rules  with
      effect from 9 July 2012 means an application made in  accordance  with
      the requirements of Part 1 of the rules.


  58. Part 1 contains general provisions.  A34 provides that an  application
      for leave to remain under the rules must be made, inter alia, by using
      the specified application form.. There has been no contention that the
      application was not valid.


  59. She  submitted  that  the  Judge's  findings  that  it  would  not  be
      reasonable to expect the child claimants to return to  Bangladesh  was
      flawed. A balanced judgment of what could reasonably  be  expected  of
      those involved in the appeal in the light of all  the  material  facts
      was required.


  60. She referred to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Nasim and others
      (Article 8) Pakistan [2014]  UKUT  25  which  was  promulgated  on  17
      January 2014. She submitted that there was a similar  factual  matrix.
      The Tribunal noted that the judgments of the Supreme  Court  in  Patel
      and Others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 served to re-focus attention  on  the
      nature and purpose of Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, and in
      particular, to recognise that Article 8's limited utility  in  private
      life cases that are far removed from the protection of an individual's
      moral and physical integrity.


  61. In considering the appeals of Mr Mughal and his family,  the  Tribunal
      noted at [54] that he entered the  UK  in  June  2011  as  a  student.
      Shortly after that he was joined by his wife and their three children,
      born on 2004, 2007 and 2008. A fourth child was  born  in  the  UK  in
      2011.


  62. The appellant in that appeal sought to extend his leave to  remain  in
      the UK in order to gain work experience here. The First-tier  Tribunal
      noted in the decision  dated  13  November  2012  that  there  was  no
      evidence to show that it would not be in the children's best interests
      to return to Pakistan.  It was now a feature of the case for Mr Mughal
      and his family that the best interests of the two  children  at  least
      lie in remaining in the UK on the basis that two of his children,  the
      daughter born in January 2004  and  the  one  born  in  December  2011
      suffered from deafness [56].


  63. The Tribunal was  presented  with  documentary  material  relating  to
      hospital visits made by these children in the UK  in  connection  with
      their deafness as well as school reports relating to the  school  aged
      children. There were  various  letters  from  the  NHS  regarding  the
      daughters. The Tribunal referred to various  decisions  regarding  the
      "best interests" of children in the context  of  immigration  such  as
      Azimi-Moyaed and others (Decisions affecting children; onward appeals)
      [2013] UKUT 197 and Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74. The Tribunal  noted
      at [65] that as concerns the two children who suffered from  deafness,
      given the socio economic position of the family, there was  no  reason
      to assume that these  children  would  not  continue  to  receive  the
      necessary medical attention for their deafness in Pakistan.


  64. Their removal as a family would not constitute an interference with Mr
      Mughal's Article 8 rights or be  disproportionate  to  the  legitimate
      public end of the  maintenance  of  a  coherent  and  fair  system  of
      immigration control.


  65. Ms Isherwood submitted that there has been  no  appropriate  balancing
      exercise taken under s.55.  The Judge found that the  child  claimants
      came to the UK when the elder child was 8 years old  and  the  younger
      was 6. Both had lived in the UK for  seven  years  and  eight  months.
      Although the claimants had been in the UK lawfully, they had not lived
      here for the required seven years as at the date of application.


  66. She referred to the finding by the Judge that the  claimant  would  be
      able to work  in  Bangladesh  and  to  support  and  provide  for  the
      children. There is no reason why she would  be  unable  to  return  to
      Bangladesh and set up a home there and provide for them. There was  an
      extended family still living there [28].


  67. Ms Isherwood submitted that although the Judge referred  to  paragraph
      35 of EV (Philippines) and others, supra, no reasons were given as  to
      why the circumstances were compelling.  She also referred to the Upper
      Tribunal's decision in AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT  0260  (IAC)  at
      [13]. The mere presence of the children in the UK, and their  academic
      success, was not a "trump card" which their parents  could  deploy  to
      demand immigration status for the whole  family;  Butt  v  Norway  App
      47017/09 4 December 2012, and EV (Philippines) and others v  Secretary
      of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874.


  68. Ms Isherwood further submitted that the finding that the claimant  had
      sole responsibility for her children was flawed.  There  was  evidence
      that from time to time the children do have contact with their  father
      [7]. He was currently in Spain and had been there since December 2014.
      He paid for their eldest daughter's education. She is  at  university.
      In her evidence, the claimant  stated  that  as  her  husband  was  in
      Bangladesh she often needed an instant decision. Her husband  was  not
      able to offer such an instant decision. As  a  result  she  took  such
      decisions herself [9]. However, at  [10]  the  Judge  noted  that  the
      claimant stated that she sometimes discussed things about the children
      with her husband. When she did talk to him about these things he would
      simply say in relation to any decision that "you talk  to  people  and
      you take the decision." She would make any decision regarding  medical
      intervention or advice from the school and  make  the  decision.   She
      submitted that it is apparent  that  the  husband  has  not  abdicated
      responsibility since he returned to Bangladesh in  February  2013  and
      then moved to Spain in December 2014.


      Assessment


  69. It is accepted on behalf of the claimants that when  the  applications
      were submitted, the second and third claimants had not been in the  UK
      for a period of seven years. However, it is contended that as  at  the
      date of the decision, they had been here for over seven years.


  70. Mr Rahman relied on  paragraph  276AO  which  provides  that  for  the
      purpose of  paragraph  276ADE(1)  the  requirement  to  make  a  valid
      application will not apply if the Article 8 claim is raised in certain
      relevant contexts, including where the claim is raised in an appeal or
      in response to a one stop notice issued under s.120 of the 2002 Act.


  71. A valid application means an application made in accordance  with  the
      requirements of Part 1 of the Rules.  As submitted  by  Mr  Rahman  at
      paragraph 11 of his Further Submissions date 11 January 2016,  if  the
      provisions  of  a  valid  application  are  not  complied  with,   the
      application is invalid and it would  not  be  considered  -  paragraph
      34C(a).  Mr Rahman accepted that the claimants made valid applications
      as they were considered.


  72. Mr Rahman sought to rely on the decision in Qureshi (Tier 4  -  Effect
      of Variation) App C Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00412 (IAC).


  73. The Tribunal in Qureshi held at [38] that a Tier 4  (General)  student
      application can be varied by virtue of the provisions  of  s.3C(5)  of
      the Immigration Act 1971. There is no restriction in  s.3C(5)  on  the
      number of  occasions  on  which  applications  for  variation  of  the
      original application can be made provided notice of variation is given
      prior to the respondent's decision as thereafter there would  then  be
      no application pending.  As to the date the respondent is required  to
      take into account for the purposes of determining  the  points  to  be
      awarded  under  Appendix  C,  where  there  has   been   a   variation
      substituting a new  college,  it  is  the  date  of  the  most  recent
      variation for the purposes of paragraph 1A(c).


  74. The Tribunal considered the legal framework applicable in  that  case,
      namely, paragraph 245ZX(d) of the Rules.  To  achieve  10  points  for
      maintenance, the applicant needed to meet certain of the  requirements
      of Appendix  C.  There  is  reference  to  the  requirement  that  the
      applicant must have the  funds  specified  in  the  relevant  part  of
      Appendix C at the date of the application.


  75. Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 provides for  the  continuation
      of leave pending a variation decision. Section 3C(2) provides that the
      leave is extended by virtue of the section  during  any  period  when,
      inter alia, the application  for  variation  is  neither  decided  nor
      withdrawn.


  76. In Qureshi, the appellant made an in time application for the purposes
      of further studies in the UK which she  then  subsequently  sought  to
      vary in anticipation of that course expiring or coming to an end on 21
      January 2011.


  77. When she made the application dated 12  August  2010  it  was  for  an
      extension of leave to  remain  in  order  to  study  at  a  particular
      college. The Tribunal considered whether when  she  wrote  to  explain
      that she wished to  vary  the  application  for  a  degree  course  at
      Birmingham City University she was applying for a  different  purpose.
      The second issue was what the relevant date of application was for the
      purpose of Appendix C.


  78. She gave notification of her changed plans on  15  December  2010  and
      again on 12 January 2011. The tribunal at [22] identified  the  issues
      to be: which of those dates is the relevant date? In the  alternative,
      is it open to an applicant to  vary  an  application  more  than  once
      whilst it is pending before the respondent?


  79. At [35]  the  Tribunal  was  satisfied  that  the  endeavours  by  the
      appellant to vary her application were for the same purpose, which was
      for further leave to remain in the UK in order to pursue studies.  The
      variation sought by her was not therefore one caught by the provisions
      in  paragraph  34E  of  the  rules,  which  dealt  with  variation  of
      applications or claims for leave to remain.


  80. The Tribunal concluded at [37] that in the case before them  there  is
      no indication that the Attributes needed to be in place at the time of
      application.  Appendix A which was the relevant provision at the  time
      of the decision simply required that an applicant applying  for  entry
      clearance or leave to remain as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant must  score
      75 points for attributes. There is no indication that  the  Attributes
      needed to be in place at the time of the application.


  81. Appendix C however requires an applicant to show the  specified  funds
      at the date of application.


  82. Mr Rahman submitted that "by analogy" the same  principle  in  Qureshi
      should apply and consequently the First-tier Judge made  no  error  in
      allowing the appeal as the appellants had acquired seven years  whilst
      the application was still pending.


  83. The letter  dated  29  May  2014  at  D  of  the  respondent's  bundle
      constituted the application for limited leave to remain on the grounds
      of private life. Their leave however was to expire the following  day,
      i.e., on 30 May 2014. That  is  why  they  had  to  make  a  premature
      application - (page 2).


  84. It is accepted that a valid application was made.   The  secretary  of
      state has never contended that the applications, or any of them,  were
      invalid in any way. The fact that the  applications  were  refused  or
      were unsuccessful cannot be equated with the failure  to  make  "valid
      applications."


  85. Accordingly, there is nothing contained  in  Mr  Rahman's  contentions
      that would render inapplicable the  mandatory  requirement  under  the
      applicable Rule that the relevant seven  years'  residence  must  have
      been met as at the date of application.  The  claimants  have  frankly
      conceded that a premature application in this respect had to be  made.
      If their applications had been delayed they would not have had  lawful
      leave to remain with the consequence that, in the event of a  negative
      outcome, they would have been denied a right of appeal.


  86. I do not accept Mr Rahman contention  that  the  approach  adopted  in
      Qureshi, supra, is 'by analogy applicable'  in  the  claimants'  case.
      There the Tribunal concluded that there was  no  indication  that  the
      relevant attributes under Appendix A needed to be in place at the time
      of the application.  However, insofar as Appendix C was concerned, the
      relevant requirements had to be met at the time of  application.  That
      appendix thus required an applicant to show that the  specified  funds
      were available at the date of application.  That  was  the  time  line
      which Sedley LJ had in mind in Pankina v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 719.


  87. As already noted, one of the requirements to be met  by  an  applicant
      for leave to remain on the grounds of  private  life  under  paragraph
      276ADE(1)(iv) is that at the date of application  the  applicant  must
      have lived continuously in the UK for at least seven years.  Paragraph
      276CE provides that limited leave to remain on the grounds of  private
      life in the UK is to be refused if  the  secretary  of  state  is  not
      satisfied that the requirements in paragraph 276ADE(1) are met. It  is
      thus a mandatory  requirement  affording  no  discretion.   That  also
      applied to the application under Appendix FM - EX.1.


  88. I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made  an  error  of  law  in
      finding at [24] that the decision by the secretary of state (that  the
      second and third claimants have not lived continuously in the  UK  for
      seven years) was flawed.


  89. Furthermore, I find that although referring to EV  (Philippines),  the
      Judge's findings that it would not be reasonable to expect the  second
      and third claimants to return to Bangladesh were made  without  regard
      to the proper approach set out in that case.


  90. Although the Judge referred to s.55 of the  2009  Act,  the  Court  of
      Appeal in EV, at [37], referred to the balance  "on  the  other  side"
      which needs to be taken into account, including the strong  weight  to
      be given to the need to maintain immigration control in pursuit of the
      economic well-being of the country and the fact  that,  ex  hypothesi,
      the applicants have no entitlement to remain. The immigration  history
      of the parents may also be a  relevant  factor,  (the  claimants  have
      remained here lawfully).


  91. Lord Justice Lewison stated at  [55]  that  underlying  statements  of
      principle as disclosed by decisions such as ZH (Tanzania); EB (Kosovo)
      and Naidike v Attorney General of Trinidad  and  Tobago  is  the  real
      world fact that the parent has no right to remain in  the  UK.  So  no
      counter-factual assumption is being made, and  the  interests  of  the
      other family members are to be considered in the  light  of  the  real
      world facts. This is not an approach which  is  confined  to  domestic
      law. One of the factors to be considered is  the  best  interests  and
      well  being  of  the  children,  including  the  seriousness  of   the
      difficulties they would likely encounter in the country to which  they
      are being removed.


  92. Lewison L.J. stated that this too, takes as  the  starting  point  the
      real world fact that the applicant has no right  to  be  in  the  host
      country.  Regard was also had to the decision of the European Court of
      Human Rights in Rodrigues da Silva, Hoogkmeer v Netherlands [2007]  44
      EHRR 34 where the Court stated that factors to be taken  into  account
      in this context are the extent to which  family  life  is  effectively
      ruptured, the extent of the ties and the  contracting  state,  whether
      there are insurmountable obstacles in the way of the family living  in
      the country of origin of one  or  more  of  them,  whether  there  are
      factors of immigration  control  or  considerations  of  public  order
      weighing in favour of exclusion.


  93. At [58] Lord Justice Lewison stated that if the other parent  has  the
      right to remain, that is the background against which  the  assessment
      is conducted. The ultimate question  will  be:  is  it  reasonable  to
      expect the child to follow the parent with no right to remain  in  the
      country of origin?


  94. At [60] he stated that although it is  a  question  of  fact  for  the
      Tribunal, he could not see that the desirability of being educated  at
      public expense in the UK can outweigh the benefit to the  children  of
      remaining with their  parents.  Just  as  we  cannot  provide  medical
      treatment for the rest of the world, so we cannot educate the world.


  95. Although the First-tier  Judge  weighed  the  best  interests  of  the
      children as a primary consideration, there is no indication that  this
      was set against the economic well being of the country. In particular,
      there was no consideration  of  the  costs  to  the  public  purse  in
      providing the highly specialised  education  and  treatment  to  these
      children. That was not something that the Judge considered. He  simply
      stated at [34] that it would be inappropriate to disrupt her education
      in the absence of any compelling reasons to the contrary.  There  were
      no such compelling reasons which existed in this case.


  96. In that respect, the Judge had concluded that the  claimant  would  be
      able to work in Bangladesh and be in a position financially to support
      the children. She had been able to come here and obtain  accommodation
      and provide for her family. There was  no  reason  why  she  would  be
      unable to return to Bangladesh and set  up  home  there  and  work  to
      provide for them. Nor was there any evidence that there would  not  be
      proper educational and other facilities available on their  return  to
      Bangladesh to meet the children's needs.


  97. I also accept Ms Isherwood's contention  that  the  evidence  did  not
      establish that the children's father has abdicated responsibility  for
      the claimant children. Nor has he shown a  lack  of  interest  in  his
      children with whom he has contact [7]. He pays for  the  education  of
      the eldest child, which  as  noted  by  the  secretary  of  state,  is
      arguably  inconsistent  with  the  finding  that  he  would   abdicate
      responsibility. Further, it is not evident  that  he  has  refused  to
      provide financial support for the claimants but  simply  that  he  has
      very little income.


  98. Accordingly the finding that  the  father  has  "in  effect  abdicated
      responsibility for them" was not borne out. The finding therefore that
      the claimant  has  sole  responsibility  for  the  claimants  was  not
      justified by the evidence before the Judge.


  99. I accordingly find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      involved the making of errors of law. I accordingly set it  aside  and
      re-make it.


 100. For the reasons already given,  I  find  that  the  second  and  third
      claimants did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  I
      also  find  that  the  claimant  has  not   satisfied   the   relevant
      requirements under Appendix FM.


 101. As already noted, the Judge did not consider Article 8  of  the  Human
      Rights Convention having regard to the Mr  Rahman's  'submission'   at
      [20] that if the Judge were not satisfied that the claimants  met  the
      requirements under the rules, the  appeals  should  be  allowed  under
      Article 8.


 102. There has been no contention that the failure  by  the  Judge  in  any
      event to consider Article 8 constituted an omission  amounting  to  an
      arguable error of law. There  has  been  no  counter  application  for
      permission to appeal on that basis.


      Notice of Decisions


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of  errors
      on a point of law and is accordingly set aside and remade.


      Having remade the decision I substitute a decision  for  that  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal, dismissing the claimants' appeals.


      No anonymity direction is made.






      Signed                             Date 12 April 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

