
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34454/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18th September 2017                    |On 20th September 2017            |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                Yasir jibran
                       (Anonymity direction not made)



                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P. Singh, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Richardson, Counsel instructed by Pioneer
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission, against the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Herbert OBE)  who,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on the 31st January 2017 allowed  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent to refuse to vary leave  to  remain  and  to
    make a decision to remove the Appellant.

 2. Whilst the Secretary of  State  is  the  Appellant,  for  the  sake  of
    convenience I intend to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 3.  No anonymity direction was made by  the  First  Tier-Tribunal  and  no
    application has been made on behalf of the Appellant or any grounds put
    forward to support such an application.

The background:

 4. The Appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, entered the United Kingdom in  or
    about February 2006 on a student visa valid  until  the  31st  December
    2006.

 5.  His leave to remain as a Tier 4  student  was  extended  on  the  17th
    January 2007 and again on the 5th March 2008 until 31st  October  2011.



 6.  On the 18th September 2013 he submitted an application  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 student which was refused on the 9th November  2013.
    He lodged an appeal against that decision which was allowed by the  FTT
    on the 7th April 2014.

 7. Whilst the decision was awaiting implementation the respondent  refused
    the application on the 20th November 2015.

 8. The Respondent refused the application  under  paragraphs  322(1A)  and
    paragraph 245ZX(a) of the Immigration  Rules  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant had, in an earlier application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student on the 31st October 2011, submitted an  English  language  test
    certificate from ETS which was false. The Respondent  referred  to  the
    Appellant's test scores having  been  cancelled  by  ETS  and  declared
    "invalid". As a false  document  had  been  submitted,  the  respondent
    refused the application under Paragraph 322(1A) and that the  Appellant
    had used deception.

 9. It was also refused under paragraph 245ZX (a) because the Appellant did
    not have a valid CAS. The  decision  letter  stated  that  the  Tier  4
    sponsor register was checked on the  20th  November  2015  but  Northam
    College was not listed on that date. Therefore  he  did  not  meet  the
    requirements to be awarded 30 points. As he failed to provide  a  valid
    CAS the respondent was unable to assess the amount of funds.

10. Therefore the respondent refused the application for leave to remain as
    a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under  Paragraph  245ZX9a)  and  (c)
    with reference to paragraph 116(e)  of Appendix A,  paragraph  245ZX(d)
    and paragraph 322(1A).

11. The Appellant appealed that decision on the 26th November 2015.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal:

12. On the 9th January 2017 his appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Herbert OBE). In a determination promulgated on the 31st January
    2017 the judge allowed his appeal.

13. In the determination he set out the respondent's case at paragraphs 2 -
    11 and the Appellant's case at paragraphs 13 - 21. When  recording  the
    Appellant's case, at paragraph 14, he made reference to the Appellant's
    previous studies both  in  Pakistan  and  in  the  United  Kingdom.  He
    recorded that his studies in Pakistan were in English and he  undertook
    an English language course in St Paul's College of higher education  in
    the first six months and had successfully completed his BTEC level  VII
    and an extended diploma in strategic management and leadership.

14. At paragraphs 15 - 18 the judge recorded his  evidence  concerning  the
    test and the circumstances of the test. He recorded that the  Appellant
    maintained that he did take the ETS language test and  had  passed  the
    required scores  in  listening  and  reading.  He  however  failed  his
    speaking and writing test and was required to  reset  that  in  January
    2012. He maintained that he was a genuine student who had  successfully
    completed all of his previous studies (paragraph 16). At paragraphs  17
    - 18, the judge recorded his oral evidence that a friend of  his  based
    in Nottingham had dropped him off outside the test centre.  He  had  to
    verify his photographic ID upon attendance and  undertook  the  testing
    and in the booth where there was a computer-based test. He said he  was
    required to listen to a video story he was asked questions about it. He
    said he did not take much notice about the location of the centre  that
    he was concentrating on the drive down in practising the test.

15. At paragraphs 19 - 20, the judge  made  reference  to  the  educational
    certificates  that  the  Appellant  had  provided   relating   to   his
    educational achievements in the United Kingdom.

16. As to his competence in English, the judge  recorded  at  paragraph  21
    "the  Appellant  spoke  clearly  in  English  with  only   very   minor
    grammatical mistakes that appear to have full command  of  the  English
    language and said that his English was actually better in 2011 when  he
    took the test because he was in full-time education."

17. The judge's findings of fact are set out at paragraph 22 - 33.

18. At paragraphs  22-  29  the  judge  set  out  the  submissions  of  the
    respondent and the evidence provided by the Secretary of State and made
    reference to the "generic respondent's bundle".  That  bundle  included
    the report of Project Fa�ade, a criminal enquiry into the abuse of  the
    TOEIC at Elizabeth  College  in  London  dated  15th  of  May  2015,  a
    statement from Ms Shah dated fifth  of  January  2017  (which  explains
    circumstances in which the test scores were held  to  be  invalid)  the
    individual test score said to be invalid recorded as in the Appellant's
    name, test date 14th of  December  2011  with  a  record  number  which
    appeared on the test  results  for  Elizabeth  College.  He  also  made
    reference to the witness statements from Peter Millington  and  Rebecca
    Collings. The judge  set  out  the  respondent's  submission  that  the
    generic evidence was of sufficient evidential quality to discharge  the
    burden  of  proof  and  that  this  was  accepted  by  the  Appellant's
    representative (see paragraphs 24 to 25). At paragraph 28  he  recorded
    the submission that the evidence in the current Appellant's appeal  was
    closer to that considered in SM and Qadir and  not  the  more  specific
    evidence in MA where  the  Appellant's  credibility  was  significantly
    questioned and undermined.

19. Thus the judge found at  paragraph  29  that  the  generic  documentary
    evidence put forward  by  the  respondent  "just  overcomes  the  basic
    evidential test of shifting the burden of proof  to  the  Appellant  to
    satisfy me on the balance of probabilities that the  test  was  validly
    undertaken by him in person."

20. The judge made the following findings of fact at paragraphs 30 - 33:

         "30. I have considered the generic evidence of the  respondent  and
         given that there are significant gaps  in  the  respondent's  case,
         namely there is nobody present from the Queen Elizabeth College  to
         authenticate the fact that the Appellant did not turn up in  person
         that there is no pro forma matrix of the test  undertaken  by  this
         Appellant to question his subjective recollection  about  the  test
         itself nor is there any individual to  verify  that  the  Appellant
         himself failed to appear on the dating question or had a first-hand
         knowledge of the recording of the Appellant's  voice  or  how  many
         other individuals that had imitated students that day or any  other
         day.

         31.  In summary on balance of probabilities I found  the  Appellant
         to be a credible witness. Firstly he had a history of  studying  in
         English which clearly demonstrated as he did before me that he  was
         a fluent English speaker I could understand and speak  clearly.  He
         also had a history of having undertaken significant studies both in
         Pakistan and in the United Kingdom successfully in English. He  had
         also been unsuccessful in part of the examination he had  taken  in
         December 2011 had been obliged to retake it in January 2012.

         32.  That failure strongly suggests that  there  was  not  a  third
         party who impersonated the Appellant but  he  did  so  himself  and
         turned up on the subsequent day as there was no evidence to suggest
         that his subsequent test scores in January 2012 were anything other
         than genuine. The logic is that if one is going to  undertake  some
         fraud one would do so with a tester who was going to pass the whole
         test and not fail a significant  part  of  it  otherwise  it  would
         defeat the object.

         33.  I am satisfied therefore given the primary evidence before  me
         that it is more likely than not that this Appellant was the  person
         who took the test and therefore did obtain a successful score as he
         claims."

21.  The judge therefore allowed the appeal to the  limited  extent  whereby
    the appeal was remitted to the Secretary of State to  issue  a  60  day
    notice letter whereby the Appellant could  locate  another  college  of
    study that would satisfy the immigration rules and enable them to  make
    fresh in time application based upon his subsequent  qualifications  in
    the usual way. There is no appeal against that disposal.

The appeal:

22. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that  decision.  The
    grounds stated as follows:

          1. In reaching the material finding,  the  judge  relied  on  the
             Appellant's English ability [31-33].

          2. Plainly there may be reasons why a person who is able to speak
             English to the  required  level  would  nonetheless  cause  or
             permit a proxy candidate to undertake an  ETS  test  on  their
             behalf, or otherwise to cheat.

          3. The FTT has materially  erred  by  failing  to  give  adequate
             reasons for holding that a person who clearly  speaks  English
             with therefore have no reason to secure a test certificate  by
             deception.

          4. The judgement of MA Nigeria [2016] UKUT 450 records  at  [57],
             "second, we acknowledge the suggestion that the Appellant  had
             no reason to engage in deception which we have  found  proven.
             However this has not deflected any way from reaching our  main
             findings and conclusions. In the abstract, of course, there is
             a range of reasons  why  persons  proficient  in  English  may
             engage in TOEIC fraud. These include, in exhaustively, lack of
             confidence, fear of failure, lack of time and  commitment  and
             contempt for  the  immigration  system.  These  reasons  could
             conceivably overlap in individual cases and there is scope for
             other explanations the deceitful conduct in the sphere. We are
             not required to make a further finding of  why  the  Appellant
             engaged in deception and do this we add that  this  issue  was
             not explored during the hearing. We resist any  temptation  to
             speculate about this discrete matter."

          5. In reaching  the  material  finding  the  FTT  relied  on  the
             Appellant's evidence and proficiency in  English  and  allowed
             the appeal.

          6. The FTT has materially erred in failing  to  provide  adequate
             reasoning as to why they prefer the evidence of the  Appellant
             over the issues raised by the respondent.

23. On the 12th July 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Page granted permission
    for the following reasons:

         "The respondent's grounds of appeal are arguable, saying  that  the
         judge has failed to give adequate  reasons  for  his  decision  and
         failed to provide adequate reasoning as to why the judge  preferred
         the evidence of the  Appellant  to  the  evidence  adduced  by  the
         respondent.  The  respondents  grounds  are  arguable  because   at
         paragraph 29 the judge found that the respondent's  evidence  "just
         overcomes the basic evidential test of shifting the burden of proof
         to the Appellant" and then went on in paragraph 31, 32  and  33  to
         say little more than the Appellant was found  to  be  credible  and
         that it was more likely than not that the  Appellant  to  the  test
         himself. It is arguable that the judges  failed  to  give  adequate
         reasoning to explain how the respondent's evidence was rebutted  by
         the Appellant."




24. The Appellant responded to the grounds of appeal under  rule  24.  That
    document opposed  the  appeal  observing  the  judge  directed  himself
    appropriately.

25. The document referred to the grant of  permission  by  Judge  Page  who
    suggested that it was arguable that Judge Herbert had erred in  law  at
    [29] where he stated: "the respondent's  evidence  just  overcomes  the
    basic  evidential  test  of  shifting  the  burden  of  proof  to   the
    Appellant".  However it was submitted that that was not an error of law
    but entirely consistent with the  jurisprudence  on  ETS  cases.  Those
    cases are set out at paragraph 8 and make reference  to  the  gaps  and
    weaknesses in  the  respondent's  evidence  which  was  agreed  by  two
    experts.

26. Paragraph 9, the response cites the head note in SM  and  Qadir,  which
    made reference to the Secretary of State's generic  evidence,  combined
    with the evidence particular to these two Appellant's was sufficient to
    discharge  the  evidential  burden  of   proving   that   there   TOEIC
    certificates have been procured by dishonesty but in the light  of  the
    multiple frailties from which is generic  evidence  was  considered  to
    suffer and, in the light of the evidence adduced by the Appellants, the
    Secretary of State failed to discharge  the  legal  burden  of  proving
    dishonesty on their part.

27. The response then makes reference  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  discussing
    those frailties at paragraph  62  and  66  of  his  decision  and  were
    reiterated by the Court of Appeal [16]. It is therefore submitted  that
    where there was  a  wealth  of  critical  judicial  comment  about  the
    strength of the respondent's evidence, it was not an error of the Judge
    Herbert to describe it is only just discharging the evidential burden.

28. It was  further  submitted  that  his  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    credibility was satisfactory and consistent  with  the  case  law  (see
    paragraph 87 of SM and Qadir): "87. The key question to be addressed is
    whether, take into account the shortcomings and frailties listed above,
    and bearing in mind the burden of proof and  standard  of  proof  play,
    this Appellant's evidence on the core issue of whether he was guilty of
    deceit in procuring his TOEIC certificate is believable."

29. It is submitted that in assessing the Appellant's account, and  finally
    to be credible, the judge adhered to the guidance in  the  authorities.
    Judge Herbert was entitled to believe  the  Appellant  and  gave  sound
    reasons are doing so in paragraphs 22 - 33 of the determination.

The hearing:

30. At the hearing, Mr Singh relied upon the grounds as recorded above.  He
    submitted that there was inadequate reasoning given by  the  judge.  He
    referred the Tribunal to a decision of the High  Court  in  R  (on  the
    application of Veronica Gaogalalwe)  [2017]  EWHC  1709  and  that  the
    Appellant on that appeal was in the same position as the  Appellant  in
    the current appeal (see paragraphs 40-45). Thus he submitted  that  the
    explanation given by the Appellant and thus the judge was  insufficient
    to discharge the burden of proof.

31. He further submitted that as paragraph 4 of the grounds  set  out,  the
    judge made reference to the Appellant's ability to  speak  English  but
    did not consider why he would have cheated (see MA at paragraph  57  as
    cited in the grounds).

32. Mr Richardson Counsel  for  the  Appellant  relied  upon  the  Rule  24
    response summarised above.

33. In answer to the oral submissions made by Mr  Singh,  he  distinguished
    the case of Gaogalalwe from the present appeal. That case was a  public
    law case and not a precedent fact case and the issue  was  whether  the
    decision of the Secretary of State was reasonably open to her  make  on
    the  material.  At  paragraph  42  the  judge  made  reference  to  the
    Appellant's claim relating to her educational achievements  in  English
    and that she would have no motive  or  reason  to  cheat.  However,  he
    stated "critically I have no witness statement confirming  it  was  she
    who took the test or providing any details about the  circumstances  in
    which the tests was taken. In my judgment, such a statement,  supported
    by a statement of truth signed by the claimant, is  necessary  to  make
    good a rebuttal of an allegation of cheating on facts such  as  these."
    He contrasted that position with that of the Appellant who had given  a
    detailed account in a witness statement and given oral  evidence  which
    the judge had taken into account and analysed  (paragraphs  26-27).Thus
    he submitted the judge had considered the assessment of credibility  as
    the case law had set out (see paragraph 13 of the grounds and  citation
    of SM and Qadir at [87]).

34. I asked Mr Richardson to deal with the  submission  made  by  Mr  Singh
    concerning paragraph 57 (as set out above). He stated that whilst there
    may be reasons for why some would use dishonest means, it is a long way
    from saying that a finding of someone's fluency is not relevant  as  it
    makes it less likely that an Appellant has cheated  in  an  exam  if  a
    reason he would not is eradicated. In any event, he submitted  that  it
    was not put to the Appellant in cross examination. In  fact  he  stated
    there had been very little challenge to the Appellant's  evidence.  The
    judge believed the Appellant and gave reasons for reaching  that  view.
    In essence, he submitted, the grounds  were  a  disagreement  with  the
    outcome and did not demonstrate an error law.

35. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my  decision  which  I  now
    give.

Discussion:

36. There is no dispute between the parties of the  correct  approach  that
    should be taken in cases involving the issue  of  deception.   The  key
    decisions relevant  to  determining  whether  the  Appellant  has  used
    deception in this context are SM & Qadir (ETS  -Evidence  -  Burden  of
    Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 and Sharif Ahmed  Majumder  and  Ihsan  Qadir  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA  Civ  1167.  The
    respondent's evidence in SM and Qadir was found by the  Upper  Tribunal
    to suffice to meet, albeit by a narrow margin, the  initial  evidential
    burden of showing deception. The burden then shifted to the  Appellants
    to raise an innocent explanation. In the cases of Mr  Majumder  and  Mr
    Qadir, in the context of the explanations and evidence given  by  them,
    the respondent could not satisfy the legal burden to  show  that  their
    TOEIC certificates were procured by dishonesty  and  so  their  appeals
    were allowed by the Upper Tribunal. The respondent  initially  appealed
    to the Court of Appeal but then settled those appeals by consent.

37. The question for me to consider is  whether  the  judge  gave  adequate
    reasons for reaching his overall conclusions which is the  mainstay  of
    the submissions advanced in the written grounds and relied upon  by  Mr
    Singh.

38. Having considered the determination and there being no submissions made
    on behalf of the SSHD to the contrary, I am satisfied that  the   judge
    approached the matter in the manner directed by the Court of Appeal  in
    SM and Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167. That  involves  considering,  first,
    whether the Secretary of State has met the burden on her of identifying
    evidence that the TOEIC certificate was obtained by  deception;  second
    whether the claimant satisfies the evidential burden on him of  raising
    an innocent explanation for the suggested deception; and third, if  so,
    whether the Secretary of State can meet the legal burden of showing, on
    the balance of probabilities, that deception in fact took place.

39. There can be no dispute on the evidence before the judge that that  the
    generic evidence taken together  with  the  ETS  spreadsheet  providing
    specific details relating to the Appellant is sufficient to  allow  the
    Secretary State to discharge  the  evidential  burden  of  the  use  of
    deception in the taking of an English language test. ( see Shezhad  and
    Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615 at [26],28] [43] and SM and Qadir  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 1167 at [4]). The judge reached that conclusion  at  paragraph
    29 of the determination having considered the particular  evidence  and
    its frailties in accordance with the case law (see paragraphs 22-28).

40. The next stage is where there is a burden, again an evidential  one  on
    the Appellant of raising an innocent  explanation.  This  required  the
    minimum level of plausibility. Thereafter the  judge  was  required  to
    consider whether the respondent discharged the legal burden of proof in
    relation to dishonesty which remains with the Secretary of State.

41. The judge had  the  opportunity  to  hear  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and for that to be the subject of  cross  examination  before
    him. Mr  Richardson,  who  appeared  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    observed that there had been very little  challenge  to  his  evidence.
    Having heard that evidence  he  considered  it  in  the  light  of  the
    evidence as a whole. He identified at [30] a number of difficulties  he
    found in the respondent's evidence; that there were significant gaps in
    the respondent's case- that there was nobody present from  the  college
    to authenticate the fact that the Appellant did not turn up  in  person
    and that there had been no "proforma matrix of the test  undertaken  by
    the Appellant to question his subjective recollection about  the  test"
    nor was there any individual to verify that  the  Appellant  failed  to
    appear.

42. He weighed up the evidence of the Appellant  and  found  him  to  be  a
    credible witness. He  accepted  his  evidence  as  to  his  history  of
    studying English, both in Pakistan and in the UK, which  he  found  was
    consistent with the documentation he had provided and  referred  to  at
    [18]-[19].He took into account that the Appellant had been unsuccessful
    in part of the examination he had taken in December 2011 and  had  been
    obliged to retake it in January 2012 (see paragraph 32). He found  that
    the failure strongly suggested  that  there  was  no  third  party  who
    impersonated the Appellant but did turn up himself  on  the  subsequent
    day as there was no evidence to suggest that his  subsequent  score  in
    January 2012 was anything other than genuine. He  concluded  that  "the
    logic is that if one is going to undertake some fraud one would  do  so
    with a tester who was going to pass the  whole  test  and  not  fail  a
    significant part of it otherwise it would defeat the object of it."

43. The judge returned to the respondent's evidence at [33] but reached the
    conclusion that on the balance of probabilities it was more likely that
    not that the Appellant did take the test and thus  the  respondent  had
    not discharged the overall burden.

44.  In reaching the conclusion the judge had took into account his English
    language proficiency before the  Tribunal  itself.  This  is  expressly
    challenged in the grounds by failing to take account of paragraph 57 of
    MA (Nigeria) (as set out earlier). However that  paragraph  has  to  be
    read in the light of the evidence in that case  and  as  Mr  Richardson
    submitted, the Appellant had not been cross examined nor  had  it  been
    explored in evidence as to why he would have  a  motive  to  engage  in
    deception.

45. In reaching a decision on this issue and addressing the  legal  burden,
    the factors that the Upper Tribunal noted  at  paragraph  69  of  their
    decision in SM and Qadir as being relevant to considering an allegation
    of dishonesty in this context: "include (in exhaustively, we would add)
    what the person accused has to gain from being dishonest; what  he  has
    to lose from being dishonest; what is known about  his  character;  and
    the culture or  environment  in  which  he  operated.  Mr  Dunlop  also
    highlighted the importance of three further considerations, namely  how
    the  Appellants  performed  under  cross   examination,   whether   the
    Tribunal's  assessment  of  their  English  language   proficiency   is
    commensurate  with  their  TOEIC  scores  and  whether  their  academic
    achievements are such that it was unnecessary or illogical for them  to
    have cheated."

46. The Court of Appeal in SM and Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167 endorsed  that
    approach.  These were the matters taken into account by the judge.

47. At paragraph 89 the Upper Tribunal in SM and Qadir stated as follows

         "The final question is whether the Secretary of State is  discharge
         the legal burden of establishing on the  balance  of  probabilities
         that this Appellant procured his TOEIC certificate by  deceit.  The
         answer to this question requires a balancing of all of the findings
         and the evaluative assessments rehearsed above."

48. In this context findings of fact were necessary on the  evidence  given
    by the Appellant to demonstrate that he had not  engaged  in  deception
    but had sat the test. The Appellant had given a detailed account as  to
    how he had sat the examination as recorded in the oral evidence set out
    at paragraphs 15-18. In the case of SM and Qadir, one of the Appellants
    had given details of how he sat the test (see paragraph 45) although  I
    accept in impressive  detail.  Therefore  the  judge  was  required  to
    consider that aspect of his account along with the  other  factors  set
    out in paragraph 69 relevant to the issue of dishonesty; in  this  case
    what was known about the Appellant's character, what he would  have  to
    lose by using deception along with his  level  of  English  (which  the
    judge did consider) and any other relevant factors.

49.  Therefore contrary to the grounds, it was open to the  judge  to  make
    reference to the English-language  certificates,  and  his  educational
    background and his English language ability and the evidence as to  the
    circumstances in which he sat the test.

50. I do not consider that the  High  Court  decision  cited  by  Mr  Singh
    assists his case. The judge did not hear any oral evidence (as  it  was
    not a precedent fact case but a public law challenge) and thus was  not
    required to consider whether he was a credible or  believable  witness.
    Furthermore, as paragraph 42 makes plain, whilst the  Appellant  relied
    upon her qualifications, there was no witness statement setting out any
    details about the circumstances in which  the  test  was  taken,  which
    differed significantly from the present Appellant who did give such  an
    account which was  believed by the judge.

51. As the case law identifies, each case is fact sensitive and requires an
    evaluative assessment to be made and this is to be  determined  on  all
    the evidence adduced by the parties (see  SM  and  Qadir  at  paragraph
    102). The Secretary of State in  the  grounds  does  not  identify  any
    evidence from the respondent that the judge had  failed  to  take  into
    account but advances the challenge solely on the basis that  the  judge
    failed to give adequate reasons.

52. Consequently I am not  satisfied  that  the  grounds  advanced  by  the
    respondent are made out.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law; the appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  is
    dismissed.



Signed
                                Date: 19/9/2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

