
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34130/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th May 2015                     |On 28th May 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             bibi gulalai safiy
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Ince made following a hearing at Bradford on 3rd November 2014.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on  2nd  May  1989.   She
    applied for leave to remain in the UK as a spouse under  paragraph  284
    of HC 395 but was refused on 15th July 2014 under  paragraphs  284  and
    322(9).  The Secretary of State was not  satisfied  that  she  met  the
    requirements of the rules for an extension of stay as a spouse or civil
    partner and, additionally, argued that she had failed to respond  to  a
    request to submit evidence that she had been residing with her  husband
    throughout her  probationary  period,  and  that  she  had  an  English
    language certificate and  had  failed  to  produce  an  original  birth
    certificate for her child born on 30th December 2012.

 3. The sponsor has refugee status and is now a British citizen.

 4. It was conceded at the hearing that  the  claimant  could  not  succeed
    under paragraph 284 since she had not successfully  passed  an  English
    language test.

 5. The couple have three children, a daughter, who is entitled to  British
    citizenship but who is in the care of relatives in Peshawar whilst  her
    UK passport is being issued, a son born in the  UK  in  December  2012,
    again a British citizen and another baby daughter also born in the  UK.
    The couple started the process for applying for a UK passport for their
    older daughter as long ago as 2011 and, until it is issued  the  couple
    remain apart from her.

 6. The couple married in September 2008 and the application to come to the
    UK was refused  but  subsequently  allowed  on  appeal.   The  claimant
    travelled to the UK on 26th November 2012 and lived with her husband in
    the UK but of course has spent a considerable amount  of  time  in  the
    interim with her daughter who is not yet able to join her here.

 7. The judge said there was overwhelming evidence that this was a  genuine
    marriage but the couple could not succeed under paragraph 284.

 8. With respect to paragraph 322(9) he said, after a considerable analysis
    of the evidence, that in reality the claimant had only failed to submit
    one document which was the original birth certificate  for  their  son.
    She did supply  evidence  of  co-habitation  in  the  form  of  letters
    addressed to them at their addresses in common.  So far as the  English
    language certificate was concerned she could not produce it because she
    had not taken the test.

 9. He said that refusing the application on the basis of a  document  that
    she could not produce was manifestly unfair and that  a  refusal  under
    paragraph 322(9) should be for those applicants who were not willing to
    supply appropriate documents or who deliberately did not do so and  not
    in relation to applicants who had made the efforts  that  the  claimant
    and sponsor had here.

10.  So  far  as  Article  8  within  the  rules  was  concerned  he  found
    unhesitatingly that the claimant had a genuine and subsisting  parental
    relationship with a British citizen child and with her British  citizen
    partner.  In the short-term it would  be  reasonable  for  her  son  to
    accompany her to Afghanistan but, so far as her husband was  concerned,
    there were insurmountable obstacles to his returning  there  with  her,
    since he is a refugee. Although  he  has  at  least  transited  through
    Afghanistan in the recent past there must be some residual risk in  him
    residing permanently there.  None of the family are Pakistani  citizens
    and there is nothing to suggest that the family  would  be  allowed  to
    live there permanently.  He concluded that paragraph EX.1 was satisfied
    in relation to the partner route.

11. He then went on to consider Article 8 outside  the  Rules  taking  into
    account Sections 117A and 117B which  he  said  were  neutral  and  not
    adverse to the claimant.  He wrote as follows:

         "I have found that the marriage is genuine and that the couple have
         the intention of living permanently as a couple; they have a  child
         who is definitely a UK citizen and another child who (on the  basis
         that the DNA test will be conclusive) is likely to be a UK  citizen
         - this would mean that both children would have the right to remain
         permanently in the UK and  as  such  it  would  be  in  their  best
         interests for them to do so, under Section 55; in addition a  third
         child is on the way and this would also be a  UK  citizen;  at  the
         time the appellant first applied for a spouse  visa  there  was  no
         requirement for her to have any English language  ability  and  she
         was not required to demonstrate such when she won  her  appeal  and
         was given a visa to  come  here;  but  for  this  it  appears  that
         otherwise she would have come within the  provisions  of  paragraph
         284; I have also found that she now falls into the requirements  of
         paragraph EX.1 in consideration of which I have concluded  that  it
         would not be reasonable for the Sponsor  to  either  (i)  sell  his
         business for a second time in order to live  permanently  with  his
         family abroad or (ii) remain in the UK living apart from his family
         in order to preserve that source of income for compliance with  the
         Rules; there is no persuasive evidence  before  me  to  demonstrate
         that the Sponsor would be able to live  permanently  or  safely  in
         either Afghanistan or Pakistan; the appellant is  not  otherwise  a
         burden on the taxpayer; and she has always been here with leave  to
         enter/remain."

12. He concluded that it would be unjustifiably harsh for the  claimant  to
    have  to  return  to  Afghanistan/Pakistan  and  live  there   for   an
    indeterminate time while she obtained an English language qualification
    with her and the children living apart from the sponsor save for  short
    visits, and for the sponsor having to live apart from his family for an
    indeterminate time.

The Grounds of Application

13. The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  on  two  grounds.
    First, the Tribunal had failed to provide adequate  reasons  for  their
    findings  that  the  Secretary  of  State  should  have  exercised  her
    discretion under Rule 322(9) in the claimant's favour.  She had  failed
    to provide any evidence that she  had  the  required  English  language
    skills and the onus was on her to ensure that the requirements  of  the
    rules were met.

14. Second, he had erred in his approach to Article 8.   The  Tribunal  had
    given no consideration to the 2014 Act and had  misdirected  itself  in
    law. It had considered EX.1 as  freestanding  which  was  wrong  (Sabir
    (Appendix FM-EX.1 not  free  standing)  [2014]  UKUT  00063).   If  the
    claimant does not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  (in
    relation to her English language skills) then compelling  circumstances
    have to be established for the purpose of Article 8.

15. The Tribunal had failed to  demonstrate  that  her  circumstances  were
    compelling or exceptional.  She provided no evidence that her  children
    would need to relocate with her if removed and there is no  reason  why
    the sponsor could not care for them in the UK.  It is  the  choice  for
    the claimant and her husband to  make  as  to  whether  their  children
    relocate with her or remain here.  In either  case  they  can  maintain
    contact with the absent parent.  There is no evidence that  they  could
    not relocate to Pakistan and the onus is on them  to  prove  that  they
    cannot.  There is nothing exceptional  about  her  circumstances  which
    merely amount to an ordinary family life claim.

Submissions

16. Mr Diwnycz somewhat unhappily relied  on  his  grounds.   He  left  the
    decision in my hands so far  as  paragraph  322(9)  was  concerned  and
    frankly  accepted  that  this  family's  circumstances  could  not   be
    described as run of the mill.

Findings and Conclusions

17. Paragraph 322(9) states that leave to remain should normally be refused
    where there has been a failure by an  applicant  to  produce  within  a
    reasonable time information, documents or other  evidence  required  by
    the Secretary of State to establish  his  claim  to  remain  under  the
    rules.

18. On the unchallenged findings of the Immigration Judge the claimant sent
    to the Secretary of State copies of  her  marriage  certificate,  their
    son's full birth certificate, a copy  of  the  tenancy  agreement,  the
    sponsor's bank statements and letters addressed to both of them at  the
    couple's  address.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  in  these
    circumstances  that  the  claimant's  production  of   a   copy   birth
    certificate  rather  than  an  original  should  not,  in  all  of  the
    circumstances, have led to a refusal on this ground.   So  far  as  the
    English language certificate was concerned she  could  not  produce  it
    because she had not taken the test.  Clearly that meant that she  could
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 284 but it was open to the judge
    to conclude that an additional refusal under paragraph 322(9)  was  not
    appropriate,  and  discretion  should  have  been  exercised   in   the
    claimant's favour, when the paragraph was clearly designed  to  address
    wilful failure to co-operate with the process and not in  circumstances
    such as these.

19. With respect to Article 8,  the  first  ground  alleges  that  the  new
    Immigration Act 2014 was not taken into account and is  plainly  wrong.
    The judge cited the new Act in full, said that he  had  taken  it  into
    account and at paragraph 73 of the determination addressed each of  the
    public interest considerations set out in paragraph 117B in  turn.   He
    concluded that the overall effect was neutral.

20. Second, the Secretary of State challenges the judge's conclusions  with
    respect to paragraph EX.1, but not on the basis that the judge was  not
    entitled to find that there were insurmountable obstacles to the couple
    living in Afghanistan. Given that the sponsor is a refugee that  was  a
    decision open to him to make. She rests her challenge on the basis that
    the  claimant  cannot  successfully  navigate  herself  through  to   a
    consideration of EX.1 and relies on the case of Sabir (Appendix FM-EX.1
    not free standing) [2014] UKUT 00063, which concerned  the  immigration
    status of the applicant who was in the UK as a  visitor  and  therefore
    could not meet the requirements of E-LTRP.2.1.

21. However the section  dealing  with  the  English  language  requirement
    specifically states as follows:

         "If the applicant has not  met  the  requirement  in  the  previous
         application for leave as a  partner,  the  applicant  must  provide
         specified evidence that they -

         (a)  are a national of a majority English speaking  country  listed
             in paragraph GEN.1.6;

         (b)  have passed an English language test in speaking and listening
             at a minimum of level A1 of the Common European  Framework  of
             References for Languages with a provider approved  by  the  UK
             Border Agency;

         (c)  have an academic qualification recognised by  NARIC-UK  to  be
             the equivalent of the  standard  of  a  bachelors  or  masters
             degree or PhD in the UK which was taught in English, or

         (d)   are  exempt  from  the  English  language  requirement  under
             paragraph E-LTRP.4.2;

         unless paragraph EX.1 applies."

22. The final sentence cannot logically refer to the  exemption  provision.
    Since the paragraph specifically allows for EX.1 to  be  applied  there
    can be no error in the judge doing so.

23. Finally the challenge to the judge's reasoning in respect of Article  8
    outside the Rules amounts to a mere re-statement of  the  Secretary  of
    State's case and in any event is misplaced.  This is not a  case  where
    the family can simply choose to live elsewhere.  The judge's conclusion
    that, given that he had at one time had refugee status, there must be a
    residual risk to the  sponsor  in  Afghanistan  is  unchallenged.   The
    claimant is not a Pakistani national, albeit that she has relatives who
    are looking after her young daughter there.  It was open to  the  judge
    to reject the submission that the family could live together in a third
    country where none of them are nationals.

24. No issue is taken with any of the primary findings of fact made by  the
    judge.  This  is  a  very  detailed,   thoughtful   and   well-reasoned
    determination, and the judge's conclusions were plainly open to him.

Notice of Decision

25. The original judge's decision shall stand.  The  claimant's  appeal  is
    allowed.

26. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
