

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34408/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre |Decision Issued                      |
|On 23 May 2017                        |On 01 June 2017                      |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 sharib gull
                            (NO ANONYMITY ORDER)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms H Masih, instructed by Heritage Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant Secretary of State appeals with permission to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against the decision and reasons statement  of  FtTJ  Shergill
    that was issued on 12 October 2016.

 2. No anonymity direction was given in the First-tier Tribunal  and  there
    is no reason to make such an order now.

 3. At the outset of the appeal, Mr Mills informed me that the  application
    for permission to appeal was misplaced.  He explained that  the  author
    of the grounds of application would only have had sight of the  reasons
    for refusal letter and Judge Shergill's decision.  It  was  likely  the
    author of the grounds focused on the fact the judge  recorded  at  [12]
    that there had been one invalid ETS result and had overlooked the  fact
    that the results overall were identified as being questionable.

 4. Having examined the file, Mr Mills  admitted  that  the  focus  in  the
    grounds was incorrect.  He informed me that where  an  ETS  result  was
    found to be questionable, as in this case, the correct  approach  would
    be for the Home Office to interview the  applicant  to  decide  whether
    there was a reasonable basis for concluding  that  deception  had  been
    used by the person to obtain the result.  That had not  happened  here,
    and therefore the Secretary of State had not discharged the  evidential
    burden as required.  Mr Mills advised me there was no  legal  error  in
    relation the Judge Shergill's finding that the Home Office  had  failed
    to discharge the evidential burden.

 5. Even if there had been some doubt on this point, Mr Mills admitted that
    the fact the appellant had British  citizen  children  meant  that  the
    public interest would be outweighed by their  best  interests  and  the
    appellant's private and family life  rights.   The  findings  of  Judge
    Shergill on those issues were correct in law.

 6. Mr Mills informed me that in  his  opinion  Judge  Shergill's  decision
    should not have been challenged.   Unfortunately, because  this  is  an
    ETS case, he does not have authority to withdraw the appeal.

 7. Ms Masih, who relied on her skeleton argument, agreed there is no legal
    error.

 8. I conclude that there is no legal error in  Judge  Shergill's  decision
    and reasons statement and his decision stands.

 9. Ms Masih said she was without instructions about whether to apply for a
    wasted/unreasonable costs order.  I rule that no application for  costs
    has been made and therefore I can make no decision regarding costs.



Decision

There is no legal error in the decision and reasons statement of  FtT  Judge
Shergill and his decision stands.


Signed                         Date 23 May 2017


Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
