

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34021/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6th September 2017                  |On 12th September 2017              |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                 ROBIN SINGH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Martin, instructed by Asher and Tomar
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, an Indian national, sought and was  granted  permission
      to appeal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on
      12th December 2016 which dismissed his human rights claim appeal.


     2. The decision by the First-tier Tribunal judge  First-tier  Tribunal
        failed to apply the law correctly, imported incorrect tests of  the
        evidence in reaching his conclusions, reached  some  findings  that
        were not supported by evidence and failed to make findings on other
        elements of the evidence. Both parties  were  agreed  the  decision
        could not stand.

     3. I am satisfied the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  infected
        with significant material errors of law and I set it  aside  to  be
        remade in full with no findings preserved.

     4. The effect of the First-tier Tribunal decision is  that  there  has
        been no effective hearing of the substance of  the  appeal  and  no
        sustainable findings of  any kind.  The  scheme  of  the  Tribunals
        Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does  not  assign  the  function  of
        primary fact finding to the Upper Tribunal.


     5. When I have set  aside  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
        s.12(2) of the TCEA 2007 requires me to remit the case to the First-
        tier with directions or remake it for ourselves.  Where  there  has
        been no substantive hearing before the First tier and the facts are
        disputed or unclear I conclude that the decision should be remitted
        to a First-tier Tribunal judge to determine the appeal.



          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the  decision  and  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for re-hearing.

[pic]

                                    Date 6th September 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
