
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/34491/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Field House                      |Decision Promulgated        |
|On 27 November 2014                       |On 2 December 2014          |
|                                          |                            |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before
               THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ELISABETH LAING DBE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                       ZINDA AURRETHIA TRICIA CALIXTE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr B Watson of Haslaw & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr E Tufan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. We have considered whether any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence we do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge James promulgated on 11 July  2014   which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules and Article 8.
Background
3. The Appellant was born on 4 February 1981 and is a citizen of St Lucia.
4. On 2 January 2013 the Appellant applied for Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain
   on the basis of  10  years  continuous  legal  residence  in  the  United
   Kingdom.
5.  On  10  July  2013  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application by reference to paragraph 276B of  the  Rules  and  found  no
   arguable reasons to warrant a grant of leave under Article 8 outside  the
   Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended ('the Rules') and made directions for
   her removal under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality
   Act 2006.
6. The refusal letter gave a number of  reasons:  the  Appellant  could  not
   meet the requirements of paragraph 276B because she had  spent  192  days
   outside the United Kingdom and therefore there was a break in her  lawful
   residence in excess of the  period  for  which  there  was  a  discretion
   available; the Appellant did not meet  the  family  requirements  of  the
   Rules in Appendix FM as she  had  no  partner  or  child  in  the  United
   Kingdom; she did not meet the  private  life  requirements  of  paragraph
   276ADE, given the length of time she had resided in  the  United  Kingdom
   and there was no evidence to suggest she had cut all ties with St  Lucia;
   there were no factors that had not been considered under the  Rules  that
   warranted a consideration of the case under Article 8 outside the  Rules.


The Judge's Decision
7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge James
   ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's decision. The
   Judge found that the Appellant had conceded that she could not  meet  the
   requirements of the Rules in relation to Long Residence or Article 8; the
   Judge considered the case under Article 8 outside the Rules and took into
   account her background and circumstances but found that the  decision  to
   remove was in all the circumstances proportionate.
8. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  21  October  2013  Upper  Tribunal
   Judge Pitt gave permission to appeal stating that it  was  arguable  that
   the Judge had 'failed to take into account the accepted and material fact
   of the  appellant  having  been  given  incorrect  legal  advice  in  the
   proportionality assessment.'

9. At the hearing we heard submissions from  Mr  Watson  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that in essence can be summarised as follows:

   a) He relied on his skeleton argument and grounds of appeal.

   b) The Judge had taken  into  account  all  the  facts  underpinning  the
      Appellant's application but failed to give them sufficient weight  and
      therefore arrived at a perverse conclusion.

10. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Tufan submitted that in essence:

   a) The Judge specifically took into account that the Appellant  had  been
      given poor advice previously.

   b) The only error the Judge made was in considering Article 8 outside the
      Rules without finding compelling reasons to do so but that  error  was
      in favour of the Appellant.

   c) The threshold for a finding of perversity was a high one  and  it  was
      not met in this case as the conclusions reached by the Judge were open
      to him on the facts.

   d) The grounds are merely a disagreement with the conclusions reached  by
      the Judge.
Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard those  submissions  we  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

12. This was an appeal against a refusal of Indefinite Leave  to  Remain  on
   the  basis  of  Long  Residence  under   the   Rules.   The   Appellant's
   representative at the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  properly
   conceded that the Appellant could not meet the requirements of the  Rules
   either as to Long Residence or Article 8.

13. The Appellant challenges in her grounds of appeal  the  conclusions  the
   Judge reached as to the proportionality of the decision under Article  8.
   We are satisfied that the  Judge  carried  out  a  careful  and  detailed
   analysis of the Appellant's circumstances taking into account all of  the
   facts that were relevant to the assessment of proportionality. The  Judge
   specifically identified the length of  lawful  residence  in  the  United
   Kingdom(paragraphs 9,14), the fact that the Appellant had been given poor
   legal advice previously as to the basis on  which  she  should  apply  to
   remain in the United Kingdom (paragraphs 10, 15), that  she  had  made  a
   positive contribution to the community (paragraphs 17 and 18).

14. The Judge  considered  this  factual  background  by  reference  to  the
   appropriate test set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL  27.  Mr  Watson  accepted
   that the Judge had considered all of the facts that were relevant to  the
   issue of proportionality but argued that she  had  failed  to  give  them
   sufficient weight. We are satisfied that it is not an arguable  error  of
   law for an Immigration Judge to give too little weight or too much weight
   to a factor, unless irrationality is alleged and that the  threshold  for
   establishing irrationality is a high  one.  We  are  satisfied  that  the
   decision of the Judge in this case was not perverse and that she  reached
   a conclusion that was open to her on the facts.


15. We were therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read  as
   a whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

16. We therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

17. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
2.12.2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
