
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/34526/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13 June 2017                           | On 16 June 2017                  |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr Muhammad Usman Ahsan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Harris, Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an error of law hearing.  The appellant in this matter  is  the
    Secretary of State and Mr Ahsan is  the  Claimant.   The  Secretary  of
    State has appealed the decision made by the First-tier Tribunal,  Judge
    Suffield-Thompson ("FTT") promulgated on 30 November 2016 in which  she
    allowed the appeal outside of  the  Rules  under  Article  8  and  with
    reference to Section 117B(6).

2.   The Claimant is a citizen of Pakistan and he is married  to  a  British
    citizen and has a British citizen  child.   At  the  time  of  the  FTT
    hearing his wife was expecting another baby. That child  has  now  been
    born. The Appellant refused the application on  the  grounds  that  the
    Claimant did not meet the Rules for Suitability (S LTR 1.6) as  he  had
    used deception in a previous application by using a proxy taker in  his
    English language test on 18.9.2013 and that the relationship  developed
    in precarious circumstances.  The Claimant had leave as a student  when
    he married the sponsor. The FTT dismissed the appeal under the Rules on
    the same grounds but found exceptional circumstances  under  Article  8
    outwith the Rules.

3.       In the grounds of appeal the Secretary of  State  argued  that  the
    FTT erred by treating the fact that  the  Claimant  was  married  to  a
    British citizen and the child was a British  citizen  were  exceptional
    circumstances justifying  consideration  outside  of  the  Rules  under
    Article 8.  Secondly, it was argued that   the  FTT  erred  in  law  by
    failing to follow MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705  in  which  it  was
    confirmed   that  the  assessment   of   reasonableness   allowed   for
    consideration of the wider public interests.  Permission to appeal  was
    granted on all grounds.

4.   The matter comes before me today and I have heard submissions  from  Mr
    Harris and from Mr Nath.  I am satisfied having considered all  of  the
    evidence before me that there was a material error of law by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge and that both grounds argued by the  Appellant  are
    made out.

Discussion and decision re error of law

5.   The FTT made clear findings  when  considering  the  appeal  under  the
    Rules as to the use of dishonesty by the Claimant [34  &  36]  and  the
    fact  that  the  relationship  and   marriage   arose   in   precarious
    circumstances.   The  FTT  found  that  the  Claimant's  presence   was
    undesirable and that it was a very serious act to try to manipulate the
    immigration rules by cheating in the English  Language  test.  However,
    when looking at Article 8 the  FTT  failed  to  properly  consider  the
    public interest factors and the focus of her assessment was on the fact
    that the wife and child were British citizens [45]. The FTT found  that
    these factors were sufficient  to  justify  consideration  outside  the
    Rules [38].

6.   In its proportionality  assessment  under  Article  8  the  FTT  placed
    weight on the primary consideration of where the best interests of  the
    British citizen child lay [51] having found that the  child's  interest
    were to remain in the UK with both parents.  Yet in  my  view  made  no
    real assessment of the evidence in that regard.  The child was  1  year
    old and at that age it is generally the case that the interests of  the
    child  lie simply by remaining with both  parents.   The  FTT  made  no
    assessment of the child's circumstances in  the  event  of  the  family
    moving to Pakistan. The FTT concluded that the child "would lose out on
    many things as identified by Lady Hale" in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD  [2011]
    UKSC 4.  The FTT decision in short failed to adequately explain how the
    best interests of the child, which are a  primary  consideration,  were
    capable of outweighing the public interest factors identified  under  S
    LTR 1.6 (dishonesty) and which were matters to be considered  in  terms
    of reasonableness under Section 117B(6) when dealing with a  qualifying
    child.

7.      Accordingly there is an error in law and I set  aside  the  decision
    of the FTT.


Re making the decision

8.   I proceeded to  hear  submissions  from  Mr  Harris  and  Mr  Nath  and
    reserved my decision which I now give with my reasons.  I  rejected  Mr
    Harris' application for the matter to be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing as there was no basis to support  that  argument
    given  that  findings  of  fact  remained.   I  rejected  his   further
    application for an adjournment to obtain medical  evidence  to  support
    the claim that the sponsor had been diagnosed with diabetes. I  had  in
    mind the standard practice direction that the parties must be ready  to
    deal with the substantive matter following any error of  law  decision.
    I allowed the Claimant to adduce evidence  of  a  test  result  of  his
    wife's diagnosis of diabetes.  I was also aware that the  second  child
    had been born.

9.   I consider the evidence that was before the FTT and the  findings  made
    in particular that the Claimant used deception  in  obtaining  an  ELTS
    certificate although  I  accept  that  he  did  not  in  fact  use  the
    certificate. The parties met and developed their  family  life  in  the
    knowledge that the Claimant's circumstances as a  student  in  the  UK,
    were precarious.  The FTT dismissed the appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules relying on the failure to meet the  suitability  and  eligibility
    requirements and that he was a person whose presence was not  conducive
    to the public good. That decision  stands  and  no  grounds  have  been
    argued that the FTT erred in this regard.

10.  As to whether or not  Article  8 outside of  the  Rules  is  engaged  I
    take the  view  that  there  was  no  evidence  of  any  compelling  or
    exceptional  circumstances that were not covered by the Rules  and  the
    fact that the Claimant's wife and child were British citizens were  not
    exceptional and could not justify consideration outwith the Rules.  The
    FTT should not have proceeded to  consider  Article  8  at  all  and  I
    dismiss the appeal.

11.   Alternatively, if Article 8 was found to  be  engaged  the  assessment
    would focus on proportionality and in reaching a  decision  the  public
    interest  factors  under  section  117B  apply.   This   includes   the
    application of section 117B(6) where there is a British Citizen  child.
    At the FTT hearing there was one child qualifying as a British  citizen
    who was one year old and apart from the fact  that  he  was  a  British
    Citizen  there was no other evidence or findings made to show  why  his
    best interests lay in remaining with his parents in the  UK.   The  FTT
    failed to follow MA(Pakistan)   in that it did not look  at  the  wider
    public interests in assessing reasonableness of  the  child  living  in
    Pakistan or in assessing the proportionality of the interference in the
    removal of the Claimant.  There was no evidence  that  was  capable  of
    tipping the balance in favour of the child or  outweighing  the  public
    interest,  given  his  age  and  the  findings  that  there   were   no
    insurmountable obstacles to the couple living in  Pakistan  given  that
    the sponsor spoke English, Urdu and Punjabi.  Even accepting  that  the
    sponsor was suffering from diabetes, I find no evidence that she  would
    not be able to obtain treatment  in  Pakistan  for  a  common  illness.
    There were family members in Pakistan who could support the  appellant,
    his wife and his children.  Article 8 is not engaged  nor  breached  as
    the family can relocate to Pakistan and it would be reasonable for  the
    children to do so with their parents.  The wider  public  interests  in
    maintaining a fair and consistent immigration control  which  does  not
    allow undesirable persons to remain in the  UK  outweighs  the  private
    interest of the child as a British citizen in this case.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.






Signed                                  Date 15.6.2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date 15.6.2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

