
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/34001/2014
                                                               IA/34003/2014
                                                               IA/34005/2014
                                                               IA/34013/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                    1) AC
                                    2) AB
                                    3) GB
                                    4) JB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Dawkin, counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Jamaica.  The third  appellant  is  also
    British having been granted citizenship  in  October  2014  (after  the
    respondent's decisions were made but prior to the appeal hearing in the
    First-tier Tribunal).

 2. Given that  two  of  the  appellants  are  minors  and  given  also  my
    references to the health of the first  appellant,  the  appellants  are
    entitled to anonymity in these  proceedings  and  I  make  a  direction
    accordingly.

 3. The appellants had applied for leave to  remain  in  the  UK  on  human
    rights grounds.  At that time the third appellant was not British.  The
    respondent refused their applications under Appendix FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules and decided to remove the appellants
    under s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.  The  decisions  had
    been reconsidered and maintained on 13 August 2014.

 4. The appellants appealed against those decisions and  their  appeal  was
    heard in the First-tier Tribunal by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Geraint
    Jones QC ("the FTTJ"). He refused the appeals of the first, second  and
    third appellants on human rights grounds and made no  decision  on  the
    appeal of the third appellant, finding that her appeal was "otiose" due
    to her British citizenship.

 5. All four appellants sought permissions to appeal and this  was  granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor on 8  July  2015.  Her  reasons  for  so
    granting were as follows:-

         "1.  The grounds argue that the judge erred in law  in  failing  to
             recognise the authority of Zambrano (C-34/09) and  Sanade  and
             others (British children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 48.

         2.   It is also argued that  he  misdirected   himself  as  to  the
             findings  of  fact  at  issue,  failing   to   recognise   the
             relationship between the first and second appellants  when  it
             had not been challenged, failing to take into account material
             medical evidence, and misdirecting himself in relation to  his
             assessment of the best interests of the children.

         3.   Finally it is said that he showed bias in his attitude.

         4.   The determination  contains  loose  and  somewhat  intemperate
             language in relation not only  to  the  judge's  view  of  the
             conduct of the appellants but also his opinion of the  caselaw
             cited.

         5.   All grounds may be argued."

 6. Thus the appeal came before me.

 7. In their grounds of appeal, the appellants  rely  on  the  guidance  in
    Zambrano to the effect that refusal to grant a right  of  residence  to
    the first and second appellants was contrary to Article 20 TFEU because
    the decision deprived the British third appellant of the  enjoyment  of
    her rights as an EU citizen.  The FTTJ had erred in law in  failing  to
    recognise the binding authority of Zambrano and Sanade.   Further,  the
    FTTJ had misdirected himself as to the facts at issue in  that  he  had
    failed to recognise the genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  of  the
    first and second appellants  which  had  not  been  challenged  by  the
    respondent: the FTTJ had made contrary findings despite there being  no
    challenge on this issue by the respondent at the hearing.  It  had  not
    therefore been open to the FTTJ to make an alternative finding  without
    inviting the parties to address this issue first.

 8. In addition, according to the appellants, the FTTJ had failed  to  take
    into account two letters dated the day before the  hearing,  handed  to
    the FTTJ and the respondent prior to the start of the hearing. The FTTJ
    failed to refer to these in the decision, despite having  allowed  them
    to be adduced in evidence. Both letters related to the vulnerability of
    the first appellant and were thus relevant to the analysis of the  best
    interests of the children in her care.

 9. The grounds also refer to the FTTJ's findings with regard to  the  best
    interests of the third appellant as being perverse,  particularly  that
    it was in her best interests to "relocate  to  the  warmer  climes"  of
    Jamaica within the bosom of her family.  It was submitted by Ms Dawkin,
    for the appellants, that the FTTJ had failed to make any mention of the
    best interests of the fourth appellant.  He had also  erred  in  giving
    weight to the poor immigration history of the parents in the assessment
    of the children's best interests and in finding that the children  were
    unlawfully in the UK when they were both born here.   The  decision  to
    remove the third and fourth appellants had been made on  the  basis  of
    their being family members of persons who had overstayed and  were  not
    British at the date of decision.  The FTTJ also failed in his  duty  to
    make a decision in the third appellant's appeal against the decision to
    remove her.

10. In her oral submissions, Ms Dawkin reiterated that this was  a  classic
    Zambrano situation: the removal of  the  parents  undoubtedly  had  the
    effect of requiring the third appellant to leave the EU.  She submitted
    that the FTTJ should have taken into account the respondent's policy of
    not removing British children in such circumstances. There had been  no
    suggestion that the third appellant could be cared for by anybody  else
    in order to remain in the UK. This was, she submitted, exactly what the
    FTTJ had envisaged but he nonetheless found the removal reasonable.  It
    was unequivocal that,  according  to  EU  law,  domestic  law  and  the
    respondent's policy, it was unreasonable to expect the child to  leave.
    Furthermore, she submitted, the  failure  of  the  FTTJ  to  take  into
    account the first appellant's medical condition, which would impact  on
    the best interests of the children, was an error of law, given that the
    first appellant currently received support in the UK.

11. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Everett relied on the Rule 24 reply  to
    the effect that the FTTJ had directed  himself  appropriately.  It  was
    noted that the appeal was  being  pursued  on  Article  7  grounds  and
    although the FTTJ had made comments about the case law  cited,  he  had
    appropriately directed himself at paragraph 68 in relation  to  s117A-D
    of the 2002 Act.  It had been appropriate to consider whether or not it
    would be reasonable to expect the child to relocate to Jamaica with his
    [sic] parents. At paragraph 58, the FTTJ found  that  no  evidence  had
    been adduced as to why it might be unreasonable to expect the child  to
    depart from the UK; on the evidence (or rather the  lack  of  it),  the
    burden being on the appellants, it was open to  the  FTTJ  to  conclude
    that it would be reasonable for the child to relocate with the family.

12. In her oral submissions, Ms Everett said that she was not resiling from
    the R24 reply but that she had taken on board  the  criticisms  of  the
    FTTJ's decision. She agreed that the respondent had accepted, prior  to
    the hearing, the relationship of the first  and  second  appellant  was
    genuine and subsisting; she accepted it was unarguable that  there  had
    been anything to contradict the respondent's position  as  regards  the
    nature of the relationship.  She agreed that the  third  appellant  was
    British at the date of hearing. She did not consider the FTTJ had  been
    right to describe the decision as otiose; rather,  she  submitted  that
    the third appellant's acquisition of British nationality  post-decision
    rendered the decision invalid.   As  regards  the  FTTJ's  reasons  for
    concluding that the third appellant  could  reasonably  leave  the  UK,
    these flowed from the fact the third appellant would leave  the  UK  in
    the bosom of her family.  Ms Everett confirmed  that  the  respondent's
    IDI in force at the date of decision advised that, in  most  cases,  it
    would not be reasonable to remove a British child.  She  noted  however
    that there were some circumstances in which  this  guidance  would  not
    apply.  Ms Everett made no positive assertion in  concluding  her  oral
    submissions but said she would leave it to me to decide  whether  there
    was a material error of law in the FTTJ's decision.

Discussion

13. The only  issue  before  the  FTTJ  was  whether  the  removal  of  the
    appellants would place  the  UK  in  breach  of  Article  8.   All  the
    appellants, at the date of decision, were Jamaican citizens and it  was
    inappropriate therefore for the FTTJ to decide that the appeal  by  the
    third appellant was otiose. Notwithstanding  her  having  been  granted
    British citizenship prior to the  date  of  hearing,  the  decision  to
    remove her had given rise to a right of appeal and the third  appellant
    was entitled to a decision on her appeal, albeit the  removal  decision
    was no longer enforceable.

14. Ms Dawkin submits that the application of Zambrano and related case law
    is at the crux of this case. I agree.

15. I have a number of concerns about the FTTJ's decision. First, the  FTTJ
    ignored the respondent's concession that the relationship  between  the
    parent appellants was genuine and subsisting, referring to  a  lack  of
    evidence on the issue.  No evidence was required given that this  claim
    had been accepted by the respondent. Although the FTTJ was not bound to
    accept the nature of the relationship, his departure  from  the  agreed
    position of the parties required explanation. In the absence of such an
    explanation,  the  reasonable  inference   is   that   the   FTTJ   had
    misunderstood  or  failed  to  take  the   concession   into   account.
    Furthermore, and significantly, the FTTJ failed to follow the  guidance
    in Sanade as  to  the  application  of  Zambrano,  instead  criticising
    aspects of that guidance.   That guidance has direct application to the
    facts of this case, particularly given that the parties had agreed that
    the parent appellants were in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    and, implicitly, that  they  were  the  primary  carers  of  the  third
    appellant.  The FTTJ's failure to follow the guidance in  Sanade  is  a
    material error of law and  his  decision  must  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety.

16. In Sanade, the Upper Tribunal stated at point 5 in the headnote:

         "Case C-34/09 Ruiz Zambrano now makes it clear that where the child
         or indeed the remaining spouse is a British citizen and therefore a
         citizen of the European Union, as a matter of  EU  law  it  is  not
         possible to require the family as a unit to  relocate  outside  the
         European Union or for the Secretary of  State  to  submit  that  it
         would be reasonable for them to do so."

17. The Upper Tribunal in Sanade also made clear at point 6 of the headnote
    that:

         "The critical question is whether the child  is  dependent  on  the
         parent being removed  for  the  exercise  of  his  Union  right  of
         residence and whether removal of that parent will deprive the child
         of the effective exercise of residence in  the  United  Kingdom  or
         elsewhere in the Union."

18. The first and second appellants are the third appellant's  parents  and
    only carers.  The removal of the  first  and  second  appellants  would
    force the third appellant to leave the EU to be with her parents.   Her
    circumstances fall within the situation described in Sanade.   This  is
    also the respondent's position as set out  in  her  guidance.  The  IDI
    "Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0B: Family Life (as a  Partner
    or Parent) and Private Life: 10-year Roots" (November 2014)  states  at
    11.23 under the rubric "would it be unreasonable to  expect  a  British
    citizen child to leave the UK?":

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British citizen child to leave the EU, regardless of the
         age of that child. This reflects  the  European  Court  of  Justice
         judgement in Zambrano."

19. The Guidance then goes on:

         "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer. In such cases it will usually be  appropriate  to
         grant leave to the parent or  primary  carer,  to  enable  them  to
         remain  in  the  UK  with  the  child,  provided  that   there   is
         satisfactory  evidence  of  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
         relationship."

20. The Guidance identifies the exception to that approach:

         "It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight as to justify the separation,  if  the  child  could
         otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer  in
         the UK or in the EU.

         The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:

             Criminality falling below the thresholds set out in  paragraph
             398 of the Immigration Rules;

             A very poor immigration history, such as where the person  has
             repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.

         In considering whether refusal  may  be  appropriate  the  decision
         maker must consider the impact on the child of any separation."

21. The third appellant has no other carer in the UK. Her only  carers  are
    her parents, the first and second appellants. Thus the exception in the
    IDI does not  apply  here.   I  find  therefore  that  the  appellants'
    situation is covered squarely by the  guidance  in  Sanade:  the  third
    appellant is a British citizen whose primary carers are her parents. If
    her parents, the first and second appellants, are removed from the  UK,
    the third appellant, who is aged 11, would be forced to depart  the  UK
    with her parents. This would deprive her of the right to reside in  the
    UK, the country of her nationality.

22. I also take into account the guidance in s117B(6) of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which provides that "In the case  of  a
    person who is not liable to deportation, the public interest  does  not
    require the person's removal where - (a) the person has a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and  (b)  it
    would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom." A "qualifying child" means, for these purposes, a child under
    the age of 18 who is a British  citizen  (see  s.117D(1)).   The  third
    appellant is, therefore, a "qualifying child". It is accepted that  the
    first and second appellants have a  "genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship" with the third appellant.

23. Section 117B(6) states that: "The public interest does not require  the
    person's  removal"  where  that   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship exists and "it would not be reasonable to expect the child
    to leave the United Kingdom".

24. Applying  the  respondent's  guidance  and  Sanade,  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the third appellant  to  leave  the  UK.  In  such
    circumstances, the public interest does not require the removal of  the
    first and second appellants.  The fourth appellant's  removal,  as  was
    pointed out by Ms Dawkin, hinges  on  that  of  the  first  and  second
    appellants, his parents, on whom he is dependent.

25. Whilst both parties' representatives  submitted  that  the  appropriate
    course was for me to remit the  appeals  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    given that the respondent accepts the first and second  appellants  are
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship and, implicitly, that they are
    the primary carers of the third appellant (who is British), I  consider
    it appropriate to remake the decision on that  basis.   Accordingly,  I
    find  that  the  removal  of  the  appellants  would  give  rise  to  a
    disproportionate interference with the appellants' right  to  a  family
    and private life in the UK.



Decision

26. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve
    errors of law, as set out above.

27. I set aside the decision.

28. I re-make the decision in the appeals by allowing them on human  rights
    grounds.


Signed   A M Black
     Date: 30 December 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Fee Awards

No fees having been paid, there can be no fee awards.


Signed   A M Black
     Date: 30 December 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black

