
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA346992014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th April 2016                             |On 9th June 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                         Mr francis leon amo apraku
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Maka, promulgated on 28th September 2015, following a hearing  at
    York House on 26th  August  2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant  under  Regulation  8  of  the  EEA
    Regulations, whereupon the Respondent Secretary of State, applied  for,
    and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  and  thus
    the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Ghana, who was born on 22nd April
    1983.  He appeals against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  20th
    August  2014,  refusing  his  application  for  a  residence  card,  as
    confirmation of his right of residence under European Community Law, as
    the Sponsor of an EEA national exercising treaty rights.  The Appellant
    claims to have  been  in  a  relationship  with  [EP],  a  national  of
    Czechoslovakia.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge had before him a situation where the Appellant  had  married,
    under  Ghanaian  law,  the   EEA   national,   [EP],   a   citizen   of
    Czechoslovakia, by virtue of a customary marriage, and  the  issue  was
    whether such a marriage could be recognised for the purposes of English
    law.  The judge held that the proxy marriage  "Has  not  been  properly
    executed and I do not accept proper steps have been followed to show  a
    valid and lawfully issued certificate" (paragraph 48).  He also went on
    to say that he saw nothing before him to confirm that  the  Appellant's
    marriage  had   been   validly   accepted   by   the   authorities   in
    Czechoslovakia.

 4. However, the judge allowed the appeal on the basis that  the  Appellant
    was in a durable relationship with [EP] and that this  was  "a  genuine
    and committed relationship" (paragraph 51).  A child had been  born  by
    the name of [TB] and the judge went on  to  say  that,  "I  accept  the
    parties were living together at  the  time  and  the  birth  itself  is
    evidence of a relationship between the couple" (paragraph 52).

 5. However, the judge also added  that  he  was  not  impressed  with  the
    Appellant's account regarding how he entered the United Kingdom and the
    fact that he did not have his passport with him when  he  applied  (see
    paragraph 56).  He found that a false visa had been used.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  have
    allowed the appeal outright because under Regulation 17(4) of the  2006
    EEA Regulations there is a discretion to be exercised here,  and  which
    can only be exercised by the Secretary of State.  Reference was made to
    the case of Ihemedu (Nigeria) [2011] UKUT 00340 where it is said that,

         "Regulation 17(4) makes  the  issue  of  a  residence  card  to  an
         OFM/extended family member, a  matter  of  discretion.   Where  the
         Secretary of State has no yet exercised that discretion the most an
         Immigration Judge is allowed to do is to allow the appeal as  being
         not in accordance with the law leaving the  matter  of  whether  to
         exercise this discretion in the Appellant's favour or  not  to  the
         Secretary of State".

 7. On 19th February 2016, permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis
    that the case of Ihemedu had not been followed and the judge was  wrong
    to have allowed the appeal in the manner that he did.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before  me  on  4th  April  2016,  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe,
    appearing as Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent Secretary of State, submitted that the issue  was  a  narrow
    one in this case, namely, whether the judge was correct to have allowed
    the  appeal,  bearing  in  mind  that  Regulation  17(4)  of  the   EEA
    Regulations makes it clear that there is an element of discretion to be
    exercised by the judge, and all that the judge can do is  to  say  that
    the appeal is not in accordance with the law.

 9. For his part, Mr Karim, appearing on behalf of the Appellant, submitted
    that he would not object to the matter being referred to the  Secretary
    of State, save to say that the judge had not actually  used  the  words
    "outright" in allowing the appeal, but had only allowed this appeal  to
    the extent that it had not been shown that the relationship was  not  a
    durable one.

Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  This is a case where  the  judge
    has allowed the appeal.  The judge has not gone on to refer to  Section
    17(4) of the EEA Regulations 2006  and  to  say  that  the  matter  now
    remains outstanding before the  Secretary  of  State  to  exercise  her
    discretion, with the Tribunal only being able to say that the  decision
    is not in accordance with the law.

Remaking the Decision

11. I remake the decision on the basis of  the  findings  of  the  original
    judge, and the submissions that I have heard  today.   This  appeal  is
    allowed  to  the  extent  that  under  Regulation  17(4)  of  the   EEA
    Regulations the decision whether to exercise the discretion  in  favour
    of the Appellant and to hold  that  the  Appellant  is  entitled  to  a
    residence card is a matter for the Secretary of State.

Notice of Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed only to the extent that, whereas  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude  that  the  Appellant  and  his  partner  were  in  a  durable
    relationship, the issue of whether to  grant  a  residence  card  is  a
    matter of discretion for the Secretary of State under Regulation 17(4),
    and will take into account all the circumstances appertaining  to  this
    case.

13. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th April 2016
