
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34379/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10 November 2016                        |On 7 December 2016               |
|(extempore judgment)                       |                                 |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                VASILE ROMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Vasile Roman applied for and was refused  a  registration  certificate.
    His appeal before the First-tier Tribunal on 23 May 2016 was allowed on
    the basis that he had provided evidence that he had registered as self-
    employed.  The Secretary of State sought and was granted permission  to
    appeal on the basis  that  the  evidence  produced  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was

         "totally insufficient to show the appellant is a qualified  person.
         Nearly nine months have passed since the date of  registration  yet
         there is no supporting evidence such as convictions, receipts  bank
         statements etc. to show that any work has been carried out and that
         the appellant is economically active."

2.   The decision which led to the appeal was dated  14  October  2015.   It
    appears from a letter that was produced that Mr Roman arrived in the UK
    towards the end of September 2015.  In accordance with Regulation 13(1)
    EU nationals have a right of residence for three months whilst  seeking
    employment or self-employment.

3.   Mr Roman submitted his application for  registration  as  self-employed
    on 20 November 2015 having commenced working for himself on  1  October
    2015.  Under Regulation 14(1) a qualified person is entitled to  reside
    for as long as he remains a qualified person.  A  qualified  person  is
    defined in Regulation 6(1)(c) as  a  self  employed  person.   A  self-
    employed person is defined as a person who establishes himself in order
    to pursue activity as a self-employed person  and  that  is  Regulation
    4(1)(b).

4.   Under Regulation 19(3)(a) a person may be removed if he does  not  have
    or ceases to have a right to reside.  The fact that Mr Roman  does  not
    have a registration certificate  or  an  endorsement  on  his  passport
    stating that he has a right to reside does not mean that  he  does  not
    have a right to reside.  He is registered as a self-employed person  as
    evidenced by his HMRC registration. There is no requirement to  produce
    evidence that he  is  receiving  income.   It  is  the  fact  of  self-
    employment that is relevant.

5.   The grounds relied upon by the Secretary  of  State  are  misconceived.
    There is no error of law in the decision  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge to allow Mr Roman's appeal.  It is of  course  a  matter  for  Mr
    Roman to apply for a registration certificate so that he does not  have
    problems in the future but that  is  no  part  of  his  entitlement  to
    reside.

Notice of Decision

    There is no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I
    do not set aside the decision.

    The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  stands,  namely  the  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent is allowed.

    No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date 6th December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
