

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/34614/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
Decision and Reason Promulgated
On 20th December 2017                                                On 4th
January 2018




                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                     MA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                              Appellant


                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs K Degirmenci, Counsel, instructed by DF Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr.D.Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction


   1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria born in the United Kingdom in
      June 2008.


   2. His mother, T, came here as a student in December 2006. She obtained
      various leaves until September 2009. She then was granted leave until
      August 2013 as the spouse of a settled person, D. They married in July
      2010.She gave birth to her daughter, A, in December 2009.

   3. The father of both children is O, a Nigerian national. He married a
      United Kingdom citizen. She died shortly after their marriage and his
      application for leave to remain was refused in January 2014. His
      appeal was dismissed. He remains here having made a further
      unsuccessful leave application.

   4. T applied for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of her marriage
      to D. This was refused in August 2014. Her appeal was heard on 1 May
      2015 and the decision was remitted back to the respondent for
      reconsideration. This was because the decision did not adequately
      consider the two children affected. This resulted in the decision of
      18 November 2015 which is the subject matter of the present
      proceedings. Meantime, she had leave under section 3C of the 1971 Act

   5. The decision of 18 November 2015 dismissed her application for
      indefinite leave to remain as a spouse. This was because her marriage
      had broken down two years earlier and a decree absolute issued, dated
      3 August 2015. Consequently, she was not in a genuine and subsisting
      relationship with D.

   6. Consideration was given to the ten-year route to settlement as a
      parent. By the time of reconsideration A had lived in the United
      Kingdom for seven years. The decision maker had regarded to paragraph
      EX1 of the immigration rules. There was no dispute that a genuine and
      subsisting parental relationship existed. However, the respondent took
      the view that the family could reasonably return to Nigeria and that
      the section 55 duty was complied with.

The First tier Tribunal.

   7. The appeal against this decision was heard by Designated Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal Woodcraft and Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
      Norris. The appellant and his mother were the appellants, with his
      sister as a dependent. The focus in the appeal was upon the children,
      particularly MA because he had been here seven years.

   8. The tribunal heard from T. She was employed by a Health Board managing
      8 employees. She said her parents lived in a village in Nigeria and
      all of her siblings were in the United Kingdom. She said their
      biological father, O, saw them most weekends and he had family settled
      here who they saw.

   9. At paragraph 28 onwards the tribunal dealt with the reasonableness of
      expecting the children to relocate to Nigeria. When considering the
      matter outside the rules reference was made to section 117 B of the
      2002 Act. The relevant date there was the date of hearing. On this
      basis, MA sister, A, was also a qualifying child.

  10. The tribunal found that the best interest of the children were to
      remain with their mother and to have contact with their natural father
      and to continue to be educated in their school. The tribunal then went
      on to consider the weight to attach to those interests in assessing
      the reasonableness of requiring them to leave.

  11. Paragraph 36 dealt with the core argument: the fact the children had
      crossed the 7-year threshold. Reference was made to the respondent's
      instructions and of very strong reasons being required to show it
      would be reasonable to expect the children to leave. The tribunal
      referred to the decisions of MA Pakistan and also AM Pakistan and Ors
      -v-SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 180.

  12. The tribunal concluded by finding that T had no basis for remaining in
      her own right following the breakdown of her marriage. They also took
      the view that it was not unreasonable to expect either child to leave.
      Therefore, the claim that MA had under the rules failed. The tribunal
      then went on to consider the position of the children outside the
      rules, following the Razgar sequential approach and the effect of
      section 117B. It referred to T having had a precarious immigration
      status and little weight being attached to the private life she had
      established. The fact she would lose her employment was not a
      significant obstacle to relocation, as discussed in the decision of A.
      She was considered to be self-sufficient. The tribunal did not see
      very significant obstacles to either child integrating into Nigeria
      and did not find any compelling factors which outweighed the
      legitimate aim of immigration control. Consequently, the appeals were
      dismissed under the immigration rules and under article 8.


The Upper Tribunal

  13. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
      tribunal did not identify the very strong reasons to render the return
      of the children proportionate.


  14. Mrs Degirmenci referred to the case law and the IDI. She contended the
      starting point was to grant leave unless there were strong contrary
      reasons. The first appellant always had leave and queried what was
      weighing against the appellants. They spoke English; they had
      sufficient income; they were here lawfully.

  15. She contended there were inaccuracies and assumptions by the tribunal
      in relation to the children's father. For instance, there was no
      specific finding as to whether he had any outstanding application or
      appeal. Mrs Degirmenci said that in fact he had. Furthermore, there
      was a suggestion that the level of contact he had with the children
      had been exaggerated. No evidence had been led as to the distance
      between where he and the children lived.

  16. In response, Mr. Clarke contended that no material errors existed. The
      judges correctly directed themselves and made relevant findings, based
      upon evidence. The balancing of the individual interests and the
      public interest was not fixed but which was fact sensitive. The weight
      to be attached to the various ingredients was a matter for the judges.
      They had reached the conclusion that the children's best interest lay
      in remaining in the United Kingdom. However, this was not
      determinative. They then turned to consider what weight to attach to
      those interests. They considered their father's situation. He has no
      leave. He may well have an ongoing appeal but given his past
      difficulties the future was uncertain. The judges reached a conclusion
      that the children's best interest was to maintain contact with their
      father and there was no good reason apparent why he could not return
      to Nigeria. The United Kingdom had no obligation to continue to
      educate third country nationals. The tribunal had considered the risks
      to the children in Nigeria. There was no evidence produced as to
      kidnappings.

  17. Mr Clarke made the point that T time here was always precarious and
      she had no legitimate expectation things would be different. She had
      3C leave pending the decision on her application in relation to her
      marriage. There was however no underlying factual basis to support the
      application: they were estranged.

  18. In response, Mrs Degirmenci repeated that the children's mother had
      always been here lawfully. She had been on student visas up until her
      marriage. She was then granted leave based on that.  The delay in a
      decision in relation to her subsequent application was attributable to
      the respondent not considering the position of the children. She
      accepted the position of the children was not a trump card but it was
      necessary to look at all of the factors cumulatively.

   Consideration

  19.  The tribunal were looking at matters through the prism of the rules.
      The position of the children's mother was considered first. The
      conclusions are recorded at paragraph 26 to 27. This aspect has been
      uncontentious.

  20.  The tribunal clearly appreciated the nuances of the statutory
      provisions. For instance, it was pointed out that MA had a claim under
      paragraph 276 ADE (vi) in that he had lived continuously for seven
      years prior to the reconsideration (as distinct from the date of
      application). The distinction between the provisions in the rules and
      section 117 B of the 2002 Act was noted, where the relevant date is
      the latter was the date of hearing. This therefore applied also to the
      younger child.

  21. The tribunal noted the claim that the children's father visited most
      weekends. Their mother had provided a second statement in which she
      gave an account of the situation in Nigeria and referred to the
      educational system in place; the limited amenities and the risk from
      kidnappers. Her financial circumstances were set out. The tribunal
      heard evidence from the children's natural father. He said he had an
      appeal pending and the tribunal commented on the lack of documentation
      provided. The competing submissions are recorded.

  22. The tribunal made comprehensive findings. The appeal was directed
      towards the children. However, at Paragraph 29 the tribunal made the
      point that they were considering the appeal not only from the
      interests of the individuals concerned but also in relation to the
      family as a whole.

  23. At paragraph 30 the tribunal noted the best interests of the children
      were a primary consideration. Their interest had to be considered
      before considering the reasonableness of their removal. The tribunal
      went on to consider the weight to be attached to their best interests,
      balancing this with the reasonableness of requiring them to leave.
      Consequently, the tribunal that adopted the correct approach and made
      clear finding that their best interests were to remain and to be with
      their mother; to continue to have contact with the father and to
      continue to be educated in their school.

  24. The tribunal at paragraph 32 considered the possibility of them losing
      contact with their father if they moved to Nigeria. The tribunal
      acknowledged this was a factor which could potentially render the
      decision unreasonable. The tribunal referred to what was known of his
      immigration history, with the conclusion being there was no good
      reason why he could not return to Nigeria with them.

  25. Paragraph 33 considered the existing level of contact between him and
      the children. The tribunal did express concern that this had been
      bolstered to support the appeal. There was a reference to him
      travelling each day to collect them from school. His statement
      referred only to seeing them at weekends or collecting them when their
      mother was not available. He was living in Erith and they were in East
      London. The tribunal referred them living a considerable distance
      apart, with the journey involving crossing the Thames. Whilst there is
      nothing to indicate evidence was led as to the distance and time
      involved the judges also had the benefit of oral evidence which is not
      recorded. It was open to the tribunal to assess the level of claim
      contact.  The reference as to distance reads as an observation rather
      than a specific finding and I find no material error established
      either of fact or law.


  26. The tribunal evaluated the factors advanced about why it would be
      unreasonable to expect the children to leave. It was accepted they
      have been immersed in the British educational system but it did not
      follow they could not adapt to the Nigerian system. Reference was made
      to the absence of evidence provided on their behalf about the system
      in place in Nigeria beyond their mother's own account of her
      experiences. Similar comments were made about the claim in relation to
      the security situation.

  27. At paragraph 36 the tribunal clearly identified the core issue in the
      appeal. The tribunal appreciated that the jurisprudence and
      highlighted the seriousness of expecting children who had been here 7
      years to go to their country of nationality. There had been quire in
      the higher courts as to whether the focus should be on the children
      only or whether other factors could come into play. The tribunal
      referred to the decisions of MA (Pakistan) & Ors, R (on the
      application of) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) &
      Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 MA and AM (Pakistan) & Ors v Secretary of
      State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 180. Lord Justice Elias
      gave both judgements and at para 20 of the latter said `The court,
      admittedly reluctantly, concluded that it was inherent in the
      reasonableness test in section 117B(6) that the court should have
      regard to wider public interest considerations and in particular the
      need for effective immigration control'

  28.  In line with this the tribunal considered the family immigration
      history. Comments were made about their mother having leave under
      section 3C.This interim leave was based upon an application which had
      been extended because of the respondent's original error and with
      little underlying merit. The tribunal recognised the difference
      between someone here without leave or who had overstayed and the
      situation of the children's mother who had leave throughout. The
      tribunal recognised this as a favourable consideration in line with AM
      (Pakistan). However, the strengths of the point was diluted by the
      fact that her marriage had broken down and therefore the basis upon
      which he sought to remain no longer existed.

  29. The tribunal went on to address other arguments advanced, such as the
      potential for MA to apply for British citizenship in the future.
      However they were dealing with the situation as at the present. The
      suggestion they would be at risk of kidnapping was assessed. Factors
      relevant to section 117 B were considered including their mothers
      financial situation. Section 117 B (6) was considered and the
      reasonableness of the children going to Nigeria. This overlapped with
      the earlier consideration.

Conclusions

  30. Having considered the decision in its entirety I am satisfied that the
      tribunal asked itself the right questions and made appropriate
      findings based upon evidence. I find this to be a carefully prepared
      decision in which the tribunal clearly understood the legislative
      provisions and the jurisprudence. It was a matter for the tribunal to
      decide the balancing of the various factors. They did state at
      paragraph 38 that the issue was finely balanced and potentially
      arguable either way. I find the tribunal did carefully balance the
      relevant factors. It had regard to the length of time the children had
      been here and their progress. At the outset it evaluated their best
      interests. Having done so, other factors were then considered. This
      included the immigration history and position of their mother and
      father. The arguments about the situation in Nigeria were addressed.
      Another tribunal may well have reached a different conclusion.
      However, this does not mean the tribunal materially erred in law.


   Decisions


   The decision of Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Woodcraft and
   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Norris dismissing the appeals shall
   stand. No material error of law has been established.




   Francis J Farrelly
   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge                    Dated 28 December 2017

