
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34495/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 April 2016                               |On 4 May 2016                 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                               MR H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  ANDRIA PATRICIA SAVERY SILVA CABRAL SANHA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O Yekinni, Solicitor

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Molloy)  allowing  an  appeal  under  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the   EEA
    Regulations") and on Article 8 grounds against a decision to remove the
    applicant on the basis that her removal was justified on the grounds of
    abuse of rights under reg 21B(2)  of  the  EEA  Regulations.   In  this
    decision I will refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier
    Tribunal, the applicant as the appellant and the Secretary of State  as
    the respondent.

Background

2.   The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Portugal  born  on  10  July  1993.
    According to her witness statement she has been living in the UK  since
    2007.  She has been in full-time education and  employment  and  is  at
    present on an extended four year BSc (Hons) business management  degree
    course at Plymouth University. She came to the UK with her  mother  and
    two sisters when she was aged 13 and has been living here  since  then.
    She has a daughter, an EEA national, born on 1 April 2015.

3.   On 27 August 2014 the appellant was served with a  decision  to  remove
    her following service on her on 27 August 2014 of  a  notice  informing
    her of her status under the 2006 Regulations and of  her  liability  to
    detention and removal.  In  that  notice  it  was  indicated  that  her
    removal would justified on the grounds of abuse of rights in accordance
    with reg 21B(2) of the EEA Regulations and in the box headed  "Specific
    Statement of Reasons", the following appears:

         "You are specifically considered a person who has assisted  another
         to enter or attempt to enter into a marriage or  civil  partnership
         of convenience, because you were interviewed today in  relation  to
         your marriage which has been deemed a marriage of convenience."

4.   The appellant appealed against that decision.  The grounds are  drafted
    in general terms arguing that the decision is contrary to her rights as
    an EEA national, that her removal would be unlawful under  s.6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998 and that the decision is not in  accordance  with
    reg 21 of the 2006 Regulations.

5.   The appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 22  September  2015.
    The appellant was represented by Mr Yekinni but there was no appearance
    on behalf of the respondent.  A 50 page bundle of  documents  from  the
    appellant's representative had been faxed to the hearing centre on  the
    previous day in the afternoon but that did not reach  the  judge  until
    the day of the hearing.  The judge explained that the only documents he
    had had when pre-reading the file were those accompanying  the  lodging
    of the appellant's notice of appeal and a bundle  from  the  respondent
    (dated 25 September 2014) consisting of a photocopy of the  appellant's
    documents and a full copy of the notice of appeal.  Therefore,  he  did
    not have a proper bundle from the respondent and had only received  the
    appellant's bundle on the  day  of  the  hearing.   The  judge  rightly
    criticised  the  parties  for  their  failure  to   comply   with   the
    requirements of the Rules.  The  judge put the matter back so  that  Mr
    Yekinni could  take instructions from his  client  as  to  whether  she
    wanted to have a full oral hearing or to have the issues determined  on
    the papers.  Mr Yekinni unequivocally  asked  for  a  decision  on  the
    papers.

6.   The judge then referred to the provisions  of  reg  24(2)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations and to the fact that where a decision was taken to remove a
    person under reg 19(3)(a) or (c) the person was to be treated as  if  a
    person to whom s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 applied.  He
    noted from reg 21B(2) that the respondent may take an EEA  decision  on
    the grounds of abuse of rights where there are  reasonable  grounds  to
    suspect the abuse of a right to reside and it is  proportionate  to  do
    so.  The judge found that there was no evidence  before  him  from  the
    respondent which could support  a  claim  that  there  were  reasonable
    grounds to suspect the appellant had abused her right to reside, it not
    being in dispute that she was a Portuguese  national  and  therefore  a
    citizen of the EU.  He further commented that even if  there  was  some
    evidence, which could lead  him  to  say  that  there  were  reasonable
    grounds to suspect an abuse of the right to reside on the part  of  the
    appellant, there was nothing from the respondent to show  that  it  was
    proportionate for her to take the decision on the specified grounds.

7.   The judge said that the only indication as to  where  the  abuse  might
    lie was from the appellant's own witness statement where she had stated
    that she had not entered into a marriage of convenience but had met and
    fallen in love with someone who did not share the same feeling.

8.   In the absence of any further details about the basis of the  decision,
    the judge understandably commented that he struggled to  ascertain  the
    basis for the respondent's decision.  The appellant had denied entering
    into a marriage of convenience and in her statement she had set out the
    family life that she had in the UK and the fact that her  daughter  had
    only known life in this country.  The skeleton argument lodged  on  her
    behalf submitted that the respondent had failed  to  prove  there  were
    reasonable grounds to suspect an abuse of the right to  reside  but  in
    any event family factors had not been taken  into  account  before  the
    s.10 decision was made.  The judge therefore allowed the  appeal  under
    the EEA Regulations. He went on to consider article 8  saying  at  [37]
    that it need not be examined further because he was not satisfied there
    was any evidential basis for finding that the respondent's  immigration
    decision was in accordance with the EEA Regulations but  at  [40]  then
    said that, as the appeal had been allowed  under  the  Regulations,  it
    followed that it should be automatically allowed on article 8 grounds.

Grounds and Submissions

9.   In the grounds the respondent seeks to challenge the decision  for  the
    following reasons:

    (1)  In allowing the appeal under article 8 the judge materially  erred
         in law, submitting that where no notice had been served under s.120
         of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002
         Act") the appellant could not bring a  human  rights  challenge  to
         removal  in  an  appeal  under  the  EEA  Regulations  relying   on
         Amirteymour and Others (EEA  appeals;  human  rights)  [2015]  UKUT
         00466 and to the head note which reads:


             "Where no notice under Section 120 of the 2002  Act  has  been
             served and where no EEA decision to remove has been  made,  an
             appellant cannot bring a human rights challenge to removal  in
             an appeal under the  EEA  Regulations.   Neither  the  factual
             matrix nor the reasoning in JM (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ  1402
             has any application to appeals of this nature."


    (2)  The judge misdirected himself in allowing the appeal under article
         8 without considering Sections 117A to 117D of the 2002 Act.


    (3)  The judge erred in that  having  noted  that  the  respondent  had
         failed to provide any evidence  and  admitting  that  the  Tribunal
         could go no further  in  trying  to  ascertain  the  basis  of  the
         immigration decision he had inserted himself in the role of primary
         decision-maker and should have allowed the appeal  to  the  limited
         extent of remitting it back to the respondent.


    (4)  The judge failed to give adequate reasons why  the  appellant  had
         won her appeal on family and private life grounds  relying  on  the
         decision in Budhathoki (Reasons for decisions) [2014]  UKUT 341 .


10.  Mr Avery accepted that the grounds relating to article 8 had little  if
    any substance or materiality  as  this  was  a  case  where  a  removal
    decision had been made and, in any event, the appeal had  been  allowed
    under the EEA  Regulations.   However,  he  sought  to  challenge  that
    decision on the basis that the proper course would have  been  for  the
    judge to adjourn the appeal or remit the matter to the respondent.  The
    appellant's bundle had not been served on the respondent who would  not
    have been  aware that the appellant had denied  that  she  had  entered
    into a marriage of convenience.  This had not been  clearly  challenged
    in the grounds of appeal whereas the respondent had evidence  that  she
    had admitted this at interview.  The respondent had been proceeding  on
    the basis that this contention was accepted.

11.  Mr Yekinni submitted that the judge had not erred in law.  It had  been
    for him to decide how  the  appeal  should  proceed  and  he  had  been
    entitled to find that there was no adequate basis in  the  evidence  to
    support a finding that the appellant had abused her rights.

Assessment of whether the Judge erred in law.

12.  This appeal was first listed for  hearing on 9 January 2015.   Attached
    to the hearing notice issued on 19 September  2014  are  directions  to
    both parties stating that if they had not already done  so,  they  must
    submit to the Tribunal and to the other party a bundle of the documents
    they wished to rely on in support of the appeal to arrive no later than
    three weeks before the date of the hearing with a specific  instruction
    to the appellant to send all copies to the respondent at the Presenting
    Officers' Unit and  to  the  respondent  to  send  copies  of  all  the
    documents to the appellant.  The hearing was further  adjourned  on  13
    March 2015 to 22 September 2015.

13.  The respondent had submitted the very limited documents referred to  by
    the judge in [7] and the appellant's documents were served by  fax  the
    day before the hearing.  I note that the  respondent's  documents  were
    been sent to the Tribunal on 25 September 2014  and  were  received  at
    Taylor House on 30 September 2014.  The judge was entitled  to  comment
    that those documents did not meet  the  requirements  of  the  relevant
    procedure rules and that there had been a  failure  to  make  good  any
    defaults. The respondent's case was based on  the  assertion  that  the
    appellant had  entered  or  attempted  to  enter  into  a  marriage  of
    convenience.  This appears in the notice to a person liable to removal.
    However, there was no further evidence from the respondent  to  support
    that assertion.  On the evidence before him the judge was  entitled  to
    take the view firstly, that there was no adequate evidential  basis  to
    put in dispute the  validity  of  the  marriage  entered  into  by  the
    appellant, still less that the decision was proportionate. His decision
    to allow the appeal under the EEA Regulations was properly open to  him
    on the evidence produced by the parties.

14.  Mr Avery's submitted that in the light of the paucity of  the  evidence
    before him, the judge should have adjourned  the  hearing.   I  am  not
    satisfied there is any substance in that  argument.   It  was  for  the
    judge to decide what course should  properly  be  taken  following  the
    defaults of both parties. Mr Avery said that the respondent should  not
    be disadvantaged by the failure to be represented at  the  hearing  and
    that she had been proceeding on the basis that the  appellant  had  not
    sought to challenge the assertion that she had entered into a  marriage
    of convenience.  Whilst the grounds of appeal are  drafted  in  general
    terms, it is clear that the respondent's decision was  under  challenge
    in that it was argued that the decision was not in accordance with  reg
    21 and that all relevant factors had not been considered before  making
    the decision  to  remove  the  appellant.   The  respondent  had  ample
    opportunity to file the evidence she sought to rely on but on the issue
    of abuse of rights the judge had a bare assertion from  the  respondent
    unsupported by evidence.  Mr Avery submitted that  the  respondent  had
    evidence that the appellant had admitted entering into  a  marriage  of
    convenience but there was no evidence to that effect before the judge.

15.  So far as article 8 is concerned, this was a case  where  there  was  a
    decision to remove and therefore does  not  fall  within  the  position
    considered by the Tribunal in Amirteymour  and  indeed  the  notice  of
    decision itself indicated there was a right of appeal on  human  rights
    grounds.  The judge was right when he said at [37] that article 8  need
    not be examined in the light of his findings under the EEA  Regulations
    but not when he said in [40] that as the appeal had been allowed  under
    the EEA Regulations it followed that it should automatically be allowed
    on article 8 grounds. Having found that the appeal  should  be  allowed
    under the Regulations there was no need in the  circumstances  of  this
    case to consider article 8.



Decision

16.  I am not satisfied that the judge erred in law  in  his  assessment  of
    the appeal under the EEA Regulations 2006 and the decision to allow the
    appeal on that ground stands.  The decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on
    article 8 grounds is set aside.




Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 26 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
