
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/34864/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 6 July 2015                       |On 22 July 2015                      |
|Prepared on 7 July 2015              |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               KASHIF MEHMOOD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rogers, Solicitor of Immigration Advice Centre
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant, born 25 September 1985, is a citizen of Pakistan. He
         first came to the UK to study with a valid grant of entry clearance
         as a Tier 4 student on 19  February  2011.  That  leave  was  later
         varied so as to expire on 20 May 2014.

      2. On 18 May 2014 the Appellant applied for a further variation of his
         leave as a Tier 4 student, but that application was refused  on  18
         August 2014 because he had  supplied  no  CAS  in  support  of  the
         application. A removal decision was also made pursuant  to  s47  of
         the 2006 Act.

      3. The Appellant duly appealed against those immigration decisions. In
         response to the "one stop" s120 notice served upon  him  he  argued
         that he should be granted discretionary leave to remain outside the
         Immigration Rules in the light of the relationship  he  had  formed
         with his sponsor. His appeal was heard  on  19  November  2014  and
         dismissed under the Immigration Rules and on Article 8 grounds in a
         Decision promulgated on 19 November 2014  by  First  Tier  Tribunal
         Judge Hands.

      4.  The  Appellant's  application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal was refused by Judge Davies on 19 January 2015
         on the basis that the Judge's findings were  open  to  her  on  the
         evidence, and the grounds disclosed no arguable error of  law,  but
         mere disagreement with them. Undaunted the  Appellant  renewed  his
         application to the Upper Tribunal, and  it  was  granted  by  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Warr on 28 April 2015. He observed that it  was  not
         entirely clear whether the Judge was saying  that  the  couple  had
         entered into an Islamic marriage purely for  immigration  purposes,
         or, that although this  was  the  primary  purpose  the  underlying
         relationship was genuine. He observed that  the  grant  should  not
         engender too much optimism on the Appellant's part  given  that  it
         may well be that the Judge had reached the correct conclusion  upon
         the Article 8 appeal.

      5. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response to the grant of  permission
         dated 14 May 2015.

      6. Thus the matter comes before me.

    The hearing below

      7. It was not in dispute before the First Tier Tribunal;

          i) that the application  which  the  Appellant  had  made  for  a
             variation of his leave as a student could  not  succeed  under
             the Immigration Rules for lack of a CAS when it was made [18].



         ii) that the Appellant had not passed an IELTS test  to  establish
             to the requisite standard his fluency in English [30].

        iii) that the original course for which he had been  granted  entry
             clearance had not been completed due to  the  closure  of  the
             college providing it. Nor  had  the  Appellant  been  able  to
             complete a subsequent course at a  second  college,  which  he
             blamed upon the closure of that college.

         iv) whilst he had made his most recent application for a variation
             of his leave in anticipation of the issue to him of a CAS by a
             third college, for a third course, none  had  been  issued  to
             him, which he again blamed upon the closure of  that  college,
             although absent any IELTS test it  is  difficult  to  see  how
             anything other than a conditional CAS could have  been  issued
             to him [18].

          v) that the Appellant did not meet the requirements of  paragraph
             276ADE.

         vi) that the ceremony of  Islamic  marriage  he  and  the  sponsor
             claimed to  have  undertaken  did  not  constitute  a  legally
             recognised marriage, because the mosque where it had been held
             was not registered under the Marriage Acts [2].

        vii) that the relationship the Appellant  claimed  to  have  formed
             with his sponsor did not constitute a  "durable  relationship"
             within the meaning of that phrase as used in  Appendix  FM  to
             the Immigration Rules, because it  had  not  endured  for  two
             years [2].

       viii) That the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  financial  threshold
             requirements of Appendix FM to the Immigration  Rules  because
             the evidence relied upon as to his sponsor's  income  did  not
             meet the requirements of Appendix FM-SE.

      8. In these circumstances,  the  Appellant  only  pursued  his  appeal
         before the First Tier Tribunal on Article  8  grounds  outside  the
         Immigration Rules [2 & 7].

    Error of law?

      9. Both the Appellant and the sponsor gave evidence to  the  Tribunal,
         and it is accepted before me  that  they  were  the  subject  of  a
         searching cross-examination by the Respondent's representative. The
         Judge's assessment of the evidence  given  under  cross-examination
         shows that in her judgement it was devastatingly effective in terms
         of the damage that it occasioned to their credibility as  witnesses
         of fact [24-28]. Thus the Judge concluded that no  matter  what  he
         might later have said in re-examination, the Appellant had admitted
         under cross-examination to having paid the sponsor to  undertake  a
         ceremony of marriage with him, and that he had done so in order  to
         stay in the UK [26]. The Judge also concluded that the  couple  had
         given evidence that was discrepant with one another both as to when
         they had met, and as to how long they had known one another  before
         forming the relationship they relied  upon  [24].  The  Judge  also
         concluded that although the sponsor had maintained that  she  could
         not, and would not live  in  Pakistan,  she  had  sought  to  avoid
         disclosing her own lengthy visit  to  Pakistan  in  2013,  and  the
         presence of family members living there. The Judge  also  concluded
         that their oral evidence showed that she could place little  weight
         upon the existence and content of the two letters  relied  upon  in
         evidence from  two  ladies  who  had  claimed  to  be  friends  and
         neighbours of the sponsor, but had failed  to  attend  the  hearing
         despite living locally [ApB p68-9].

     10. In the light of those findings the Appellant advanced three grounds
         in his application for permission, although  when  the  appeal  was
         called on for hearing  Ms  Rogers  abandoned  ground  2  before  me
         without seeking to argue it, and argued grounds 1 and 2 as if  they
         were one.

     11. I am not satisfied that there is any merit in ground  3,  which  is
         not supported either by any evidence of what was said by either  of
         the two witnesses during the course of the hearing in evidence, the
         sponsor's passport, or, the air tickets used by her  to  travel  to
         Pakistan. The  sponsor's  witness  statement  of  12  October  2014
         prepared for the purposes of the appeal was extremely brief, and it
         clearly failed to disclose either her first marriage, her  divorce,
         or, her lengthy stay with her grandparents in Pakistan during  2013
         [ApB p7]. All of these matters emerged during  the  course  of  the
         hearing and the oral evidence given by the Appellant and sponsor.

     12. Ground 3 asserts that the Judge made an error of fact that amounted
         to an error of law in recording at one point in her  decision  that
         the sponsor had said she returned to the UK in November 2013  [24],
         and at another point that she had said she returned in August  2013
         [25]. Read properly  I  am  satisfied  however  that  the  decision
         discloses no error of fact. Three different dates  were  given  for
         the return of the sponsor to the UK from Pakistan.  Two  discrepant
         dates were given  by  the  sponsor  of  August  and  November  2013
         following a visit made in March 2013. A  third  was  given  by  the
         Appellant of February 2014 in the context of  his  claim  that  the
         sponsor had visited Pakistan between  December  2013  and  February
         2014. I am satisfied that all the  Judge  did  was  to  record  the
         evidence  she  had  been  given,  and  then  go  on  to  find,  not
         unreasonably, that it was discrepant.

     13. In ground 1 it is asserted that the Judge's findings in relation to
         the  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  the  sponsor  were
         perverse. Ms Rogers confirmed that  she  wished  to  maintain  that
         assertion notwithstanding the relevant very high threshold  not  on
         the basis that there was no evidence to support the finding, but on
         the basis that it was irrational in  the  light  of  the  sponsor's
         pregnancy; Miftari v SSHD [2005] EWCA 481.

     14. The first limb to this ground  is  the  assertion  that  the  Judge
         failed to consider the evidence that the sponsor was pregnant  with
         the  Appellant's  child  when  considering  whether  or  not  their
         relationship was a  genuine  one.  Put  simply  this  assertion  is
         unfounded. The Judge was  well  aware  of  the  evidence  that  the
         sponsor had conceived, and was pregnant with the Appellant's child,
         which was due in May 2015 [7(v), 19, 27].

     15. The second limb to this ground is  the  assertion  that  since  the
         sponsor had claimed in evidence that  she  was  pregnant  with  the
         Appellant's child, it was perverse of the Judge to  find  that  the
         couple had formed their relationship and undertaken a  ceremony  of
         Islamic marriage not because they were in love,  but  because  they
         had arranged to do so for the purpose of allowing him  to  stay  in
         the UK [29]. That finding was not irrational, and in  my  judgement
         the criticism advanced of it conflates the issue  of  whether  this
         was a genuine relationship at  the  date  of  ceremony  of  Islamic
         marriage with  the  issue  of  whether  it  had  become  a  genuine
         relationship subsequently.

     16. What the criticisms of the decision fail  to  engage  with  is  the
         extremely damaging evidence that was before the  Judge.  There  was
         the admission made by the Appellant that he  paid  the  sponsor  to
         undertake the ceremony of Islamic marriage with him,  and  that  he
         had done so for the purpose of staying in the UK. It  is  difficult
         to see that any evidence given in  re-examination  could  be  given
         sufficient weight to mend that damage. The Judge had the benefit of
         seeing the Appellant give his evidence, and if she  concluded  that
         the damage was not repaired, that was a matter for her.

     17. There was also the discrepant evidence as to when  the  couple  had
         first met. The Appellant said that he  first  met  the  sponsor  in
         December 2013, and that they did not meet again until January  2014
         when they decided to marry. That could not be true if  she  was  in
         Pakistan between December 2013 and February 2014  as  he  had  also
         claimed was the case.

     18. Even if the sponsor did return  from  Pakistan  in  November  2013,
         newly divorced, met the Appellant for the first  time  in  December
         2013, and agreed to marry him at their next meeting in January 2014
         as was her evidence, that was inconsistent with the evidence of her
         neighbour who had claimed that there were multiple meetings between
         the couple over a period of time.

     19. In my judgement the Judge's finding that the couple had  agreed  to
         undertake a ceremony of Islamic marriage together not out of  love,
         but because they had arranged to do so with the purpose of allowing
         the Appellant to remain in the UK was one that was open to  her  on
         the evidence, and it was adequately reasoned.

     20. Even if that relationship had developed over  time  to  become  one
         that was genuinely based upon affection and an  intention  to  live
         together as a married couple, as indeed the conception of  a  child
         might indicate, it did not follow that the  Article  8  appeal  was
         bound to be allowed. That is the misconception at the heart of this
         challenge to the Judge's decision.

     21. On any view the relationship that the  Appellant  relied  upon  had
         been formed under the most precarious of  circumstances.  Both  the
         Appellant and the sponsor had family in Pakistan,  and  they  could
         both live together in safety in that country, as  the  sponsor  had
         amply demonstrated by doing so for an extended period in 2013.  The
         only sensible interpretation of her evidence was that  the  sponsor
         had admitted that she knew when they met that the Appellant had  no
         leave to remain in the UK save the limited  grant  of  leave  as  a
         student that would expire on 20 May  2014,  and  that  he  was  not
         studying, and that he was unable to extend that leave as a student.

     22. Whilst the Judge made no reference to the  principles  set  out  in
         Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40, and SSHD v Hayat [2012] EWCA Civ 1054, it
         does not follow that her decision is inconsistent with them.

     23. It cannot be said  that  the  Appellant  has  a  "poor  immigration
         history", but equally this is not a  case  in  which  it  can  with
         confidence be said that the Appellant could upon return to Pakistan
         be immediately granted entry clearance to return for  the  purposes
         of settlement as the partner of the sponsor. They did not meet  the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules to do so at the date  of  the
         hearing. In Hayat [2011] UKUT 444, the Upper Tribunal said;

             "23.      The significance of Chikwamba, however, is  to  make
             plain that, where the only matter weighing on the respondent's
             side of the balance is the public policy of requiring a person
             to  apply  under  the  rules  from  abroad,  that   legitimate
             objective will usually be outweighed by factors resting on the
             appellant's side of the balance.

             24.  Viewed  correctly,  the  Chikwamba  principle  does  not,
             accordingly, automatically trump anything on the State's side,
             such as a poor immigration history.  Conversely, the principle
             cannot be simply "switched off" on mechanistic  grounds,  such
             as because children are not involved, or that  (as  here)  the
             appellant is not seeking  to  remain  with  a  spouse  who  is
             settled in the United Kingdom.

             25. Like the absence of children, that last factor may be  one
             which diminishes the force of the principle;  but  whether  it
             will do so depends upon  an  assessment  of  the  facts.   For
             example, if the position disclosed by the  evidence  had  been
             that the appellant's wife was due to finish her studies only a
             few weeks after the date of the hearing, and was intending  to
             return to her country of origin, and  the  evidence  was  such
             that she did not need the appellant to  be  present  with  her
             while she finished her studies and prepared to leave, then the
             Chikwamba principle would have  had  nothing  to  add  to  the
             appellant's case.  The  actual  facts  of  the  present  case,
             however, were very different.  As we have  already  seen,  the
             appellant's wife had the best part of a year to go before  the
             end of her first tranche of the ACCA course.  She has now been
             given leave to remain until 2014 in  order  to  complete  that
             course.  There  is  no  suggestion  that  her  practical   and
             emotional need for her husband to be with her  has  diminished
             in any respect.

             26. The fact that the presence in the United  Kingdom  of  the
             appellant's wife depends upon her status here  as  a  student,
             and only on that, has to be acknowledged  in  undertaking  the
             balancing exercise. However, as we have indicated,  that  fact
             alone  does  not  negate  the  Chikwamba  principle.   She  is
             entitled to remain and study here until 2014. In practice,  if
             the appellant were to be removed, it is highly likely that she
             would be without his help and support for a  very  substantial
             proportion of that time. The evidence is that  she  needs  the
             appellant's help and support.  She has committed no breach  of
             the Immigration Rules.  Nor has the  appellant.   There  is  a
             likelihood that, if the appellant were removed, his wife  will
             find she is unable to continue her studies, thus negating  the
             rationale of requiring him to go back to Pakistan to  make  an
             entry clearance application.

             27. In short, on a proper analysis of the facts, the principle
             in Chikwamba points plainly to the factors in  favour  of  the
             appellant outweighing the  single  factor  relied  on  by  the
             respondent."

     24. As  explained  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Hayat,  the  Chikwamba
         principle does not therefore mean that no individual should ever be
         required to return  to  their  country  of  origin  to  seek  entry
         clearance in the usual way. On the contrary if  there  are  factors
         that  weigh  in  the  Respondent's  favour   when   balancing   the
         proportionality of removal, other than simply the public policy  of
         requiring entry clearance  to  be  sought  from  abroad,  then  the
         Chikwamba principle does not automatically mean that they carry  no
         weight.

     25. The Court of Appeal in Hayat [2012] EWCA  Civ  1054  approved  that
         approach. (I do not  consider  that  Zhang  [2013]  EWHC  891  adds
         anything to the analysis of the relevant principle by the Court  of
         Appeal.)  Nor does the Court of Appeal  approach  in  MF  (Nigeria)
         [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 alter the guidance given in Hayat,  indeed  in
         my judgement it reaffirms that guidance.

     26. On the facts of this case the significant fact in the  Respondent's
         favour are the findings as to when this  relationship  was  formed,
         and the circumstances in  which  it  was  formed.  Looking  at  the
         evidence in the round the Judge was perfectly entitled to  conclude
         that the removal decision was proportionate, and thus  dismiss  the
         Article 8 appeal [30-31]. The arguments available did not rely upon
         the core concepts of moral and physical integrity,  and  given  the
         sponsor's previous ability to live  in  Pakistan  for  an  extended
         period she could hardly be heard to say that she would  not  do  so
         again for any period of time. In my judgement the Judge was correct
         to conclude that the evidence relied upon did  not  establish  that
         there were any compelling compassionate  circumstances  that  meant
         the decision to remove  the  Appellant  to  Pakistan,  lead  to  an
         unjustifiably harsh outcome.

    DECISION

         The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 19 November 2014 did not involve the making of an error  of  law
         in the decision to dismiss the appeal that requires  that  decision
         to be set aside and remade. The decision to dismiss the  appeal  is
         accordingly confirmed.

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    The Appellant did not seek anonymity before the  First  Tier  Tribunal,
    and no request for anonymity is made to me.  There  appears  to  be  no
    proper basis for the Upper Tribunal to make such a direction of its own
    motion.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 7 July 2015
