
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34461/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 August 2014                             |On 3 September 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       mrs Trupti Harikrushana Padaria
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma (Counsel instructed by Malik Law
Chambers Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This matter comes before us for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  by  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Lawrence) promulgated on 10  June  2014,  in  which  he
    allowed the claimant's appeal under  Article  8  for  leave  to  remain
    outside of the Rules.

Background

2.   The claimant, whose date of birth is 12 November 1985, is a citizen  of
    India.

3.   In a letter dated 15 August 2013 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    claimant's application for leave to remain in the UK under  pararagraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules as she had not  lived  continuously  in
    the UK for at least twenty years.  She  entered  as  the  spouse  of  a
    highly skilled migrant on 31 October 2008 but  her  marriage  ended  in
    July 2012.  She formed a relationship with her sponsor  with  whom  she
    cohabited since 30 January  2013.   They  celebrated  a  Hindu  wedding
    ceremony in March 2013 but had not cohabited for two years.

4.   The First tier Tribunal hearing took place on  27  May  2014  at  which
    time the appellant was heavily pregnant with a "due" date in July 2014.

5.   The Tribunal confirmed at [8] that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE because the sponsor was not settled in
    the UK, the appellant did not meet the  requirements  of  paragraph  E-
    LTRP.2.1, and paragraph EX1(b) did not apply.  The  Tribunal  found  at
    [9] that there were no insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  being
    continued in India. There was no evidence that the Indian sponsor could
    not accompany the claimant and their child to India.

6.   The Tribunal considered the  appeal  under  Article  8  ECHR  following
    principles set out in SSHD v Treebhowan and Hayat [2012] EWCA Civ  1054
    [19].  The Tribunal found the claimant's advanced stage of pregnancy to
    be  a  significant  factor  and  exceptional  circumstance  such   that
    consideration of the  appeal  could  be  made  outside  of  the  Rules.
    Following Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 the  Tribunal  found  family  life  was
    established [20] and that the interference was disproportionate  having
    regard to the legitimate public end [25].

7.   Grounds of appeal were submitted by the  Secretary  of  State.   Ground
    one was that the Tribunal erred by failing to follow the "arguably good
    grounds" approach as per Gulshan and R (on the application of Nagre)  v
    SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and  that  the  claimant's  pregnancy  and
    temporary inability to travel was  not  an  arguably  good  ground  for
    consideration outside of the Rules.  Ground two was that  the  Tribunal
    erred in the assessment of proportionality.

8.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin  on
    27 June  2014  who  concluded  that  the  judge's  reasoning  that  the
    claimant's advanced stage of pregnancy warranted consideration  outside
    of the Immigration Rules was properly open to  him.   However,  it  was
    arguable that the proportionality assessment was flawed by a failure to
    have proper consideration of the material facts, and the  Secretary  of
    State's duty to apply the Immigration Rules  and  the  public  interest
    factors.


Discussion and Decision

9.   The first ground relates to the "Gulshan" test.  While  we  acknowledge
    that an advanced state of pregnancy was  arguably  a  good  ground  for
    consideration outside of the Rules, in light of the recent judgment  in
    MM (Lebanon) and others, R (on the application of) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department and another [2014] EWCA Civ 985  that  approach
    no longer forms a necessary stage prior to consideration of  Article  8
    ECHR and it appeared to us that this ground therefore fell away.

10.  The second ground focuses on the Article 8 proportionality  assessment.
     It was our view that the First-tier Tribunal's assessment  was  indeed
    flawed in failing to take into account at all the  appellant's  failure
    to meet the Immigration Rules.

11.   Further, there is no dispute  that  the  sponsor  here  is  an  Indian
    national with limited leave to remain. The decision was also  in  error
    where the Tribunal  found,  correctly,  at  [9],  that  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to the couple living  together  in  India  but
    that finding not being weighed at all in the Article 8  proportionality
    assessment.

12.  We also found that the Tribunal was misconceived  in  stating  at  [25]
    that because the claimant may be able to meet the Rules in  an  out  of
    country application  "the  notion  of  immigration  control  loses  its
    potency". The fact of her being unable to meet  the  Immigration  Rules
    now remained a  relevant  factor  in  the  Article  8  assessment;  see
    Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558.

13.  Accordingly we find the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  disclosed
    an error on  a point of law such that it should be  set  aside  and  be
    remade.

14.   As regards the re-making, Mr Sharma indicated that he wished  to  take
    instructions a letter dated 24 July 2014 from the  Secretary  of  State
    informing the claimant's sponsor of his  liability  for  detention  and
    removal.  It appeared to us that the appeal should be  re-made  on  the
    evidence as it was before the First-tier Tribunal and we indicated that
    we therefore placed no weight on that letter. Mr Sharma confirmed  that
    otherwise he was content for the Tribunal  to  proceed  to  remake  the
    decision without further submissions, as did Ms Isherwood.

15.  As may be clear from our reasons for finding an error of law above,  it
    was not our view that the decision to  refuse  leave  under  Article  8
    could be found to be disproportionate. The appellant  cannot  meet  the
    Immigration Rules and that must be taken as the starting point  in  any
    proportionality assessment; see Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558.
    We accept that she has a family life here with  her  partner  and  will
    have established a limited private life in the time that she  has  been
    in the UK. Her partner is Indian, however, and he is in  the  UK  on  a
    temporary basis. It appeared to us that the couple, having  decided  to
    begin  a  relationship  when  the  claimant's  immigration  status  was
    uncertain, could reasonably be expected to exercise  their  family  and
    private life in India, their country of origin and the place they  have
    spent most of their lives and were always expecting to return to at the
    end of their limited leave. The appellant's pregnancy might be a factor
    to consider  when  setting  precise  removal  directions  but  was  not
    something that could show the refusal of leave to be disproportionate.

16.   In short, it was not our judgement that anything in the  circumstances
    of the claimant or her partner showed that the decision to refuse leave
    was disproportionate and we therefore refused the appeal.

Decision

17.  We find a material error of law in the determination of the  First-tier
    Tribunal and set it aside.

18.  We remake the decision as refused under Article 8 ECHR.






Signed                                  Date 2.9.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


No anonymity order made.

There is no fee award as the appeal is dismissed.






Signed                                  Date 2.9.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

