

                                     [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/34204/2013


                                   THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |         Determination        |
|On September 17, 2014           |Promulgated                   |
|                                |On September 18, 2014         |
|                                |                              |
|                                |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR WASEEM TARIQ

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Everett (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms Victor-Mazeli, Counsel, instructed by
      Shahzad Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Whereas the  respondent  is  the  appealing  party,  I  shall,  in  the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.


 2. The appellant, born March 4, 1988 is a citizen of  Pakistan.  On  March
    10, 2010 he entered the United Kingdom as a tier 4 student  with  leave
    to remain until July 30, 2012. Shortly before he was  due  to  sit  his
    exams his college's license was revoked and he obtained  permission  to
    study elsewhere. On July 30, 2012 he lodged an application for  further
    leave but on October 5, 2012 his second college's licence  was  revoked
    and on February 20, 2013 the respondent wrote to him  advising  him  of
    this fact and allowing him  up  to  60  days  to  find  an  alternative
    Sponsor. He submitted a further application on April 23, 2013 but  this
    was ultimately refused on August 5, 2013 on the basis  the  maintenance
    requirement had not been met.

 3. On August 19, 2013 the appellant appealed under Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 arguing the Rules had been
    met.

 4. The matter was listed before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Whalan
    (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on June 2, 2014. The respondent
    was unrepresented. In a determination promulgated on July  2,  2014  he
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and made a fee award  in
    favour of the appellant.

 5. The respondent appealed that decision on July 11, 2014.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Brunnen on  July
    22, 2014. He found the FtTJ may have erred for the reasons set  out  in
    the grounds.

 6. The appellant was in attendance at the hearing.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR OF LAW


 7. Ms Everett relied on the grounds of appeal. She accepted there had been
    no challenge  to  the  FtTJ's  finding  the  bank  statement  had  been
    submitted but argued that the  FtTJ  should  have  refused  the  appeal
    because there was no letter of authority from the appellant's father as
    required by Appendix C of the Immigration Rules. She noted a letter had
    been sent to the appellant on April 24, 2013 requesting  this  document
    and evidence of funds and this suggested that the  respondent  conceded
    evidential flexibility was  considered.  However,  there  had  been  no
    response to this letter hence the refusal letter.  She  invited  me  to
    find a material error.

 8. Ms Victor-Mazeli stated that the FtTj had decided the case based on the
    evidence before him. The appellant had neither received the second page
    of the letter dated February 20, 2013 nor the letter  dated  April  24,
    2013. If he had he would have provided all that had been requested. She
    accepted that at the date of application/decision/hearing the appellant
    had not submitted the letter of authority from his father albeit he had
    the document now. She stated that as he had never received  the  letter
    then he should, as had been acknowledged by the respondent, been  given
    an opportunity to furnish the document. She  asked  me  to  uphold  the
    decision  or  alternatively  require  the  respondent  to   apply   the
    evidential flexibility test.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT


 9.  This  is  an  appeal  by  the  respondent.  The  respondent  had  been
    unrepresented at the original hearing and I am satisfied  that  if  she
    had been represented two important matters would have been highlighted:-



     a. The absence of the letter of authority as set  out  in  Appendix  C
        section 13 and 13B.
     b. A letter on the respondent's files indicating  that  a  letter  had
        been sent to the appellant requesting further documents.


10. The decision in Qureshi [2011] UKUT 00412 makes  it  clear  that  where
    there has been a variation substituting a new college, it is  the  date
    of the most recent variation for the purposes of paragraph  1A(c).   In
    other words the appellant had to  demonstrate  when  he  submitted  his
    application in April 2013 that he satisfied the Rules.

11. The FtTJ accepted  in  paragraph  [10]  of  his  determination  that  a
    relevant bank statement had been sent but made no finding on the letter
    as authority as required by section 13B(b) of Appendix C.

12. I am satisfied that this application did not  satisfy  the  Immigration
    Rules because the latter had never been submitted. Ms Victor-Mazeli did
    not seek to persuade me that this aspect of the  Rules  had  been  met.
    There is therefore a material error.

    REMAKING OF DECISION

13. The  evidence  I  had  was  that  the  respondent  accepted  evidential
    flexibility was being considered and it was the appellant's failure  to
    respond that led to the refusal  letter.  The  appellant,  through  his
    counsel, confirmed the letter of April 24, 2013 had never been received
    and he was only aware of it, for the first time, today.

14. I am satisfied there are strong arguments for the appellant to be given
    time to submit his evidence as this is  something  the  respondent  had
    clearly been considering and this is  case where evidential flexibility
    should be applied. Ms Everett had accepted the missing  documents  fell
    within the respondent's evidential flexibility policy and as  I  accept
    the appellant had never received a request for the missing documents  I
    concluded that it  would  be  unfair  if  he  was  not  given  such  an
    opportunity.

15. I set aside the decisions to allow the appeal and to make a fee  award.
    I am satisfied that this is an appropriate case to remit  back  to  the
    respondent to consider evidence that fell within  their  own  rules  on
    evidential flexibility.


    DECISION


16. There is a material error of law and I set aside the original decision.



17. The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules to the limited extent
    that the  application  remains  before  the  respondent  for  a  lawful
    decision to be made having given the appellant a reasonable  period  of
    time to provide the letter of authority and any other document that  it
    indicated should be forwarded in a letter dated April 24,  2013.  I  am
    satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the appellant had  not
    received the letter.


18. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.


Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis







TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award, as the respondent was entitled to reject the
application in the light of the apparent failure to respond to the letter
dated April 24, 2013.

Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
