
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34781/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 19 January 2018                        |On 23 February 2018              |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

                             ANGEL LAURIAN RITTI
                      (Anonymity has not been directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Tanzania born on  17  August  1979.   She
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 19 November  2015
    refusing her leave to remain in the United Kingdom on health issues and
    deciding to remove her to Tanzania.

 2. The appeal was heard by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Rozanski on  4
    April 2017.  The appeal was dismissed under the Immigration  Rules  and
    also outside the Rules in a decision promulgated on 24 April 2017.


 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Hollingworth on 27 November
    2017.  The permission states that  the  Judge  has  considered  whether
    there would be a breach of Article 8 outside the Rules.   At  paragraph
    75 of his decision the Judge assumes that the appellant has  a  private
    life in the  UK  and  that  removal  would  be  an  interference.   The
    permission states that it is arguable that the Judge has set out no, or
    an insufficient, analysis of the medical  condition  of  the  appellant
    when carrying out his proportionality exercise for Article 8.

 4. Previously in the decision the Judge found that the threshold  required
    for Article 3 of ECHR to be  engaged  had  not  been  reached  and  the
    permission states that although the Judge has referred at paragraph  72
    to the case of Akhalu (Nigeria) [2013] UKUT 00400 (IAC) it is  arguable
    that he has not considered in sufficient detail the  issue  of  whether
    there would be a breach of the physical and  moral  integrity  limb  of
    Article 8 when carrying out the proportionality exercise.

 5. At paragraph 71 of the decision the Judge states that it was not  clear
    whether the appellant's Article 8 private life rights were  engaged  or
    not but nonetheless he proceeds to consider whether there  would  be  a
    breach of Article 8 outside the Rules  and  he  goes  on  to  refer  to
    Section 117 of Part 5A of the 2002 Act and deals with  proportionality.
    At paragraph 77 the Judge refers to other factors which must  be  taken
    into account when Section 117 is considered.  When the Judge does  this
    he concludes that the appellant's private life should be  given  little
    weight and that it would be proportionate to remove the appellant  from
    the United Kingdom.  The permission states that it is arguable that the
    Judge  has  insufficiently  delineated  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant's  medical  condition,  the   availability   of   care,   the
    accessibility of  care  and  the  distinction  between  the  Article  3
    threshold and the issue of "breach of  physical  and  moral  integrity"
    pursuant to Article 8 when considering whether there would be a  breach
    of Article 8 outside the Rules.

 6. At paragraph 73 the Judge refers to Article 8 not  being  automatically
    excluded by a failure to meet the full rigours  of  Article  3  but  he
    states that the correct approach is to have regard to every  aspect  of
    the appellant's private life and the consequences  for  her  health  on
    removal.  The permission states that it is arguable that the Judge  has
    insufficiently dealt with the  question  of  the  consequences  to  the
    appellant's health on removal in the context of the physical and  moral
    integrity limb of Article 8.

 7. There is a Rule 24 response on file which states  that  the  First-Tier
    Judge directed himself appropriately.  The Judge  directed  himself  to
    the case law relevant to health cases, stating that there  could  be  a
    rare case, where a case which could not succeed under Article  3  might
    succeed under Article 8 but he found that the appellant's circumstances
    did not meet this stringent test.  The correct case law is referred to.
      The  response  goes  on  to  state  that  the  UK  has  not  accepted
    responsibility for the appellant's health care and the Judge has  found
    this.  The response goes on to state that in relation to  the  argument
    in the grounds of appeal that the appellant may not be able  to  obtain
    medical treatment in a remote part of Tanzania,  the  First-Tier  Judge
    fully considered the possibility  of  the  appellant  living  with  her
    sister on return to Tanzania, having lived with  her  for  three  years
    prior to coming to the UK in  2014.   The  judge  also  noted  that  no
    documentary evidence had been provided to show that the appellant would
    not be able to obtain the medication she  requires  in  Tanzania.   The
    response states that the First-Tier Judge made findings open to him  on
    the evidence and that there is no error of law in the decision.

 8. On the day before the hearing an adjournment request was made by Ukimas
    Consultancy Limited, 53 Ladens Road, West Croydon.  This letter is from
    Mr Okech and he was the representative at the First-Tier  hearing.   In
    spite of this he states that he was only instructed on 18 January  2018
    to represent the appellant in this matter and so has not  had  time  to
    prepare the case.  He goes on to state that the appellant is very  sick
    and is unable to attend the court hearing.   No  medical  evidence  was
    provided with the adjournment request to show this.  HMCTS  replied  to
    this adjournment request stating that the request arrived too  late  to
    be placed before a Judge  for  a  decision  and  that  the  adjournment
    request would be considered at the hearing.


 9. In spite of this no one from Ukimas Consultancy  Limited  appeared  for
    the hearing of this appeal and the appellant did not appear.

The Hearing

10. The adjournment request was considered at the hearing and was discussed
    by me and the  Presenting  Officer.   It  was  decided  to  refuse  the
    adjournment request as Mr Okech had already appeared on behalf  of  the
    appellant, had produced no medical evidence relating to the appellant's
    health on the day and should have appeared  for  the  hearing  of  this
    appeal after receiving the aforesaid Tribunal letter.

11. The Presenting Officer submitted that this claim cannot  succeed  under
    Article 8 within the Rules and is an appeal purely on Article 8 outside
    the Rules.  He submitted that this is an appellant who has received NHS
    medical treatment in breach of her visa terms and although  she  has  a
    private life in the United Kingdom she is not financially  independent.
    There is no evidence of her paying any tax, her position in the  United
    Kingdom is precarious and she is receiving regular NHS treatment.


12. The Presenting Officer submitted that at paragraph 72 of  the  decision
    the Judge has referred to the case  of  Akhalu  and  considers  whether
    there would be a breach of the physical and  moral  integrity  limb  of
    Article 8 when  he  carries  out  the  proportionality  exercise.   She
    submitted that the United Kingdom has not accepted  responsibility  for
    this appellant's health and no evidence has been produced to show  that
    she will be unable to obtain the appropriate medication  and  treatment
    if she returns to Tanzania.

Decision and Reasons

13. The Judge has given a thorough decision referring to the relevant  case
    law and making reference to Section 117B.  He notes that at the date of
    the First-Tier hearing the appellant had spent less than three years in
    the United Kingdom and had spent most of her life  in  Tanzania,  apart
    from a period of time when she lived  in  Canada.   Her  son  lives  in
    Canada.  Her evidence before the First-tier Judge was that  before  she
    came to the United Kingdom she did not suffer from  psychosis  but  the
    first medical letter produced refers to her  relapse  in  2014.  It  is
    clear that she suffered from psychosis when she was in Canada and  then
    returned to Tanzania where her condition stabilised and she  lived  and
    worked there without requiring medication.  The Judge does not  believe
    that she has not been working in the United Kingdom  and  she  actually
    admitted to working as a nanny for a period.

14. The Judge has considered the objective evidence  on  Tanzania  and  the
    health care there and notes that in Tanzania free medical treatment for
    mental health conditions is generally available.   He  finds  that  she
    does not require to go to live with her mother in a remote  area.   She
    has previously resided with her sister and can remain with  her  in  an
    area of Tanzania which is not remote.  The Judge makes reference to the
    case of Benaid v UK (2001) 33 EHRR 205 and the fact that health care in
    Tanzania is not as good as in the United Kingdom but states  that  this
    is not decisive from the point of view of Article 3.  At  paragraph  69
    he finds that the appellant does not meet the strict requirements  that
    apply to Article 3.  She does not have a terminal  illness.   She  will
    have access to medication in Tanzania and she has family who  can  help
    there.  The Judge also points out that her health is  stable  when  she
    takes her medication.


15. The Judge refers to the sparse evidence about her private life  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He argues that the fact that she is in receipt of  NHS
    treatment in the United Kingdom cannot be said to be an  assumption  of
    responsibility for ongoing medical treatment.  He therefore finds  that
    the high threshold required by Article  8  of  ECHR,  relating  to  her
    health has not been reached.  The Judge also refers to the said case of
    Akhalu and considers her situation in  the  United  Kingdom,  which  he
    finds is not exceptional.


16. The Judge considers all aspects of the appellant's  private  life  when
    assessing proportionality and  applies  the  criteria  referred  to  in
    Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   He
    finds that removal is lawful in this case as there  is  nothing  before
    him to indicate that she  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  health
    migrant.  He notes that she is not  financially  independent,  has  not
    produced evidence of having paid taxes in the UK and has been receiving
    regular medical treatment on the NHS to  which  she  was  not  lawfully
    entitled.  He refers to her friendships and relationships in the United
    Kingdom and her precarious status here which means that  little  weight
    can be given to the appellant's private life.


17. The Judge therefore finds that the appeal cannot succeed under  Article
    8 outside the Rules.  He has given proper reasons for his findings  and
    based on what was before him he was entitled to reach this decision.


18. There is no material error of law in the Judge's decision.


Notice of Decision

As there is no material error of law in the Judge's decision his decision
promulgated on 24 April 2017 must stand.

Anonymity has not been directed.


Signed                                  Date 16 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray

