

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/34342/2013
     IA/34348/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17th July 2014                             |On 24th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                 SADIK MOHAMMED AND NIKHATH SULTANA MOHAMMED
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

Appellants:   Mr Findlay.
Respondent:   Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision made on behalf of the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (hereinafter the "Secretary of State") dated 07 August 2013,
    the application of the first-named Appellant for leave to remain  as  a
    Tier 1 Entrepreneur was refused. By a  kindred  decision  of  the  same
    date,  the  application  of  the  second-named  Appellant,  the   first
    Appellant's spouse, for leave to remain as the dependent  of  a  person
    having the status sought by her husband was also refused.  The  ensuing
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") was dismissed.

 2. Upon the hearing of  this  appeal,  the  grounds  crystallised  to  two
    issues:

    (a)  The "SOC Code" issue; and

     (b) The "contracts" issue.

    Each of these was  probed  at  some  length  in  submissions  from  the
    parties' respective representatives and in exchanges with the bench. As
    the  hearing  progressed,  Mr  McVeety,  properly  and   realistically,
    conceded the first issue.   It fell to the Tribunal  to  adjudicate  on
    the second issue, therefore.

 3. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,  I  provided  a  short  ex  tempore
    judgment, allowing the appeal, which I now summarise.  Ultimately,  the
    question was fundamentally the factual  one  of  whether  the  contract
    documents concerned  -  which  were  an  obligatory  requirement  under
    Appendix A, paragraph 41 SD(c)(iii)(4)(iii) - had  been  included  with
    the first Appellant's application.  I decided this factual issue on the
    balance of  probabilities,  with  the  assistance  of  the  documentary
    sources  which  were  available,  in  particular  Section  7   of   the
    Application Form and the evidence of Mr Findlay who, as the Appellants'
    lawyer, compiled and  submitted  the  application.  I  also  took  into
    account the obvious doubts and uncertainties, fully acknowledged by  Mr
    McVeety, relating to the state of the Respondent's documentary records.
     I accepted Mr Findlay's evidence that, in the particular context,  the
    terminology  "supplier  invoice"  in  the  Application   Form   denoted
    "contract".   Being  satisfied  on  this  issue  on  the   balance   of
    probabilities,  I  made  a  finding  that  the  requisite   contractual
    materials had indeed been included  with  the  application.   Thus  the
    application was compliant with the Rules.

DECISION

 4. It follows that the determination of the FtT must be set aside.

 5. The parties agreed with my suggestion that I should proceed  to  remake
    the decision without more.  No further submissions were made.  It flows
    inexorably from the analysis and finding above that the  appeal  should
    be allowed and I so order.

                                                     [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                          Date: 17 July 2014
