
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/34778/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 November 2015                  |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     S P
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Harrington, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is an Iranian national. On 19 June 2012 she applied for
       further leave to  remain  in  the  UK.  The  Respondent  refused  her
       application under paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules  made  a
       decision to refuse to vary her leave to remain on 8 August 2013.  The
       Appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal was dismissed
       by First-tier Tribunal Judge Knowles in a decision promulgated on  10
       April 2014. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  against  that
       decision. Permission was refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Astle
       on 28 May 2014. The Appellant renewed her application for  permission
       to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and it was refused by Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Grubb on 28 July 2014. That decision was quashed by his  Honour
       Judge Jarman QC on 25 November 2014.  The  reasons  given  were  that
       permission to apply for judicial review was given on 3 November  2014
       but neither party had applied for an oral hearing within the terms of
       CPR 54.7A(9)(a) and the decision was quashed in accordance  with  CPR
       54.7A (9)(b).

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by CMG Ockleton, Vice  President  of
       the Upper Tribunal, on 9 September 2014 in the light of the  decision
       of the High Court.

  The Grounds

    3. The Appellant relies on both sets of grounds  seeking  permission  to
       appeal. The grounds seeking permission to appeal from the  First-tier
       Tribunal assert that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  that  the
       Appellant was not a member of a social group are  irrational.  It  is
       further submitted that the Judge did not apply appropriate weight  to
       the genuine Iranian court document submitted  by  the  Appellant  and
       that the Appellant's husband wanted her to return to Iran to continue
       their abusive relationship. The First-tier Tribunal  had  found  that
       the Appellant was the victim of domestic violence  from  her  husband
       whilst in the United Kingdom and the  finding  that  she  was  not  a
       member of a social group of women subjected to domestic  violence  in
       Iran was irrational and  not  in  accordance  with  the  Respondent's
       policy. It is further submitted that the Judge erred  in  speculating
       that the Appellant would be protected by her family members  in  Iran
       and it was speculation that she would be able to  successfully  bring
       divorce proceedings against her husband. It is further submitted that
       the First-tier Tribunal's decision was irrational in the light of the
       country information referred  to  at  paragraphs  47  to  54  of  the
       decision.

    4. The grounds seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal assert
       that the Respondent's decision under paragraph 276  ADE  was  not  in
       accordance with the law as the application should have been  assessed
       under Article 8 ECHR only as it was made prior to 9  July  2012.  The
       grounds further argue that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  take
       into account up to date country information post-dating  the  country
       guidance of 2003. It is asserted that the  evidence  shows  that  the
       Appellant was unlikely in 2014 to be able to receive  adequate  state
       protection due to the law treating the matter as a domestic  violence
       matter and that no specific domestic violence provisions existed.  It
       is also asserted that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in failing
       to make any finding as to whether the Appellant would be at  risk  of
       continued violence from her husband  in  her  home  area  or  whether
       internal relocation was either safe or if not, unduly harsh. Finally,
       it is asserted that at paragraph 54 of the  decision  the  First-tier
       Tribunal erred in law by reversing the standard of  proof  in  asylum
       cases in favour of  the  Respondent  in  stating  that  he  found  it
       reasonable that if she chose to institute  divorce  proceedings,  she
       would be able to rely on her sister and brother in law  for  support.
       It is submitted that the correct question is  whether  the  appellant
       would be reasonably likely to remain at risk of  persecution  despite
       the  possibility  of  seeking  protection  by   instituting   divorce
       proceedings. It is submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal's  finding
       on the ability to seek protection by initiating  divorce  proceedings
       is vitiated by this and by failing to engage  with  the  evidence  on
       divorce and legal proceedings.

  The Hearing

    5. Ms Harrington submitted that  the  Judge  dealt  with  Article  8  in
       paragraphs 55 and 56 of the determination and considering firstly  at
       whether the case came within the Rules or outside them there  were  a
       number of errors. In considering whether she came  within  the  Rules
       the Judge looked at private life and not the domestic violence Rules.
       She would not fall within the domestic violence  requirement  of  the
       Rules due to the fact that she was the spouse of a refugee. A further
       aspect of domestic violence which had  not  been  considered  was  in
       relation to FH (Iran) (Post-flight  spouses)  Iran  [2010]  UKUT  275
       which considered  the  disproportionate  effect  of  the  Immigration
       Rules. Refugee spouses could  not  bring  them  within  the  ordinary
       spouse rules. She was only outside the  Rules  because  she  was  the
       spouse of a refugee. That had not been considered and the  Article  8
       decision could not stand for those reasons.

    6. In respect of the protection aspects, the Judge  had  approached  the
       risk posed by her husband in the wrong order.  What  he  should  have
       done was consider whether there was a  real  risk  that  her  husband
       would use the legal provisions of Iran to make his wife come back him
       and have her return to his home. If it was reasonably likely that  he
       would do that and it was accepted that he had begun that process  her
       parents could not prevent her return whilst they remain  married.  If
       she was returned to his home, domestic violence would continue.  What
       the Judge relied upon in concluding that protection was available was
       the ability she had to divorce him  but  that  presupposed  that  she
       could divorce him before he enforced his legal  right.  The  question
       was whether there was a real risk that he could  enforce  his  rights
       before she could enforce her right to divorce where the situation was
       that it was very difficult for a wife to divorce. The only  realistic
       conclusion was that the husband would win. It was not  an  answer  to
       say that it the fullness of time she would be able  to  divorce  him.
       Domestic violence was not a crime and therefore she could not  go  to
       the police. There was failure to consider matters in the proper order
       when looking to consider what the risk was.

    7. The Judge had also fallen into error in concluding that she would  be
       able to  divorce  on  the  basis  of  alcohol  abuse.  There  was  no
       supporting evidence of alcohol abuse. Potentially that was  the  only
       ground of divorce open to her on the basis of the objective evidence.
       There were very limited grounds for divorce and there was no proof of
       the alcohol abuse and there was a limited  category  into  which  she
       could bring herself. At paragraph 48 the Judge had found that it  was
       not surprising that  her  husband  had  not  made  an  allegation  of
       adultery because that would prevent her return. Given that the  Judge
       was looking at the United Kingdom rather than Iran the  Judge  failed
       to  recognise  that  it  was  not  the  risk  on  return.  The  final
       substantive area of error was that the Judge had failed  to  consider
       updating the objective information and that was set out in the second
       set of grounds of appeal. There had been a worsening in the situation
       in the country guidance. Pages 6 and 8 of the objective  bundle  were
       relevant as was a longer article which set out the changes  over  the
       last 20 years and given the very  substantial  passage  of  time  the
       Judge needed to do more. Further there were errors of law in relation
       to his findings on social group. At the end of paragraph 48,  because
       of the error regarding being accused of adultery  that  fed  into  an
       error regarding social group. At paragraph 49  there  was  simply  no
       explanation as to why women in Iran who  are  subjected  to  domestic
       violence were not a social group. As was dealt with in  the  grounds,
       the Respondent's own guidance noted women in Iran who were subject to
       domestic violence were a social group. This was a decision that had a
       number of errors of law  which  were  clearly  material  and  matters
       needed further consideration. There was no  anonymity  direction  and
       one needed to be made in the light of the evidence.

    8. Mr Richards submitted that there was no  material  error  of  law  in
       determination. Article 8 was dealt with adequately and the Judge made
       a finding that there was effectively no family life  in  the  UK  and
       there was nothing controversial about that. He went on  in  paragraph
       56 to deal with private life and to deal with positive features.  She
       was studying and working but his consideration of private life  claim
       led to the finding that there was a preference for the freedom  here.
       That worked perfectly well as a proportionality analysis and was  not
       flawed in law. Ms Harrington referred to domestic violence rule which
       could not be met in any event. There  was  nothing  in  the  skeleton
       argument or submissions recorded which drew attention of the Judge to
       the domestic violence Rule and it  was  unclear  how  the  Judge  was
       required to deal with that in any way. There was no material error of
       law in the way the judge dealt with Article 8.

    9. Dealing firstly with the question of particular  social  group,  from
       what the Judge said at the end of paragraph 38 it followed  that  she
       was not a member of a social group. If he was  minded  to  find  that
       there was a risk she would fall into a group. He was not  looking  at
       things in reverse order. There was  no  material  error  because  the
       Judge found that there was no real risk from her  husband  or  anyone
       else. Her husband was in this country in any event. The Judge carried
       out a perfectly thorough analysis of the evidence and  concluded  for
       the reasons given that the Appellant was not at  risk  on  return  to
       Iran and full and cogent reasons were given for that  conclusion  and
       it was properly open to the Judge on the evidence. Whilst it  may  be
       an unwelcome conclusion to the Appellant it was not  infected  by  an
       error of law.

   10. Ms Harrington said that the Appellant's husband had been in the UK as
       a refugee but he had returned to Iran at  the  date  of  the  hearing
       before the First-tier Tribunal. This  was  the  conclusion  that  the
       First-tier tribunal must have reached because the Judge accepted  the
       court document.







  Discussion and Findings

   11. The first point taken in the grounds of appeal is that the First-tier
       Tribunal should not have decided  the  Appellant's  Article  8  claim
       under the Immigration Rules (the new Rules) which came into force  on
       9 July 2012 but under Article 8 ECHR only. It is clear however,  that
       there was no error of law in the First-tier approach to Article 8  in
       this regard. In Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74 the Court  of  Appeal
       held between 9 July and 6 September 2012 the Secretary of  State  was
       not entitled to take into account the provisions  of  the  new  Rules
       (either directly or by treating them as a statement  of  her  current
       policy) when making decisions on private or family life  applications
       made prior to that date but not  yet  decided.  However,  thereafter,
       that position was altered by HC 565 and from that date the  Secretary
       of State was entitled to take into account the provisions of Appendix
       FM and paragraphs 276ADE-276DH in deciding  private  or  family  life
       applications even if they were made prior to 9 July 2012.

   12. The Respondent made her decision in this case on 5  August  2013  and
       consequently the First-tier Tribunal did not err in  considering  the
       Appellant's case under the new Rules.

   13. The Appellant  argues  under  paragraph  3.2  of  the  grounds  as  a
       concomitant to the argument above that in finding that there were  no
       arguably good grounds outside  of  the  new  Rules,  the  Appellant's
       Article 8 case ought to have been considered without reference to the
       new Rules. It is said that this is material because the Appellant had
       entered the UK lawfully as the spouse of a refugee and at  all  times
       had remained in the UK lawfully. It is asserted that unframed by  the
       new Rules, it would have been appropriate to consider the  Article  8
       in the light of the Appellant's circumstances and  in  particular  in
       the light of the Secretary of State's policy with respect to domestic
       violence. It is said that a different result may have  pertained  had
       the  First-tier  Tribunal  not  confined  itself   to   framing   the
       proportionality exercise by reference to the new Rules. Ms Harrington
       argued that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  have  considered  the
       question  of  whether  the  Appellant  met  the   domestic   violence
       provisions by  analogy  with  the  case  of  FH  (Iran)  (Post-flight
       spouses) Iran [2010] UKUT 275 as an  aspect  of  the  proportionality
       assessment outside the Immigration Rules.

   14. The First-tier Tribunal did not err in  considering  the  Appellant's
       Article 8 claim under the new Rules and the Appellant's  argument  in
       the grounds in relation to the domestic violence point is  framed  as
       predicated on that ground. Further, it does not  appear  either  from
       the skeleton argument that was before the First-tier Tribunal or from
       the submissions as summarised at paragraph 34-38 of the decision that
       the First-tier Tribunal was asked to consider that  the  Respondent's
       decision was disproportionate by analogy with the case of  FH  (Post-
       flight spouses) Iran [2010] UKUT 275. In that case the Upper Tribunal
       held that the Immigration Rules as at 1.8.2010 made no provision  for
       the admission of post-flight spouses of refugees with  limited  leave
       and that it was unlikely to be proportionate to refuse the  admission
       of the spouse of a refugee where all the  requirements  of  paragraph
       281 were met save that relating to settlement. However,  neither  the
       grounds seeking permission to appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  or
       the Upper Tribunal assert that an argument was made to the First-tier
       Tribunal by analogy in relation to  the  relevance  of  the  domestic
       violence Rules in an assessment of proportionality.

   15. In GS (India) and Others v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40 Laws LJ  held,  in
       relation to an appeal from the Upper Tribunal, at paragraph [89]

           "Generally, the UT will not make an error of law by  failing  to
           consider a point never put to it.   That  is  not,  however,  an
           absolute rule.  Sometimes new  issues  are  (in  the  lamentable
           patois of the cases) "Robinson obvious".  The  reference  is  to
           Robinson v Secretary of State [1998] QB 929,  in  which  it  was
           held at paragraph 39 that the appellate authorities

                "are not required to engage in a search for new  points.  If
                there is readily discernible an obvious point of  Convention
                law which favours the applicant although he  has  not  taken
                it, then the special adjudicator  should  apply  it  in  his
                favour, but he should feel under no  obligation  to  prolong
                the hearing by asking the parties for submissions on  points
                which they have  not  taken  but  which  could  be  properly
                categorised as merely 'arguable' as opposed to  'obvious'...
                When we refer to an obvious point we mean a point which  has
                a strong prospect of success if it is argued.  Nothing  less
                will do."

           The Robinson hurdle is a high one:  see  my  observations  in  R
           (Khatoon) v ECO  Islamabad  &  Anor  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1327  at
           paragraph 21 ..."

   16. The Appellant has not shown that the argument outlined in the grounds
       in relation to domestic violence was made to the First-tier Tribunal.
       I do not consider that the argument here is a "Robinson obvious". The
       First-tier Tribunal took account of the arguments made in relation to
       Article 8 both as summarised in paragraphs 34 to 38 of  the  decision
       and as set out in  the  skeleton  argument.  Cogent  and  sustainable
       reasons were given at paragraph 56 for the finding that there were no
       arguably good for granting the Appellant leave to remain outside  the
       Rules. I find that there was  no  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal's assessment of Article 8.

   17. It is also asserted that the First-tier Tribunal failed to take  into
       account up  to  date  country  information  post-dating  the  country
       guidance of 2003 in relation to domestic violence. It is argued  that
       in the light of the objective evidence the First-tier Tribunal should
       have departed from the country guidance as it was no longer safe.

   18. The First-tier Tribunal made a number of findings in relation to  the
       risk to the Appellant on return. The Judge had regard  to  the  Court
       documentation which he found to be genuine. That  document  consisted
       of a statement from the Appellant's husband dated 17  April  2014  in
       which he stated that she was living in a strange country without  his
       permission (p5 of Appellant's subjective bundle). Her husband  states
       that according "to Article 114 of the Civil Code (law) of  Iran,  the
       right of choosing the place and accommodation of a man  and  wife  is
       within the man, so the continuation of  you  living  outside  of  the
       country is against the common and sharia laws".

   19. The First-tier Tribunal found that this  was  not  an  allegation  of
       adultery and that the Appellant did  not  face  a  real  risk  of  an
       allegation of adultery and was not a member of  a  particular  social
       group, namely women in Iran accused of  adultery.  I  find  that  the
       First-tier  Tribunal  gave  cogent  and   sustainable   reasons   for
       concluding that the Appellant had not been accused of adultery by her
       husband and that she would not be  so  accused  on  return.  He  took
       account of the contents of the letter from the Appellant's brother in
       law  in  which  he  gave  an  account  of  a  conversation  with  the
       Appellant's husband and  found  that  this  did  not  show  that  the
       Appellant would be accused of adultery. He found that  the  statement
       dated 17 April 2014 did not amount to an allegation of adultery. This
       finding was open to him on the facts of the  case  and  not,  as  the
       grounds assert, irrational.

   20. The First-tier Tribunal also  considered,  at  paragraph  52  of  the
       decision, whether the Appellant would be subject  to  domestic  abuse
       from her husband on return. He accepted that she had  been  subjected
       to domestic violence at the hands of her  husband  whilst  they  both
       lived in the United Kingdom and that she was forced to seek help.  He
       found that the Appellant's husband's complaint to the Court  in  Iran
       was part and parcel of the  manipulative  and  controlling  behaviour
       associated with  such  conduct.  He  had  regard  to  the  background
       material on discrimination against women in Iran and  the  fact  that
       attitude of the Iranian authorities  towards  domestic  violence  did
       nothing to deter men from  abusive  behaviour  towards  their  wives.
       However, he concluded that  the  Appellant  had  considerable  family
       support from her sister and husband who  would  support  her  in  the
       event that her husband accused her of adultery. He  also  found  that
       she had regular contact with her parents and  it  would  be  unlikely
       that they would force her to return to  her  husband's  violence  and
       abuse.

   21. It is evident from these findings that the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
       not accept that the  Appellant  was  at  risk  of  domestic  violence
       because it was unlikely that she would  be  made  to  return  to  her
       husband.  Whilst there was a statement from the  Appellant's  husband
       before the First-tier Tribunal requesting her return  to  him,  there
       was no order from the Court requiring her do so. The grounds  do  not
       aver that the First-tier Tribunal did not  have  regard  to  evidence
       that showed that the Appellant would be required, by law,  to  return
       to her husband. Whilst the grounds of appeal refer at  paragraph  4.1
       (vii) to Article 1108 of the  Iranian  civil  code  which  compels  a
       woman's obedience to her husband, in the absence of evidence  showing
       she was be at risk of being forced to return,  it  was  open  to  the
       First-tier Tribunal, on the evidence before him,  to  find  that  she
       would not be forced to return to his violence and abuse.

   22. The First-tier Tribunal found at paragraph 49 of  the  decision  that
       the Appellant was not a member of a social  group,  namely  women  in
       Iran who are subjected to domestic  violence,  on  the  basis  of  ZH
       (Women as Particular Social Group) Iran CG [2003] UKIAT 00207 without
       considering firstly whether the country guidance should  be  departed
       from in the light of the current objective evidence.  However,  I  do
       not consider that this error was a  material  error  of  law  as  his
       findings as to the risk to the  Appellant  in  relation  to  domestic
       violence in  paragraph  52  were  adequately  reasoned,  referred  to
       objective evidence and were open to him in the  absence  of  evidence
       showing she would be compelled to return to her  husband.  Whilst  Ms
       Harrington argues that the First-tier Tribunal  should  firstly  have
       made findings on whether the Appellant would be compelled by  law  to
       return to her husband before considering whether  she  could  enforce
       her right to divorce, objective evidence showing that she would be so
       compelled was not before him and there was no  court  order  to  this
       effect.

   23. I also find that the First-tier Tribunal gave clear  and  sustainable
       reasons for finding that the evidence before him did  not  justify  a
       departure from ZH on the question of whether the Appellant  would  be
       able to institute divorce proceedings against her husband in Iran. He
       had regard to the conclusions of the Upper Tribunal in ZH that  there
       were divorce provisions in Iran of which the claimant  in  that  case
       could take advantage. He also had regard to the  background  evidence
       submitted by the Appellant. He referred specifically to the  evidence
       cited in the Respondent's OGN of September 2013 at  page  17  of  the
       Appellant's objective bundle. According to the FH report of  3  March
       2010 cited  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  paragraph  54  of  the
       decision, where a wife applies for divorce, according to Article 1130
       of  the  civil  code,  she  has  the  burden  of  proving  that   the
       continuation of the marriage would  expose  her  the  "difficult  and
       pressing conditions"  which  can  include  the  husband's  addiction,
       impotence, adultery, abandonment and physical abuse.

   24. He also took account of the background evidence in the OGN at page 18
       of the Appellant's bundle that there was one divorce for every  seven
       marriages in Iran and that  the  major  force  behind  this  was  the
       increasing willingness of Iranian women  to  manipulate  the  Iranian
       legal  system  to  escape  unwanted  marriages.  He  found  that  the
       Appellant had documentary evidence to support a claim of divorce as a
       result of the abuse which occurred  whilst  she  was  in  the  United
       Kingdom and that she would have support from her family. In the light
       this evidence I find that the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  err  in
       finding that it  was  open  to  the  Appellant  to  initiate  divorce
       proceedings or in finding  that  the  evidence  before  him  did  not
       justify a departure from the country guidance.

   25. I also do not find that the First-tier Tribunal reversed the standard
       of proof as asserted at 4.4 of the grounds. He found at paragraph  52
       that she would be unlikely to be forced  to  return  to  her  husband
       (where the risk of persecution as a result of domestic  violence  was
       said to arise) and then at paragraph 54 that it was reasonably likely
       that she could rely on her sister and brother in law for  support  in
       divorce proceedings.  This was not a refusal of the standard of proof
       but a finding in  relation  to  the  likelihood  of  her  ability  to
       separate from her  husband.  Given  these  findings,  the  First-tier
       Tribunal did not need to consider  whether  internal  flight  was  an
       option, as he had found she was not at risk of persecution.

  Notice of Decision

   26. For the above reasons therefore I find that there was no error of law
       in the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I  dismiss  the
       Appellant's appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
