
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34887/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided on the papers                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 January 2018                            |On 30 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                         MR JAYSINH BHUPAT KESHWALA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision  dated
    30 November 2015 refusing his claim to remain based on his  family  and
    private life in  the  UK.   His  appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pickup in a decision promulgated on 1 March  2017  ("the
    Decision").

 2. The Appellant did not attend nor was  he  represented  at  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  The Judge noted at [3] of the Decision
    that the Appellant's human rights claim had been certified  as  clearly
    unfounded pursuant to section 94 Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 ("section 94").  The Judge also went on at [9] to  note  that,
    as  the  claim  had  been  certified  under  section  94,  he  had   no
    jurisdiction to consider an appeal on human rights grounds.

 3. Notwithstanding that (correct) self-direction, the  Judge  went  on  to
    make findings in the appeal on the basis that he understood this to  be
    an appeal which pre-dated the coming into force of the changes  brought
    about by the Immigration Act 2014.  He therefore purported  to  dismiss
    the appeal "on immigration grounds".

 4. As the Appellant points out in his grounds of appeal, this  is  not  an
    appeal under the  "saved  provisions"  preserved  by  the  transitional
    arrangements under the Immigration Act 2014.  Although the  application
    to which the Respondent's decision responds was  made  before  6  April
    2015, it was not an application to vary leave since the  Appellant  had
    no leave.  Furthermore, the Respondent's decision is also  the  refusal
    of a human rights claim.  Accordingly, the "saved provisions" could not
    apply.  This is therefore an appeal under the  provisions  which  post-
    date the coming into force of  the  Immigration  Act  2014  amendments.
    Accordingly, the only issue for the Judge in this case is  whether  the
    Respondent's decision  involves  a  breach  of  the  Appellant's  human
    rights.  As the Judge rightly  observed,  he  had  no  jurisdiction  to
    consider that issue because the claim was certified.

 5. As such, the Judge fell into error  by  making  findings  of  fact  and
    purporting  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on   immigration   grounds.    On
    application to this Tribunal, I granted permission on  the  basis  that
    the Judge had no jurisdiction to make the Decision and this amounts  to
    an arguable error of law.  If a Judge  lacks  jurisdiction  to  make  a
    decision, then the decision is wrong in law and should not  be  allowed
    to stand.  Accordingly, by  my  decision  dated  22  November  2017,  I
    extended time for the application for permission to appeal for  reasons
    which I gave and I granted permission  by  decision  in  the  following
    terms (so far as relevant):-

         "3.  Turning then to the substance of the  permission  application,
         the grounds of appeal are, in their analysis, arguably correct. For
         that reason, I grant permission  to  appeal.  In  fact,  given  the
         certification, I find it difficult to see how there  could  be  any
         contrary view. I note that the Judge can hardly be blamed for  what
         has occurred given the failings by the Appellant's solicitors  both
         in lodging an appeal where there was no in-country right of  appeal
         and not correcting that error by responding  to  the  communication
         from the Tribunal.  The effect of the error, as is accepted by  the
         grounds, is that the Decision  should  be  set  aside  and  re-made
         dismissing the appeal for  want  of  jurisdiction.   I  have  given
         directions for further submissions to be made, particularly by  the
         Respondent who has not yet had the opportunity to  respond  to  the
         grounds.  If there is no objection to the course proposed,  I  will
         then make that decision on the papers.

    I then gave directions as follows:-

         "Unless either party files and serves objections in writing  to  be
         received within 14 days from the date when this decision is sent, I
         propose to find an error of law in the Decision on the  basis  that
         the Judge lacked jurisdiction to make it.  I then  propose  to  set
         aside the Decision and re-make it dismissing the appeal."

 6. There has been no communication by or on behalf of the  Appellant.   By
    letter dated 3 January 2018, the Respondent wrote confirming  that  she
    does not oppose the Appellant's application for  permission  to  appeal
    and invites the Tribunal to determine  the  appeal  on  the  papers  as
    directed in the grant of permission.

 7. For the reasons outlined at [4]  to  [5]  above  and  in  my  grant  of
    permission, I find that the Judge  had  no  jurisdiction  to  make  the
    Decision.  I therefore set aside the Decision for that  reason.   Since
    there is no right of appeal to the Tribunal, I have no jurisdiction  to
    decide the appeal.  I therefore substitute my own decision finding that
    there was and is no valid appeal.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup discloses an error  of  law
because he made the decision when he had no  jurisdiction  to  consider  the
appeal as the human rights claim had been certified and the refusal of  that
claim was the only decision which could be the subject  of  the  appeal.   I
therefore set  aside  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pickup
promulgated on 1 March 2017 and substitute a decision that there was and  is
no valid appeal in this case.

Signed[pic]                         Dated:  29 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith



