
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber    Appeal Number: IA/34765/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 22 March 2018                     |On 23 March 2018                      |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


                                   Between

                                 Fizzah [A]
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the  Appellant:      Mr  E  Nicholson,  Counsel  instructed  by  Marsans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          Determination and Reasons

    Details of appellant and basis of claim

      1.    The Secretary of State challenges  the  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge T Jones to allow this appeal  (although  it  is  not
         specified whether this is under or outside the rules) by way  of  a
         determination promulgated on 21 July 2017. For convenience, I refer
         to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

      2.    The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on [  ]  1981.  She
         entered the UK for studies in 2007 although full details  have  not
         been provided in any of the representations made by her  solicitors
         or in the respondent's decision letter. The latter and the  grounds
         of appeal refer  to  her  entering  on  3  September  2011  as  the
         dependant of a PBS migrant whom she married in Pakistan in December
         2007 and who subsequently obtained indefinite leave to  remain  and
         is now, it would seem, a British national. The appeal  was  brought
         by the appellant against the respondent's refusal  of  19  November
         2015 to grant her  indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a  victim  of
         domestic violence. A supplementary letter was issued on 8  February
         2017 in response to further information supplied by the appellant's
         representatives. The appellant completed her post graduate  studies
         in 2009 and divorced her husband in December 2013. Her  application
         for leave was made some two years later.

      3.    The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant. He found  that
         she did not meet the requirements of E-DVILR.1.2. because  she  had
         not held limited leave as the partner of a  British  citizen  or  a
         person settled in the  UK.  However,  he  found  that  pursuant  to
         paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  there  would  be   very   insurmountable
         obstacles to re-integration because she had been through a  lot  in
         terms of the marriage, was ostracised by her family and fearful  of
         repercussions should  her  circumstances  be  known  to  people  in
         Pakistan. He also found  that  removal  would  be  disproportionate
         because she had a supportive aunt and sister  and  the  opportunity
         for employment.

      4.    The respondent sought permission to appeal and this was  granted
         by First-tier Tribunal Judge Martins on 8 January 2018 on the basis
         that the judge had arguably misdirected himself when assessing  the
         appellant's ability to re-integrate on return to Pakistan.

    Appeal hearing

      5.    At the hearing, I  heard  submissions  from  the  parties.   The
         appellant was present.

      6.    Mr Walker submitted that the  respondent's  case  was  that  the
         judge's findings about insurmountable  obstacles  was  inadequately
         reasoned. There were the omissions in paragraphs 41 and 42  that  I
         had pointed out and there had been no  proportionality  assessment.
         It followed that there were material errors by the  judge  and  the
         entire decision should be set aside.

      7.    In response, Mr Nicholson relied on his  Rule  24  response.  He
         submitted that the judge had carefully considered all the  evidence
         and there was no challenge to the credibility of the appellant  (at
         paragraph 39). Although the appellant's former husband had not been
         a British national/settled person at the date of  the  application,
         he had indefinite leave to remain at the date of the  decision.  Mr
         Nicholson questioned why there should be a rule allowing spouses of
         settled persons or British nationals to seek  leave  to  remain  as
         victims of domestic violence but not for  spouses  of  refugees  or
         points based migrants. He submitted a  case  such  as  this,  where
         there was evidence of domestic violence, should succeed outside the
         rules.

      8.    Mr Nicholson submitted that the reliance of  the  respondent  on
         country guidance cases of divorced women in Pakistan had to be seen
         in the context of the appellant's evidence of  being  terrified  of
         honour killings on return. He argued that the  respondent  had  not
         maintained that such a state of terror was not capable  of  meeting
         the test of 276ADE(vi) and that the  judge  had  been  entitled  to
         allow the appeal on that basis.

      9.    Mr Nicholson submitted that the judge's decision should only  be
         set aside if it was impossible to understand his reasoning. Despite
         the missing words in the paragraphs referred to,  his  meaning  was
         clear. It was possible  that  these  were  errors  of  punctuation.
         Nevertheless, the judge goes on to rely on private life established
         in the UK and considers the life which would await her in Pakistan.
          He submitted that the respondent's grounds did  not  consider  the
         findings on 276ADE or on article 8. The  judge  accepted  that  the
         appellant was genuinely fearful of repercussions against her should
         she return and he found these matters to be  very  compelling.  The
         reasoning was not inadequate.  The  findings  were  compliant  with
         Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. The respondent's grounds were not sufficient
         to deprive the appellant of the Tribunal's positive decision. There
         was no error of law.

     10.    Mr Walker replied. He submitted that the judge had not  analysed
         the arguments put forward on country guidance.

     11.    That completed the submissions. At the conclusion of the hearing
         I reserved my determination which I now give with reasons.

    Consideration

     12.    I have considered the oral and documentary  evidence  before  me
         and the submissions made by the parties.

     13.    The judge's findings and conclusions are contained at paragraphs
         37-42 of the determination. It is true that they  could  have  been
         more detailed and more carefully prepared. I refer, in  particular,
         to the plainly incomplete sentences at paragraph 41 and 42  (second
         and first sentences of the respective paragraphs).  However, as  Mr
         Nicholson emphasised, the issue is  whether  this  meant  that  his
         conclusions  were  impossible  to  follow  and  were   inadequately
         reasoned.

     14.    The judge heard oral evidence and fully accepted the appellant's
         account. Whether or not those fears are objectively well founded is
         not the issue. The judge believed the entire account.  He  accepted
         that the appellant's marriage  had  broken  down  due  to  domestic
         violence, that she feared becoming the victim of an honour  killing
         on return to Pakistan and  that  she  had  been  closely  supported
         through a traumatic time by her sister and aunt  on  whom  she  had
         come to rely. Those  findings  have  not  been  challenged  by  the
         respondent and however generous the judge  may  have  been  in  his
         overall findings, (made despite the appellant's  class,  education,
         previous occupation, urban background and very delayed  application
         for leave), I must concur with Mr Nicholson's submission that  they
         support his conclusion that there would, in those circumstances, be
         very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  re-integration  on
         return.

     15.    Although there has not been an analysis of the country  guidance
         case put  before  the  judge  (this  appears  to  be  part  of  the
         sentence(s) missing from paragraph 41), it is difficult to see  how
         they could have impacted on the outcome given the judge's  findings
         as to the credibility  of  the  appellant  and  acceptance  of  her
         account. He has also, as Mr Nicholson pointed out in  his  Rule  24
         response, taken account of the public interest considerations  when
         reaching his  conclusions.  Having  accepted  all  the  appellant's
         evidence, it was open to the judge to find  that  there  were  very
         compelling matters which warranted a  decision  in  her  favour  on
         article 8 grounds in addition to the  positive  finding  under  the
         Immigration Rules inferred from paragraph 41.

     16.    The judge has provided adequate reasoning for  his  conclusions.
         The fact that another Tribunal may  not  agree  with  his  generous
         findings is not the test.

    Decision

     17.    The First-tier Tribunal did not  make  errors  of  law  and  the
         decision to allow the appeal stands.

    Anonymity Order

     18.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  make  an  order  for
         anonymity. I was not asked to make one and, in  any  case,  see  no
         reason for doing so.




             Signed:
             [pic]
             Dr R Keki?
             Judge of the Upper Tribunal


             22 March 2018
