
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34777/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 11th November 2015                  |                On 11th December 2015|
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                          Mrs ayodele emily oreuga
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Marian Owoyinfa, Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of both Nigeria and the United States.   She
    was born on 6th April 1930 and is  now  85  years  old.   She  appealed
    against a decision of the Respondent dated 12th August 2014  to  refuse
    to vary leave to remain in the United Kingdom and to remove her by  way
    of  directions  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum   and
    Nationality Act 2006.  Her appeal was  allowed  at  first  instance  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Stokes sitting at Taylor House on 24th
    March 2015.  For the reasons which I set out in more  detail  below,  I
    have set that decision aside on the grounds of a material error of  law
    and have reheard the substantive appeal.   Although  this  matter  came
    before me initially as an appeal by the Respondent I therefore continue
    to refer to the parties as they were known at first  instance  for  the
    sake of convenience.

2.   The Appellant had visited the United Kingdom on a number  of  occasions
    as a visitor from 1980 onwards complying with her  visa  conditions  on
    each occasion.  On 12th September 2013  she  last  entered  the  United
    Kingdom using her United States passport with a visit  visa  valid  for
    six months.  Shortly before that visa was due to  expire  she  made  an
    application on 25th February 2014 for indefinite leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom outside the Rules on the grounds that the refusal of the
    application would breach this country's obligations under Article 8  of
    the European Convention of Human Rights (right to respect  for  private
    and family life).

3.   The basis of the Appellant's application was  that  she  was  suffering
    from Alzheimer's disease and also diabetes.  She required the  constant
    care of her five children living in the  United  Kingdom  and  required
    daily doses of insulin.  She had been a widow for the last 24 years.  A
    daughter lived in the United States but was working full-time  and  was
    not in a position to look after the  Appellant.   If  returned  to  the
    United States the Appellant would not be able to  afford  the  required
    level of care needed and there would be  an  adverse  impact  upon  her
    children remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom.   She  had  developed  an
    emotional attachment and dependency on her five children which amounted
    to exceptional and compassionate circumstances.

The Refusal

4.   The Respondent refused the application taking  into  account  a  letter
    received dated 4th February 2013  from  the  Appellant's  daughter  who
    resided in the United States, Ms Funke Toyin-Lugbile ("Funke").   Funke
    had stated that the Appellant had been residing with her in the  United
    States and if the Appellant were granted leave to  remain  it  was  her
    intention to visit the Appellant in the United Kingdom at  intermittent
    periods to provide respite care for her siblings the  Appellant's  five
    UK based children.  The  Appellant  could  access  appropriate  medical
    treatment and support care in the United States.  Whilst the  Appellant
    might have to pay a percentage of the  costs  it  was  noted  that  the
    Appellant's five children in the United Kingdom had  stated  that  they
    were willing  to  pay  for  the  Appellant's  financial  needs  without
    resorting to public funds.

5.   Whilst Funke would not be able to provide the  Appellant  with  day-to-
    day care due to her own full-time  employment  she  could  provide  the
    Appellant with emotional and psychological support  and  the  Appellant
    could be visited by her family based in the UK.   The  Appellant  would
    not be living alone in the most exceptional circumstances if  she  were
    to return to the United States.  There would be no breach of Article  3
    (prohibition of torture) as the  Appellant  would  be  able  to  obtain
    suitable medical care in the  United  States.   The  Appellant's  adult
    children could not be considered as the Appellant's partner(s) for  the
    purposes of Appendix FM.  As the Appellant did  not  have  a  child  or
    partner in the United Kingdom Appendix FM did not  apply.   Turning  to
    the issue of the Appellant's private life the  Respondent  stated  that
    the Appellant could not satisfy paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules as she had not lived continuously in the United  Kingdom  for  at
    least twenty years.  The Appellant  had  resided  in  Nigeria  and  the
    United States for the majority of her  life  and  there  would  not  be
    significant obstacles to her integration into the country to which  she
    would have to go if required to leave the United Kingdom.

The Decision at First Instance

6.   The Appellant attended the hearing before the Judge  with  the  support
    of members of her family and gave very limited evidence.  The principal
    oral testimony came from five of the Appellant's children who  attended
    and whose evidence was  summarised  in  the  determination.   The  only
    medical evidence produced to the Judge were two letters from a  general
    practitioner at the South Street Medical Centre dated 17th January  and
    6th February 2014 which stated that the Appellant was  registered  with
    that GP  practice.   The  letters  confirmed  that  the  Appellant  was
    suffering from Alzheimer's disease and was very forgetful as her memory
    was very poor.  The Judge noted at paragraph 23 that  both  Alzheimer's
    disease and diabetes were  incurable  but  whereas  diabetes  could  be
    controlled  Alzheimer's  was  a  progressive   disease   although   not
    necessarily terminal.

7.   The Judge noted that after the Appellant's  husband  died  in  December
    1989 the Appellant had taken over his petrol station business  and  had
    been relatively well-off.  She then sold  the  business  and  used  the
    proceeds to build herself a house which she still owned.  She travelled
    regularly between Nigeria, the United Kingdom  and  the  United  States
    visiting her children.  The Appellant  had  lived  with  Funke  in  the
    United States for many years and  successfully  applied  to  become  an
    American citizen in 2009.

8.   In his findings the Judge first dealt with the question of whether  the
    Appellant could return to Nigeria.  The Judge quoted from  the  Country
    of Origin Information Report on Nigeria June  2013  re-issued  February
    2014 noting the limitations on health provision  and  the  difficulties
    faced by females in Nigeria.  The Appellant would encounter problems as
    a lone woman and as  someone  with  a  mental  health  condition  which
    influenced her  behaviour.   She  therefore  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) if she were to be returned to Nigeria that is that
    there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  her  integration  into
    Nigeria.

9.   At paragraph 29 the Judge turned to the alternative  of  the  Appellant
    returning to the United States.  The Appellant had produced no evidence
    to show she could not return and continue to  live  with  her  daughter
    Funke despite her diagnosed medical conditions.  There was no  evidence
    to show she would be unable to access appropriate medical care  in  the
    United States.  She would have the support of Funke and her family  for
    both the Appellant's emotional and medical needs.  The children in  the
    United Kingdom  had  previously  contributed  towards  the  Appellant's
    financial support but the Judge found they could continue such  support
    despite their denials to him.  I pause to note here that that remark at
    paragraph 29 of  the  determination  sits  uneasily  with  the  Judge's
    earlier statement at paragraph 21 that no  issues  of  credibility  had
    been raised by the Respondent or before him.  The Judge did not  accept
    that the Appellant's medical conditions  met  the  high  threshold  for
    Article 3 on medical grounds. Save in  exceptionally  compelling  cases
    the humanitarian consequences of returning a person to a country  where
    his or her health was likely to deteriorate terminally  did  not  place
    the returning state in breach of Article 3.   The  Judge  concluded  at
    paragraph 29 that the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) if she were to be returned to the United States.

10.  The Judge proceeded to consider the  matter  outside  the  Rules  under
    Article 8.  The Appellant had  an  established  family  life  with  her
    daughter Mrs Kola-Ojo with whom she had lived  for  the  past  eighteen
    months.  She was totally dependent on Mrs Kola-Ojo for her physical and
    day-to-day care and as a sufferer from  Alzheimer's  was  a  vulnerable
    person. At paragraph 35 the Judge quoted the evidence he  had  received
    from Mrs Kola-Ojo that there had been no prior  warning  signs  of  the
    Appellant's mental condition and that Funke in the  United  States  had
    noticed nothing amiss.  Alzheimer's had been diagnosed two months after
    the Appellant had arrived  and  had  deteriorated  over  the  last  few
    months.  The Judge noted the care arrangements made by the  family  for
    the Appellant  and  also  noted  that  the  Appellant  was  at  present
    receiving free NHS care.

11.   At  paragraph  41  the  Judge  considered  Home  Office  guidance   to
    caseworkers where an applicant does not meet the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Leave  can  be  granted  outside  the  Rules  where
    exceptional circumstances apply.  The Judge found that the Respondent's
    decision to refuse leave to remain outside the Rules  would  result  in
    unjustifiably  harsh  consequences.   As  the   Appellant's   condition
    deteriorated  further  the  toll  would  be  borne  by  Funke  and  her
    relatively young family if the Appellant were to return to  the  United
    States.  Removal would adversely impact on the lives of the Appellant's
    children remaining in the United Kingdom to the extent that it rendered
    such removal disproportionate.  He allowed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

12.  The Respondent appealed against this decision arguing  that  the  Judge
    had misdirected regarding Section 117B(4) and (5) of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  which  provided  that  little  weight
    should be given to a private life established by a  person  at  a  time
    when their immigration status was precarious.  The Appellant's presence
    in the United Kingdom was always precarious she had temporary leave  to
    enter and after that was  an  overstayer.   The  Judge's  statement  at
    paragraph 40 of the determination that the Appellant  had  "established
    her family and private life whilst she  was  living  here  lawfully  so
    weight can be placed on it" was incompatible with the clear wording  of
    the section.  The Judge appeared to have  allowed  the  appeal  on  the
    basis that the Appellant's children in  the  United  Kingdom  would  be
    upset if the Appellant were being cared for effectively in  the  United
    States.  This could not possibly amount  to  compelling  circumstances.
    It appeared that the Appellant had  deliberately  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom to overstay thereby avoiding the need to  make  an  application
    which would not have succeeded under Appendix FM or FM-SE.   There  was
    no reference in the determination to the cost to the  public  purse  of
    the Appellant's continued residence and  care  in  the  United  Kingdom
    which the Judge was required to engage with.

13.  The Respondent relied on the Upper Tribunal decision of  Akhalu  [2013]
    UKUT 400 at which it was said:

         "The consequences of removal for the health of a claimant who would
         not be able to access equivalent healthcare  in  their  country  of
         nationality as was available in this country are  plainly  relevant
         to the question of proportionality.  But when weighed  against  the
         public interest in ensuring that  the  limited  resources  of  this
         country's health service are  used  to  the  best  effect  for  the
         benefit of those for whom they are intended, those consequences  do
         not weigh heavily in the claimant's favour but  speak  cogently  in
         support of the public interest in removal".

14.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson on 1st September 2015.  In granting
    permission to appeal he noted that nothing in Section 117B(4)  and  (5)
    stated that weight should be placed on family or  private  life  simply
    because a person had been in  the  United  Kingdom  lawfully.   On  the
    contrary the Appellant's private life was  arguably  established  at  a
    time when her immigration status was precarious  given  the  Tribunal's
    finding in AM [2015] UKUT 260 (that a person's  immigration  status  is
    precarious if their continued presence in the United  Kingdom  will  be
    dependent upon their obtaining a further grant  of  leave).   In  those
    circumstances the Judge was arguably obliged by Section 117B(5) to give
    the Appellant's private life little weight.

15.  Following that grant of permission directions were sent to the  parties
    by the Upper Tribunal that they  should  prepare  for  the  forthcoming
    hearing on the basis that if the Upper Tribunal decided  to  set  aside
    the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  any  further  evidence
    including supplementary oral evidence that  the  Upper  Tribunal  might
    need to consider if it decided to  remake  the  decision  could  be  so
    considered at that hearing.

The Error of Law Stage

16.  For the Respondent it was argued that it  was  unclear  why  the  Judge
    thought there were compelling circumstances  outside  the  Rules  which
    would permit the appeal to be allowed under Article 8.  There  were  no
    obstacles to reintegration into the United States the Appellant  was  a
    US citizen and had family there.  There was no evidence  the  Appellant
    would be unable to access medical facilities in the United  States  and
    would continue to receive financial support from her UK  based  family.
    There was no evidence of harsh circumstances.  What  had  happened  was
    that the Judge had conducted  a  free-standing  Article  8  assessment.
    There was a clear mistake when the Judge had said that the  Appellant's
    Article 8 claim was strengthened by reason  of  her  lawful  residence.
    The Appellant was in receipt of public funds.

17.  For the Appellant it was argued that there were five children based  in
    the United Kingdom but only  one  in  the  United  States.   Funke  had
    explained why she could not handle her  mother  in  the  United  States
    given the diagnosis of dementia.  The Appellant had been coming to  the
    United Kingdom for  the  last  30  years  and  there  were  significant
    obstacles to her to return to Nigeria or the  United  States.  At  this
    point I observed to the Appellant's representative that the  Judge  had
    found against the Appellant under  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  finding  that
    there were no significant obstacles to the Appellant returning  to  the
    United States.  There had been no cross appeal by the Appellant against
    that part of the Judge's decision.

18.  The Appellant's private and family life had  been  built  up  over  the
    years whilst she has been travelling between the United States, Nigeria
    and the United Kingdom.  The case of AM (Malawi) was  not  relevant  to
    this Appellant.  The Appellant's medical condition had  changed  within
    the time she had been in the United Kingdom.  The  Appellant  had  been
    unable to answer any questions beyond her name at  the  hearing  before
    the Judge at first instance.  The Judge had  gone  through  the  Razgar
    checklist and had done justice to the case because of  the  exceptional
    circumstances of the matters in question.  Even if  the  Appellant  did
    not qualify under the Rules the appeal was properly allowed outside the
    Rules under Article 8.

19.  I considered the submissions and announced my decision that I  found  a
    material error of law in the  Judges'  determination.   The  Judge  had
    decided that the Appellant could not  succeed  within  the  Immigration
    Rules and had therefore proceeded to consider  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules.  As such he had to find that there were compelling  reasons  why
    the appeal should be so allowed.  There were difficulties in  the  case
    for the Appellant.  The first was that her private life had been  built
    up at a time when her status here was precarious and thus little weight
    could be afforded to it.  The Judge was plainly wrong in  stating  that
    weight could be attached to a private life established while  a  person
    was lawfully present.  In this case the Appellant had had  leave  as  a
    visitor and thereafter 3C leave.  The Judge's misunderstanding  of  the
    effect of Section 117B  appears  to  have  significantly  affected  his
    proportionality assessment.

20.  The proportionality assessment  was  also  flawed  in  that  the  Judge
    omitted to take into account a number of relevant factors such  as  the
    burden on public funds which the Appellant  represented  and  the  fact
    that the Appellant could not succeed under the Rules a s the Judge  had
    found. It is difficult to see what weight could reasonably be  attached
    to the views of the Appellant's United Kingdom based  children  in  the
    circumstances of this case. Their preference that the Appellant  should
    stay in the United Kingdom rather than return to a country of which she
    was a citizen could only carry little weight in the balancing exercise.
    These errors  amounted  to  material  errors  of  law  leading  to  the
    determination to be set aside.  I  indicated  that  and  that  I  would
    proceed to rehear the appeal bearing in mind the  directions  that  the
    parties should be ready to give oral testimony.  As the Appellant's  UK
    based children were present in court it was possible to  proceed  there
    and then with the rehearing. The witnesses were able to supplement  the
    earlier evidence given at first instance.   In  particular  they  could
    explain what NHS care the Appellant was or was  not  receiving  at  the
    present time.

The Substantive Rehearing

21.  I first heard evidence from the Appellant's daughter Mrs  Kola-Ojo  who
    stated that when the Appellant arrived in 2013 the Appellant had become
    very confused.  Because Mrs Kola-Ojo worked in a hospital she knew what
    dementia was and the family had taken  the  Appellant  to  a  GP.   Her
    mother was doubly  incontinent.  The  family  paid  privately  for  the
    Appellant's care.   Her  mother  was  now  very  confused  calling  her
    daughter her sister and her son her brother.  The  Appellant  had  been
    discharged from NHS care and was being coped within  the  family.   She
    the witness did everything for  the  Appellant  with  her  brother  and
    sisters. The Appellant's family  in  the  United  Kingdom  were  better
    placed than the Appellant's grandchildren in the United States to  look
    after the Appellant.

22.  In cross-examination Mrs Kola-Ojo conceded that  the  family  were  not
    paying for the Appellant's diabetes treatment for which  the  Appellant
    was receiving prescriptions.  Funke  had  come  over  from  the  United
    States in February 2015 and then again later on this year  leaving  two
    weeks ago.  She came for a month each time.  It would affect  the  jobs
    of the UK based family if they went over to the United States  to  give
    Funke respite care for the Appellant.  Funke had no insurance to  cover
    the Appellant's care.  It was put to the witness  that  if  there  were
    costs of care in the United States the witness and the other  UK  based
    children could contribute.  Mrs Kola-Ojo replied that the Appellant was
    better off in the United Kingdom than in the United States because they
    could see her any time.  She accepted that her mother had a house still
    in Nigeria that people were  living  in  although  no  rent  was  being
    charged for that.

23.  Her mother had come over for a family  wedding  but  had  not  returned
    because she had started behaving peculiarly at the wedding.  There  was
    no evidence of  dementia  before  the  Appellant  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  I invited the witness in the light of that remark to  comment
    on a statement made by her sister Modupe Orenuga  dated  24th  February
    2015 which had stated "Over the past five years, but  more  importantly
    the past two years I have  witnessed  my  mother's  health  deteriorate
    rapidly as a result of her unfortunate diagnosis of dementia added with
    type  2  diabetes".   That  statement  appeared  to  suggest  that  the
    Appellant's dementia had been known for a considerable period  of  time
    before the Appellant made her last visit to the  United  Kingdom.   The
    witness replied she did not know why her sister had said that.

24.  As the maker of the statement referred to above was present in court  I
    invited the Appellant's representative to call  Ms  Modupe  Orenuga  to
    give evidence on of how long the Appellant's diagnosis of dementia  had
    been known.  Ms Modupe Orenuga stated that what was put was  a  mistake
    in her statement for which she apologised.  She had  been  writing  the
    statement  at  night.   No-one  else  had  referred  to  the  Appellant
    suffering from dementia for the last five years.  It was just an  error
    on her part.  She confirmed the contribution  towards  the  Appellant's
    care that she made and that the family did not want the Appellant to go
    to the United States they wanted her to stay here.  Last  December  the
    witness had visited Funke  in  the  United  States  to  help  with  the
    household.

25.  In cross-examination she said that the  Appellant  was  diagnosed  with
    dementia once here.  The Appellant had displayed unusual  behaviour  at
    the wedding.  It  was  quite  disturbing.   The  Appellant  went  to  a
    hospital but the witness did  not  know  if  the  clinic  had  given  a
    diagnosis.  The only evidence  was  the  letter  from  the  GP  of  6th
    February 2014 (see above).  They had not  been  asked  to  provide  any
    other medical evidence.  They had also found out about the diabetes  in
    the United Kingdom.

Closing Submissions

26.  In closing the Presenting Officer relied on the  refusal  letter.   The
    Appellant had equally strong ties to the United States as  she  did  to
    the United Kingdom indeed she was a United  States  citizen  and  could
    avail herself of all  the  facilities  there.   She  was  part  of  her
    daughter Funke's household.  What this case was about was a  preference
    for the Appellant to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   There  was  no
    evidence adduced to show that the Appellant's health would  deteriorate
    rapidly if she were returned to  the  United  States.   Nor  was  there
    evidence  that  respite  care  would  be  unavailable.   Although   the
    Appellant's daughter Funke held down two jobs she had nevertheless been
    able to come to the United Kingdom on two occasions in 2015 staying for
    a month each time.  There was no explanation  why  the  five  UK  based
    children could not offer Funke respite  care  when  travelling  to  the
    United States.  There  were  weighty  factors  that  went  against  the
    Appellant remaining in the United Kingdom.  There were public  interest
    considerations since the Appellant had been availing herself of  public
    funds.  She was not financially independent.  There was  little  weight
    to be placed on her private life as her stay here had been  precarious.
    The Appellant's removal would be proportionate to  the  legitimate  aim
    pursued.

27.  In closing for the  Appellant  reliance  was  placed  on  the  skeleton
    argument in  the  Appellant's  bundle  which  had  contended  that  the
    Appellant met the requirements set out in paragraphs E-ECDR2.4 and  2.5
    of Appendix FM.  Although the Appellant had  not  made  a  valid  entry
    clearance application in this category her circumstances had changed in
    the course of the last two years when her health had  considerably  and
    suddenly deteriorated.  Paragraph E-ECDR2.4 stated  that  an  applicant
    must show that as a result of age, illness or disability  they  require
    long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks.  They must be unable
    even with the practical and financial help of the Sponsor to obtain the
    required level of care in the country where they were living because it
    was not available and there was no person in  that  country  who  could
    reasonably provide it or it was not affordable.

28.  The Appellant was at present  living  with  one  of  her  daughters  in
    Greenwich, London her daughter was currently working part-time and  was
    able to offer care for her mother.  Funke was not in a position to look
    after the Appellant.  If returned to the United  States  the  Appellant
    would be deprived of care provided at present by her five  children  in
    the United  Kingdom.   People  with  dementia  improved  if  they  were
    actively involved with their loved ones.  If allowed to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom the Appellant would not become a burden  on  the  public
    health system the care would be shared amongst the family.  That  would
    not be the situation if the Appellant returned to  the  United  States.
    It would be far too expensive to obtain  the  same  level  of  care  in
    America that the  Appellant  was  currently  receiving  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Consideration ought to be given to the impact that removal of
    the Appellant would have on her five UK based  children.   In  the  two
    years she had resided in the United Kingdom the Appellant had developed
    an emotional attachment and dependency on  those  five  children.   The
    skeleton argument also referred to an unreported decision of  a  deputy
    in the Upper Tribunal involving a different  unrelated  Appellant,  the
    country in question in that case being Canada.

29.  In oral submissions it was argued  that  Funke  had  made  a  statement
    saying she could not look after the Appellant.  The Appellant  was  not
    having a negative impact on public funds.   The  Tribunal  should  take
    into account the fact that this was an exceptional case and  it  should
    be looked at favourably.  This was an old lady who had diabetes and had
    developed dementia.  The illness attacked her memory.  The  only  thing
    which could help her was her family network which was to be  contrasted
    with what was available to her in the United States.  It  was  relevant
    to consider the instructions given to  caseworkers  by  the  Respondent
    regarding the grant of leave to remain outside the  Rules.   This  case
    had been shown to be exceptional and the appeal should be allowed.

Findings

30.  The Judge in this case found that the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules.  Although an argument was made  that  the  Appellant
    could succeed under the Rules for a dependent relative, an  application
    under that section of Appendix FM could only be made if  the  Appellant
    was outside the United Kingdom. I  agree  that  given  the  Appellant's
    condition it appears that she does need assistance with everyday  tasks
    but the Appellant would also have to have shown that suitable care  was
    unavailable in the United States and there was no objective material to
    establish that (see paragraph 32 below).

31.  I do not accept the evidence I have been  given  that  the  Appellant's
    condition was only diagnosed two months after she arrived in the United
    Kingdom or how  long  the  family  have  known  about  the  Appellant's
    condition.  It is clear from the evidence of Modupe  Orenuga  that  the
    family had known for a considerable period of time that  the  Appellant
    was not well.  I do not accept the explanation that that statement  was
    made late at night as being one that I can place any weight on. It only
    emerged before me and no attempt had been made previously to amend  the
    statement. There is a  dearth  of  medical  evidence  as  to  when  the
    Appellant's medical condition was first diagnosed in this  country  and
    the oral testimony given by both witnesses to me  was  itself  somewhat
    confused.   It  may  well  be  that  the  family  decided  that  better
    arrangements could be made for the Appellant if the  burden  of  caring
    for her was shared between five relatives in the United Kingdom  rather
    than one relative in the United States supplemented by  visits  of  the
    others to the United States.  That however is merely  a  preference  of
    the Appellant's relatives not a significant factor which weighs in  the
    proportionality exercise.

32.  The Appellant was  unable  to  satisfy  the  requirement  of  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) for the  reasons  given  by  the  Judge.   Adequate  medical
    treatment was available to the Appellant in  the  United  States.   The
    cost of such treatment could be afforded with  contributions  from  the
    Appellant's UK based children which the Judge found as a fact would  be
    made available.  No evidence was produced to the Judge and no  evidence
    was produced to me to show that either medical care was unavailable  in
    the United States or would be at such a  prohibitively  expensive  cost
    that it could not be afforded.  Thus even if the Appellant were in  the
    United States and making an application to come to the  United  Kingdom
    from there, she would not be able to succeed  under  E-ECDR2.5  in  any
    event.

33.  The case fell to be decided outside the Immigration Rules and  as  such
    the Appellant had to show that there were compelling circumstances  why
    her case should be allowed.  The situation might have been different if
    it could be shown that she was unable to return to  the  United  States
    just as she was unable to return to Nigeria.  However for  the  reasons
    given by the Judge at first instance the Appellant was far  from  being
    able to show that.

34.  Given the Appellant's age and the  care  she  was  receiving  from  her
    family there would be an interference with the Appellant's private  and
    family life by requiring her to return  to  the  United  States.   That
    interference would be pursuant to the  legitimate  aim  of  immigration
    control since she had come as a visitor in circumstances where  I  find
    that more was known about her medical condition at the time she arrived
    than the witnesses were prepared to say.  The Appellant appears to have
    access to substantial NHS care very shortly after first arriving,  care
    to which she was not entitled.

35.  The question therefore is whether the interference caused by  requiring
    the Appellant to return to the United States is  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim pursued.  On the Respondent's side of the scales is  the
    fact that the Appellant's private life in this country has  been  built
    up at a time when her status here was precarious.  I disagree with  the
    submissions made that the case of AM (Malawi) is not  relevant,  it  is
    particularly applicable in this case as the Judge  granting  permission
    also thought (see paragraph 14 above).   The  Appellant  has  been  and
    continues to be a burden on public funds.  Not only was  she  diagnosed
    with and given treatment from her GP for her Alzheimer's condition  but
    she continues to receive treatment for her diabetes on the NHS.  On the
    Appellant's side of the equation is the fact that at her age and in her
    medical condition there will be disruption to her if she were  required
    to travel to the United States.

36.  I  do  not  accept  the  evidence  that  adequate  day-to-day  care  is
    unavailable to the  Appellant  in  the  United  States.   Although  the
    Appellant's daughter Funke is in employment, she is also able  to  take
    lengthy leaves of absence from that employment to come  to  the  United
    Kingdom to assist with the care of her mother.  I  see  no  reason  why
    such an arrangement could not be put into effect the other way with the
    Appellant's UK based children, who also visit the United States,  doing
    so and at the same time assisting Funke.  In those circumstances  there
    is in truth very little on the Appellant's side of the  equation  which
    can outweigh the public interest in the Appellant's removal.

37.  The Tribunal is  very  mindful  of  the  difficulties  which  arise  in
    Article 8 health cases. The point was concisely set out in the case  of
    Akhalu which I have quoted above (see paragraph 13).  The Appellant has
    only been in the United Kingdom for a relatively short period  of  time
    during which she has had access to NHS facilities to which she was  not
    entitled.  She is a citizen of the United States, a country with one of
    the best healthcare systems in the world which she  would  be  able  to
    access.  She has a family network in the United States just as she  has
    in this country.  The preference of her United Kingdom  based  children
    for the Appellant to remain with them  is  not  I  find  a  significant
    factor to be weighed in the proportionality exercise.  In my  view  any
    interference caused to the Appellant's private and family life in  this
    country by her removal is proportionate to the legitimate aim  pursued.
    I dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it aside.  I have remade the decision by  dismissing  the
Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  to  vary
leave.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.

Signed this 2nd day of  December 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.

Signed this 2nd day of December 2015
.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


