









UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34369/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|on 16 February 2016               |on 4 April 2016                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr Baker gashugi
                         no anonymity direction madE

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Bonavero, counsel (instructed by Gross and Co
Solicitors)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as "the secretary of state" and to  the
      respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The secretary of state appeals with permission from  the  decision  of
      First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shamash  promulgated  on  25  August  2015
      allowing the claimant's appeal under the Immigration Rules as well  as
      pursuant to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.


   3. In the grounds for permission, the secretary of state contended, inter
      alia, that there had been a material misdirection of law in respect of
      the test applied under paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration  Rules.
      The Judge had accepted that the claimant had no connections in Burundi
      [59]. It is contended that this is not the proper test under paragraph
      276ADE(vi) which requires  that  there  must  be  a  very  significant
      obstacle to the claimant's integration into the country  to  which  he
      would have to go if required to leave the UK.


   4. There were further grounds relating to  the  alleged  failure  by  the
      Judge to engage with the public interest considerations.


   5. In granting permission, First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer found that it
      is arguable  that  the  Judge  misdirected  himself  in  applying  the
      incorrect test under  paragraph  276ADE  (vi),  and  failing  to  give
      adequate reasons.


   6. Mr Bonavero,  who  represented  the  claimant  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge, relied  on  an  extensive  Rule  24  response  to  the
      secretary of state's appeal, which was prepared by other counsel.


   7. In essence he contended that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  fact
      used the correct test, which was the version of  paragraph  276ADE(vi)
      in force at  the  date  of  the  secretary  of  state's  refusal.  The
      secretary of state refused the claimant's  application  on  14  August
      2013. It was only on 28 July 2014  that  the  test  changed  to  "very
      significant  obstacles".  The  change  in  the  wording  operated  for
      applications decided on or after 28 July 2014.


   8. Accordingly the Judge used the correct test, namely that the  claimant
      had no ties, including social, cultural or family with the country  to
      which he would have to go if required to leave the UK. Moreover,  that
      was the test relied on by the secretary of state in  the  reasons  for
      refusal letter.  Mr Bonavero also challenged the secretary of  state's
      remaining grounds of appeal as set out in the response.


   9. Mr Bramble accepted that the ground relied  on  by  the  secretary  of
      state in the permission application had  been  incorrect.  He  further
      submitted that the remaining grounds directed towards public  interest
      considerations were not relevant as the First-tier  Judge  had  upheld
      the appeal in  accordance  with  the  private  life  provisions  under
      paragraph 276ADE.  He therefore accepted  that  the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge should stand.


      Assessment


  10. I am satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  directed  himself
      appropriately when finding that  the  claimant  "now  has  no  social,
      cultural or familial connections with Burundi having lived in  the  UK
      for 13 years." The version of that rule in force at the relevant  time
      was correctly applied.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any material error on a point of law. The decision  shall  accordingly
      stand.


      No anonymity direction is made.






      Signed                             Date:  16 March 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

