
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/34028/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 15 September 2015                 |On 17 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 SADAF AZIZ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K H Forrest, Advocate, instructed by LKW,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born  on  8  March  1980.   She
    appeals against a determination by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  McGavin,
    dismissing her appeal against refusal of leave to remain as the wife of
    Kashif  Ather  (her  partner  and  sponsor,  in  the  language  of  the
    Immigration Rules).

 2. The main thrust of the grounds of appeal  is  that  the  judge  decided
    whether the financial requirements of the Rules were met  in  terms  of
    their very prescriptive requirements about evidence, which is an  error
    because the correct approach is to follow not the letter but the spirit
    of the Rules, and to consider whether the public policy  objectives  of
    adequacy of income are broadly met.

 3. Although those points were pursued in some detail in  the  grounds  and
    submissions, it is sufficient to say that  in  principle  the  approach
    advocated for the appellant is  incorrect.   The  Rules  make  detailed
    requirements, which are met by specified evidence or not  at  all.   As
    submitted by the Presenting Officer, the Rules are not  the  equivalent
    of statute but they are an expression  of  policy  and  of  the  public
    interest asking for evidence to be supplied in particular  forms.   The
    judge  was  not  only  "technically"  correct  in  saying  that   these
    requirements were not met.

 4. Mr Mullen also pointed out that the judge  in  fact  went  through  the
    evidence in some detail, a task not made easy for her  by  the  way  in
    which it was presented, and found no way to reconcile the  claims  made
    by the appellant and the sponsor with the bank account  statements  and
    other written evidence presented.  I agree also with  that  submission.
    The determination clearly explained why evidence of income  in  respect
    of rental, employment and dividends fell short of what was required.

 5. There is no authority  for  the  First-tier  or  Upper  Tribunal  being
    enabled to take a broad and purposive approach  to  the  financial  and
    evidential requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 6. Even if there  had  been  some  scope  for  technical  relaxation,  the
    appellant would have to overcome the adverse credibility findings.  The
    grounds criticise these,  but  on  no  substantial  basis.   The  judge
    explained  in   detail   why   she   found   the   sponsor's   evidence
    unsatisfactory, in particular at paragraph 17.  She explained  why  the
    appellant's  evidence  was  also  unsatisfactory,  in   particular   at
    paragraph 18.  She found  her  evasive,  self-contradictory  and  unco-
    operative.   She  gave  specific  and   illustrative   examples.    Her
    conclusion that she can place little reliance on the  evidence  of  the
    appellant is well justified.  No legal error in it has been shown.

 7. The third aspect of the appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  pressed  only
    faintly, was in relation to Article 8 of ECHR.  It  was  common  ground
    that if the financial circumstances of the sponsor and appellant are in
    general as claimed, there should in principle be no difficulty in their
    assembling a properly vouched  fresh  application  to  the  respondent.
    That can be done  without  the  appellant  leaving  the  country.   The
    requirement  to  comply  with   usual   procedures   is   in   no   way
    disproportionate.  Although the judge considered the Article  8  aspect
    in respect of the sponsor being required to relocate to Pakistan, there
    is no reason to find that any disruption would go nearly that far.

 8. The appellant has not shown that the making  of  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal involved the making of any error on a point of law.
     The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

 9. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.
           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           15 September 2015
