
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/34922/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 March 2016                             |On 13 April 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                USMAN KHALIQ
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance (Syeds Solicitors remain on record)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease of reference, I shall refer to the parties as they were before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The  Secretary  of  State  is  therefore  the
    Respondent and Mr Khaliq is once more the Appellant.

 2. This is an appeal by the Respondent against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Trotter (the judge), promulgated on 4 December 2015,  in
    which he allowed the Appellant's appeal. That appeal  was  against  the
    Respondent's decisions of 27 August 2014, refusing  to  vary  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 student and to remove him from  the  United  Kingdom
    under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 3. By an application made on 30 April 2013 the  Appellant  had  originally
    sought to continue his studies in this country at Millburn  College  of
    Professional Studies. However, this institution surrendered its licence
    and the Respondent afforded the Appellant a sixty-day period  in  which
    to find a new sponsor. This he sought to do, the new institution  being
    Zaskin College in Harrow. Based on the information  available  to  her,
    the Respondent refused the application on a simple basis: the Appellant
    had no valid CAS, and  therefore  no  points  could  be  awarded  under
    Appendix A to the Immigration Rules.



The judge's decision

 4. The appeal came before the judge  as  a  'paper  case',  the  Appellant
    having elected this course of action and the Respondent  not  objecting
    thereafter.

 5. The judge accepted that the Appellant had, on 20 August 2014, sent into
    the Respondent documentation he "believed" (the term used by the judge)
    to include a valid CAS. In addition, an admission  letter  from  Zaskin
    College was submitted on the same date.

 6. In paragraph 9 of his decision, the judge appears to  accept  that  the
    document "described" and "believed" by the Appellant to be a valid  CAS
    was indeed a valid CAS, and that as a result the Appellant had complied
    with the Immigration Rules. The appeal was allowed on this basis.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. The grounds assert that there was no valid CAS in place, and the  judge
    erred in concluding otherwise.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ransley
    on 27 January 2015.



The hearing before me

 9. Neither the Appellant nor anyone from Syeds Solicitors appeared at  the
    hearing. I waited until late morning  before  dealing  with  the  case.
    There  had  been  no  communications  from   the   Appellant   or   his
    representatives to indicate why they could not attend or why the matter
    should not be dealt with in their absence. I was satisfied that  notice
    of hearing was sent to the addresses on file. Having considered rules 2
    and 38 of the Upper Tribunal's Procedure Rules, I  was  satisfied  that
    the appeal should be decision in the absence of the Appellant  and  his
    representatives.



My decision on error of law

10. The judge's decision is fundamentally flawed and must be set aside.

11. What constitutes  a  valid  CAS  is  defined  in  paragraph  6  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The mandatory requirement for this specific  element
    of an application is clearly set out in Appendix A to the Rules.

12. With respect to the judge, there simply was no valid CAS  in  existence
    at any material time. The documents submitted by the  Appellant  on  20
    August 2014 did not constitute a valid CAS. There was no other evidence
    to indicate that a CAS had been assigned to the Appellant.

13. The judge misdirected himself in law as to  what  constituted  a  valid
    CAS. Alternatively, his conclusion that  there  was  a  valid  CAS  was
    perverse. Either way, he materially erred.



Remaking the decision

14. There was no reason why  I  should  not  remake  the  decision  on  the
    evidence before me.

15. Mr Richards submitted that there was no valid CAS  and  so  the  appeal
    under the Rules must fail. Although Article 8 had been  alluded  to  in
    the original notice of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, there was  no
    merit to it.

16. I find that there was no valid CAS as at the dates the application  was
    made and its subsequent refusal by the Respondent on 27 August 2014. As
    I have stated previously, the documentation submitted by the  Appellant
    just did not constitute the mandatory unique reference number  required
    by the Rules, notwithstanding the Appellant's belief to the contrary.

17. Without a valid CAS, the Appellant's application was bound to fail, and
    his appeal shares the same fate.

18. In respect of Article 8, there is no elaboration on this issue anywhere
    in the evidence. On any view, the 'Article 8 Rules' are not met by  the
    Appellant. Outside of these, I find that the Appellant  does  not  even
    have a private life in the United Kingdom. If he did, removal would not
    constitute a sufficiently serious interference with that  life,  having
    regard to Patel [2013] UKSC 72 and other well-known  case  law  on  the
    subject  of  those  in  the  Appellant's  position.  For  the  sake  of
    completeness, removal would of course be proportionate,  having  regard
    to the absence of any material factors in the Appellant's  favour,  the
    importance of the public interest, and the factors under section 117A-B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.




Anonymity

19.  No  direction  was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  none  is
    appropriate at this stage.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.


Signed                                       Date:  8 April 2016

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                       Date:  8 April 2016

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

