


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/34004/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On : 12 October 2017                       |On: 13 October 2017            |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               proshanto barai
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Kumudusena, of Liyon Legal Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   against the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Mr  Barai's
   appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse  his  application  for
   indefinite leave to remain on long residence grounds and  to  refuse  his
   human rights claim.

2. For the purposes of this decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
   Secretary of State as the respondent  and  Mr  Barai  as  the  appellant,
   reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

3. The appellant is a citizen  of  Bangladesh  born  on  20  July  1985.  He
   entered the United Kingdom on 9 October 2004 with entry  clearance  as  a
   student valid until 31 October 2007 and was subsequently granted  further
   periods of leave to remain as a student/ Tier  4  student  until  31  May
   2012, the latter period following a successful appeal. On 31 May 2012  he
   applied for further leave to remain as a Tier 4 student and  was  granted
   leave until 20 April 2014, but his leave was subsequently curtailed to 27
   August 2013. On 23 August 2013 he applied for leave as a Tier  4  student
   and was granted leave until 24 February 2015.


4. On 4 August  2014  the  appellant  was  served  with  an  IS151A  removal
   decision on the basis of having exercised deception in  relation  to  his
   use of a fraudulently obtained ETS TOEIC certificate in  his  application
   of 31 May 2012. That had the effect of curtailing  his  leave  to  remain
   from the date of service. The appellant lodged  an  appeal  against  that
   decision but his appeal was struck out on 4 September 2014 on  the  basis
   that he had no right to appeal from inside the UK.


5. On 23 September 2014  the  appellant  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
   remain on the basis  of  ten  years'  continuous  lawful  residence.  His
   application was refused on 27 October 2015. The application  was  refused
   under paragraphs 322(2) and 322(5) of the immigration rules on the  basis
   of the use  of  the  fraudulently  obtained  TOEIC  certificate  and  the
   exercise of deception. The respondent went on to consider paragraph  276B
   of the immigration  rules  with  regard  to  the  appellant's  length  of
   residence in the UK and concluded that he failed to meet the requirements
   of paragraph 276B(ii) and (iii) as a result of his use of deception.  The
   respondent then considered Article 8 and concluded that  the  appellant's
   application fell for refusal under R-LTRP.1.1(d)(i)  of  Appendix  FM  on
   suitability grounds, with reference to S-LTR.1.6, and  that  he  did  not
   meet the eligibility  requirements  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  R-
   LTRP.1.1(d)(ii) as his  partner  was  not  settled  in  the  UK.  It  was
   considered further that paragraph EX.1  did  not  apply.  The  respondent
   considered,  in  addition,  that  the  appellant  could  not   meet   the
   requirements in Appendix FM as a parent,  that  he  could  not  meet  the
   criteria in paragraph 276ADE(1) on the basis of  private  life  and  that
   there were no exceptional  circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of  leave
   outside the immigration rules.

6. The appellant appealed against that decision. His  appeal  was  heard  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on 6 December 2016.  The  appellant  gave
   oral evidence before the judge, responding to  the  discrepancies  relied
   upon by the respondent in concluding that he had used a proxy test  taker
   to take his English language test.  The  judge  found  that,  whilst  the
   respondent had discharged the evidential burden of proving deception, the
   appellant had provided  an  innocent  explanation  in  response  and  the
   respondent had failed to discharge the legal burden of proof.  The  judge
   accepted that the appellant sat the  English  language  test  as  claimed
   without the use of a proxy and that he had not  exercised  deception.  He
   found that the respondent was not entitled to exercise discretion as  she
   did under paragraph 322(2) and (3) and  that  the  decision  was  not  in
   accordance with the immigration rules. He allowed  the  appeal  on  human
   rights grounds.

7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  respondent
   on the grounds that the judge's reasons for finding  that  the  appellant
   had given an innocent explanation were inadequate and that he had  placed
   undue weight on the appellant's ability to  speak  English.  The  grounds
   asserted further that the judge was bound to dismiss the  appeal  in  any
   event because the basis  for  the  appellant's  leave  had  been  removed
   following the withdrawal by ETS of the TOEIC  certificate.  Further,  the
   judge had failed to give any reasons for allowing  the  appeal  on  human
   rights grounds.

8. Permission to appeal was granted on 10 August  2017  on  the  basis  that
   there was arguably insufficient reasoning on the part of  the  judge  for
   the conclusion that there was an innocent explanation as it was not clear
   what that innocent explanation was.

Appeal Hearing


9. Mr Nath, in his submissions, relied upon Secretary of State for the  Home
   Department v Shehzad & Anor [2016] EWCA  Civ  615  and  SM  and  Qadir  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS - Evidence  -  Burden  of
   Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 in submitting that the judge's reasons for finding
   that the appellant had given an innocent explanation were inadequate  and
   that the judge had failed properly to consider the respondent's evidence.

10. Mr Kumudusena  submitted  that  the  judge  had  properly  rejected  the
   discrepancies and other reasons relied upon by the respondent for finding
   that the appellant had failed to provide an innocent explanation. He  had
   found that there were no contradictions in the appellant's  evidence.  He
   had given sufficient  reasons  for  concluding  that  the  appellant  had
   provided an innocent explanation and that the  respondent  had  therefore
   failed to discharge the legal burden  of  proving  deception.  The  judge
   followed the correct approach to  the  evidential  and  legal  burden  of
   proof. The appellant had completed ten years' continuous lawful residence
   in 2013 and therefore met the requirements of the immigration rules.  The
   appeal could have been allowed under the rules. There was no error of law
   in the judge's decision.


11. Mr Nath submitted that once the TOEIC certificate had been withdrawn  by
   ETS the basis of the appellant's leave had been removed and the appellant
   could not, therefore, show ten years of continuous lawful residence  even
   if the judge had properly found there was no deception. The  judge  ought
   to have gone on to consider the effect of his decision on  the  deception
   allegation on the ten year period under paragraph 276B and given  reasons
   in that regard and in regard to Article 8.


12. I allowed Mr Kumudusena to reply  and  he  submitted  that  the  judge's
   failure to deal with the long residence issue had not been  part  of  the
   grounds and in any event the refusal under paragraph 276B was  solely  on
   the basis of the deception.


13. Mr Nath responded by reiterating the points previously made.

Consideration and Findings

14. I do not believe it is disputed that  the  judge  followed  the  correct
   approach in considering the shifting burden of proof. That is set out  in
   SM and Qadir at [101] as follows:

    "101.     We have already held  that  the  evidential  burden  of proof
    resting on the Secretary of State has been narrowly discharged. For the
    reasons which we have given, we are satisfied that both Appellants have
    discharged their burden of raising an innocent explanation of the prima
    facie indications of deception  on  their  part  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's evidence. For the  reasons  elaborated,  we  conclude,  without
    hesitation, that the Secretary of State has failed to establish, on the
    balance of probabilities, that the  Appellants'  prima  facie  innocent
    explanations are to be rejected. The legal burden of proof  falling  on
    the Secretary of State has not  been  discharged.  The  Appellants  are
    clear winners."


and in Shehzad at [22]:
    "22. As I have stated, the question in these appeals only concerns the
    initial stage and whether, with the evidence of Mr Millington and Ms
    Collings, the evidential burden on the Secretary of State is satisfied.
    If it is, it is then incumbent on the individual whose leave has been
    curtailed to provide evidence in response raising an innocent
    explanation."
15. What is challenged, however, in  the  first  instance,  is  the  judge's
   finding as to whether  or  not  the  appellant  has  raised  an  innocent
   explanation. The appellant's response  to  the  respondent's  grounds  of
   challenge in that regard is that the grounds are  simply  a  disagreement
   with the judge's findings that an innocent explanation  was  established.
   The appellant's case is  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  reject  the
   discrepancies and contradictions relied upon by the  respondent  and  was
   entitled to find that he had given a consistent account  of  the  English
   language test he had undertaken.

16. It is relevant to note that two matters relied  upon  by  the  judge  in
   particular,  in  finding  that  the  appellant  had  raised  an  innocent
   explanation, were his rejection  of  an  apparent  inconsistency  in  the
   appellant's evidence  at  his  interview  as  to  whether  the  test  was
   completed  in  one  day  or  two  and  the  appellant's   excellence   in
   communicating in English. With regard to the latter, the  Upper  Tribunal
   made clear in MA (ETS - TOEIC  testing)  Nigeria  [2016]  UKUT  450  that
   "there is a range of reasons why persons proficient in English may engage
   in TOEIC fraud" and accordingly that was not a  matter  which  the  judge
   ought to have accorded weight. With regard to the former, the judge found
   at [9] that the appellant's evidence at question 15 was that he  sat  the
   test during the course of one day and that that was not inconsistent with
   the account given at question 2 which the respondent  had  misinterpreted
   as being that he sat an examination on two different dates. Yet it  seems
   to me that the evidence at question 2 was unequivocally that the test was
   taken in two parts on two different dates, and that is supported  by  the
   test dates on the certificates at C1 and C2. It  seems  to  me  that,  if
   anything, it is the appellant's evidence at question 15 that was open  to
   clarification, but that was not what  the  judge  found.  Accordingly  it
   seems to me that there is a lack of clarity in the  judge's  reasons  for
   rejecting the discrepancy relied upon by the respondent in  that  regard.
   Given that these two matters formed a significant  part  of  the  judge's
   conclusion that the appellant had raised an innocent explanation, I  find
   merit in the respondent's grounds of appeal challenging that conclusion.

17. I also find merit in Mr Nath's assertion that there appeared  to  be  no
   analysis of the evidence produced by the respondent  in  support  of  the
   deception allegation, other than the reference  at  [8]  to  the  generic
   evidence which was accepted  as  discharging  the  evidential  burden  of
   proof. Whilst the judge referred at [3] to the respondent's supplementary
   bundle and to the statement of H Rackshaw, there appears to have been  no
   consideration of the documents annexed to the statement at pages 6 to 13.


18. In all of these circumstances it seems to me that there  are  particular
   flaws in the judge's reasoning in accepting that the appellant had raised
   an innocent explanation  and  an  inadequate  consideration  of  all  the
   evidence in assessing whether or not the respondent  had  discharged  the
   burden of proof.  Accordingly  the  judge's  findings  on  the  deception
   allegation and paragraph 322(2) and (5) of the immigration  rules  cannot
   stand and the matter has to be considered afresh.


19. I would add further that there appears to be a  lacuna  in  the  judge's
   reasoning in [10] and no proper explanation as to  how  the  decision  to
   allow the appeal on human rights grounds was reached. It is not  entirely
   clear if the judge found that  the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of
   paragraph 276B of the immigration rules on long residence grounds and, if
   so, how the conclusion was reached that  there  had  been  ten  years  of
   continuous  lawful   residence,   particularly   considering   that   the
   appellant's leave ended on 4 August 2014.


20. For all of these reasons the  judge's  decision  cannot  stand  and  the
   Secretary of State's appeal is allowed. The judge's decision must be  set
   aside in its entirety. The appropriate course  is  for  the  case  to  be
   remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

DECISION

21. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The decision is set aside.

22. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  pursuant  to  section
   12(2)(b)(i) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
   Practice  Statement  7.2(b),  before  any  judge  aside  from  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Keane.






Signed:       [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated: 12 October
2017
