
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/34938/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Stoke Bennett House          |   Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                     |
|On 31 July 2017                       |   On 8 August 2017             |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                ADNAN GHALIB
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Vokes counsel instructed by Citapel Immigration
Lawyers
For the Respondent: Mrs Obomi Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant was born on 15 March 1985 and is a national of Pakistan.


3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Meyler promulgated on 9 December 2016 which dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  30
   November 2015 to refuse leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of  family  and
   private life..
5. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons which were  in  essence  that
   the Appellant could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM;  given  the
   period he had spent in the UK the only potentially relevant provision  of
   paragraph 276ADE he could meet was subsection (vi) but there would be  no
   very significant obstacles to him reintegrating into  life  in  Pakistan;
   his operation for a brain tumour in 2014 was considered but given that he
   was receiving only annual checkups there was no reason why he  could  not
   receive  these  in  Pakistan  and  therefore  this  did  not  amount   to
   exceptional circumstances.
The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Meyler ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the  Respondent's
   decision.
7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing: that the Judge was erred in that:
   a) She failed to give sufficient weight to the Appellants family life.
   b) The decision that no family life exists tainted the other findings.
8.  On 31 May  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Adio  gave  permission  to
   appeal.

9. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Mr  Vokes  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that:

   a) He accepted that a narrow point was taken in a case  that  was  finely
      balanced.

   b) At page 48 of the bundle the Appellants cousin had given  a  statement
      saying that because of the Appellants health problems they  were  very
      close and  he  had  been  supporting  the  Appellant  financially  and
      morally.

   c) In an Article 8  health  case  the  family  life  ingredient  is  more
      important and this crucial factor had been overlooked.

10. On behalf of the Respondent  Mrs Obomi submitted that :

   a) There was no material  error  and  the  Judge  had  properly  directed
      herself.

   b) The Judge had taken into account the relationship with the cousins  in
      the UK.

   c) There were strong public interest factors that were relevant  in  this
      case and these prevailed over the other factors identified.

Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard those submissions I reached the conclusion that in what  is
   a detailed and very carefully reasoned  decision  the  Tribunal  made  no
   material errors of law.

12. It is argued that the Judge was in error in failing to  make  a  finding
   that family life existed in the UK for the purpose of Article 8 and  this
   could have impacted in the proportionality exercise.

13. I am satisfied having read the Judge's decision  that  no  argument  was
   ever advanced by Mr Pipe who represented the Appellant in the First  tier
   that family life existed for the purpose of  Article  8  and  indeed  the
   Judge records that concession at paragraph 17 and it is also recorded  in
   her record of proceedings:

   "Mr Pipe did not seek to argue the case under the Immigration  Rules,  as
   he said that this was precluded by the date of the decision. Moreover  he
   conceded that the appellant could not  satisfy  any  of  the  Immigration
   Rules or indeed Article 4 of the European Convention. Instead  he  argued
   the case purely  on  the  basis  of  private  life  (physical  and  moral
   integrity) under article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights."

14. It is a matter for well experienced counsel how  they  choose  to  argue
   their case and Mr Pipe clearly accepted that the family life  he  enjoyed
   was part of his private life. Had the Judge decided  to  go  behind  that
   concession, both the Appellant and Respondent would have had to be  given
   the opportunity to address her on the issue.

15. It cannot be argued that the Judge made a finding that  no  family  life
   exists as I note that the Judge  considered  the  relationship  with  the
   family in the UK as part of the Appellants private life  in  the  UK  and
   there of references to their relationship at paragraph 43, 47,52,  53  55
   and 57 noting  what they had done financially and emotionally to  support
   him when he was ill: it was then a matter for her to give what weight she
   felt was appropriate within the context of a private life appeal .

16. This was, moreover, a private life appeal where the starting  point  was
   that the Appellant did not meet the requirements of Rules which are  said
   to reflect the Government's and Parliament's view of how, as a matter  of
   public policy, the balance should be struck between the right to  respect
   for private and family life. That was a factor that she was  required  to
   give weight to. The Appellants private life was  in  addition  precarious
   and therefore she was statutorily obliged to give it little weight in the
   balancing exercise. While not one of the statutory requirements she would
   also have been entitled to factor  into  the  assessment  his  precarious
   status when determining the weight to give to that aspect of his  private
   life based on his relationship with  the  cousins  relying  on  Rajendran
   (s117B - family life) [2016] UKUT 00138 (IAC) where headnote 2 states:

   "However, this does not mean that when  answering  the  "public  interest
   question" posed by s117A(2)-(3) a  court  or  tribunal  should  disregard
   "precarious family life"  criteria  set  out  in  established  Article  8
   jurisprudence. Given that ss.117A-D considerations are not exhaustive, in
   certain cases it may be an error of  law  for  a  court  or  tribunal  to
   disregard relevant public interest considerations."

17. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning and she reached a conclusion that was  open
   to her on the facts before her.

CONCLUSION

18. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

19. The appeal is dismissed.
Signed                                                              Date
6.8.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
