
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34861/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                   |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24th July 2014                               |On 29th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                LACHMANN DASS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Sarwar of Counsel instructed by Bassi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. On 15th April  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Pooler  gave
    permission to the appellant to  appeal  against  the  determination  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Chohan  in  which  he  dismissed  the
    appeal on immigration and human rights grounds against the decision  of
    the respondent to refuse leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of  fourteen
    years' long residence in accordance with the  provisions  of  paragraph
    276B(i)(b) of the Immigration Rules.  The respondent also  refused  the
    human rights claim applying the provisions  of  paragraphs  276ADE  and
    Appendix FM of the Rules.

 2.  In  granting  permission  Judge  Pooler  noted  that  the  grounds  of
    application submitted that the judge had erred  in  law  by  making  an
    unlawful finding, misunderstood and misdirected himself in relation  to
    the evidence and considered irrelevant matters.

 3. The grounds themselves also pointed out that, in paragraph  18  of  the
    determination, the judge had expressed  the  view  that  the  appellant
    succeeded under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules yet also stated
    in the following paragraph  that  the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements  of  sub-paragraph  (iv)  of  that  Rule  relating  to   a
    requirement for knowledge of the  English  Language  and  Life  in  the
    United Kingdom. That requirement  was  not  an  issue  put  before  the
    Tribunal.

 4. Judge Pooler considered that the  grounds  were  arguable  because  the
    appellant had provided an English language test  certificate  with  his
    application for leave to remain and the issue should have  been  raised
    by the judge at the hearing if he had concerns.

 5. The respondent sent a response under Rule 24 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in which it was accepted that the appellant
    had produced an English language certificate. However issue  was  taken
    with the conclusion in paragraph  17  of  the  determination  that  the
    appellant had been in the United Kingdom since 1995 when the judge  had
    failed to give an adequate explanation for that finding despite  having
    concluded that the appellant relied on inherently false documents and a
    witness who had not told the truth.

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Sarwar argued that, as  the  appellant  had
    proved that  he  had  the  necessary  English  Language  and  Knowledge
    qualification the determination should stand in relation to the judge's
    finding about fourteen years' continuous residence.  He submitted  that
    the judge had identified what evidence he  could  accept  and  what  he
    could not and there was sufficient supporting evidence to  entitle  the
    judge to reach a favourable conclusion.  He also indicated that witness
    evidence  had  been  accepted  by  statement  (paragraph   5   of   the
    determination) and there was nothing  to  show  that  the  Home  Office
    wanted to cross-examine those witnesses.

 7. Mr Harrison  argued  that  the  determination  was  both  confused  and
    muddled.   At  paragraph  14  the  judge  rejected  letters  from   the
    appellant's employer and in paragraph 15 commented on other  evidential
    defects including the absence of a video recording of  the  appellant's
    wedding.  It was therefore difficult to see  what  the  basis  for  the
    judge's favourable decision on residence was.   Mr  Harrison  contended
    that a judge  properly  directed  would  not  have  made  the  decision
    reached.

 8. Mr Sarwar concluded his submissions by  pointing  out  that  the  judge
    relied upon recruitment letters and the bank letter which  he  regarded
    as "the most independent evidence".

 9. After hearing submissions I announced that I  was  satisfied  that  the
    determination showed errors on points  of  law.   Representatives  both
    suggested to me that, as the errors related to the findings of fact, it
    would be necessary for there to be a fresh hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I now give my reasons for concluding that the  determination
    shows errors on points of law such that it should be re-made.

10. The  judge  was  certainly  in  error  in  raising  the  issue  of  the
    requirement for an English Language and  Knowledge  qualification  when
    this had not been in issue and when, it is acknowledged, the  appellant
    already had that qualification.  That error might not  be  material  if
    the  positive  credibility  points  about  long  residence  can  stand.
    However, when that error is seen in the light of the other errors which
    I now identify the determination cannot be seen  as  safe.   The  judge
    rejected much of the evidence put forward  by  the  appellant  to  show
    fourteen years' residence.  At paragraph 14 he identifies  two  letters
    from Prestige Recruitment  Ltd  as  unreliable.   He  also  appears  to
    dismiss the evidence which he persuaded the appellant's  representative
    could be submitted in statement form before  declaring  that  the  most
    independent evidence he had before  him  was  that  to  show  that  the
    appellant opened an  account  with  Nat  West  Bank  in  2000.   It  is
    therefore difficult to see what the "totality of the evidence" was upon
    which the judge relied before  reaching  the  conclusions  set  out  in
    paragraph 17 that the appellant had been in the  United  Kingdom  since
    1995.  These findings are perverse or irrational in the legal sense and
    the determination therefore cannot stand.

DIRECTIONS

 1. The appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh at
    the Stoke Hearing Centre.

 2. The hearing is to take place as agreed  with  representatives  on  17th
    September 2014 with a time estimate of two hours.

 3. A Punjabi (Indian) interpreter will be required.

 4. The appellant's representatives should submit a consolidated bundle  of
    documents and evidence to be produced at the hearing.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

