

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Numbers: IA/34953/2013
                                                               Ia/34959/2013
                                                               IA/33425/2013
                                                               Ia/34965/2013
                                                               IA/34970/2013
                                                               Ia/34976/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                               |Determination           |
|                                                   |Promulgated             |
|On 26th November 2014                              |On 8th December 2014    |
|                                                   |                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                  Between:

                             RAYMOND KWAKU DIDO
                               MARY AKUA ATTA
                             RICHMOND KOBLA DIDO
                            JENNIFER MAWUSI DIDO
                             LORETTA ESINAM DIDO
                              KELVIN DODZI DIDO
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellants:          Mr S Muquit, instructed by Chris & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellants are citizens of Ghana born on 17th September 1963,  6th
      September 1968, 23rd February 1993, 29th July 1997, 16th May 1995  and
      16th June 2001, respectively. They appeal against the determination of
      the First-tier Tribunal dated 24th July 2014 dismissing their  appeals
      against the Respondent's decision of 26th July 2013 refusing  to  vary
      leave to remain under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

2.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Landes
      on 13th August 2014 on the grounds that the application  was  made  on
      19th June 2012 and   the  new  rules  were  not  applicable  following
      Edgehill [2014] EWCA Civ 402. Therefore, the Judge had  erred  in  his
      approach by considering the new rules and following Gulshan (Article 8
      - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC),  rather  than
      conducting a full proportionality analysis, specifically dealing  with
      the best interests of the children. On 26th September  2014,  I  found
      that there was an error of law in the determination of the  First-Tier
      Tribunal and I set the decision aside.

3.    I shall refer  to  the  First  Appellant  as  the  Appellant  and  the
      remaining Appellant's by name. At the hearing, the Appellant submitted
      an additional statement and  further  documentary  evidence.  He  gave
      evidence relying on the statement dated 5th November 2014 as  evidence
      in chief. He was cross-examined and re-examined. Submissions were made
      by both parties. A record of all the evidence and submissions  appears
      on the court file.

4.    In summary, the Appellant's posting with  the  Ghana  High  Commission
      [GHC] in the UK finished in March 2011. He bought his house in the  UK
      in April 2011. He did not return to Ghana at the end  of  his  posting
      because he was offered another post in the GHC. The Appellant returned
      to Ghana from March to May 2011 to resign from his military post after
      23 years service. He qualified for a pension. He did not surrender his
      diplomatic passport because he was asked to return to the UK  to  take
      up a temporary appointment ending in May 2012. He was lead to  believe
      during his interview that the position would be permanent  because  he
      was asked to go to Ghana  and  retire  from  the  army.  He  served  a
      probationary period of three months and was  then  told  that  he  was
      going to be given a permanent position, but he was just given a letter
      extending his employment for two months.


5.    The Appellant's children had been studying in Ghana  prior  to  coming
      to the UK and made the transition easily, save for Kelvin who was only
      six at the time and had just started kindergarten. The  Appellant  and
      his wife had half-brothers and sisters living in Ghana. Before he came
      to the UK, he was living in military barracks and working on a project
      building a house. He had been out  of  work  for  some  time  and  was
      heavily in debt. He would not realise anything from the  sale  of  his
      house in the UK.

6.    The Appellant stated that local staff, in the GHC, were engaged  on  a
      permanent basis and were permanent residents in the  UK.  He  accepted
      that he did not have permanent residence, but stated that he was still
      offered a permanent position. He would not have opted for a  temporary
      position because he still  had  two  years  left  to  serve  with  the
      military. He was aware that local staff were permanent residents.  The
      Appellant surrendered his passport to the GHC in the UK.

7.    In re-examination, the Appellant stated that he had returned to  Ghana
      on his own. His wife and children had remained in the UK  since  their
      arrival on 22nd December 2007. Two weeks before he returned there  was
      a change in personnel and the new deputy  high  commissioner  was  not
      properly briefed. The person  who  sent  the  letter  terminating  his
      employment was not present at his interview.

8.    Mr Walker relied on the  refusal  letter  dated  22nd  July  2013  and
      submitted that the Appellant had come to the UK with  the  expectation
      that he would return to Ghana in March  2011.  There  was  documentary
      evidence to show that he was offered temporary  employment  ending  in
      May 2012. The Appellant gave evidence that locally employed staff were
      those who had a right to live in the UK permanently.  His  expectation
      must have been that when his employment ended, and his  leave  expired
      on 6th July 2012, he would return to Ghana. This had always  been  his
      expectation and it was now a matter of choice that he wished to remain
      here.

9.    Unfortunately, the Appellant could not succeed under  the  Immigration
      Rules; his children had not been  here  for  seven  years.  The  whole
      family would return together and there was nothing to show  that  they
      would suffer extreme hardship on return. They would have funds to  re-
      establish themselves from the sale of their home and it  was  open  to
      them to resume their working lives in Ghana.

10.   Mr Muquit relied on his skeleton argument and submitted  that  it  was
      accepted that  there  would  be  no  interference  with  family  life.
      Interference with private life was only justified under certain public
      interest grounds and it was not enough to say that the failure to meet
      the immigration rules was in the public interest.  The  weight  to  be
      attached to the public interest was low because none  of  the  factors
      identified in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
      Act 2002 [NIA] (as amended) applied in this case. The  Appellants  had
      been living in the UK lawfully with no recourse to  public  funds,  no
      criminal convictions and they could all speak English.

11.   It was in the best interests of the younger children to remain in  the
      UK. They had been in the UK for almost  seven  years  and  were  at  a
      critical point in their education. They  would  have  to  adapt  to  a
      different education system and it would be difficult to find  suitable
      accommodation. The  Appellants'  removal  was  not  justified  in  the
      circumstances.


Discussion and conclusions.

12.   My findings and conclusions are set  out  below.  I  have  taken  into
      account the documentary evidence in the Respondent's  and  Appellants'
      bundles,  the  witness  statements  and  the  oral  evidence.  I  have
      considered the letters from St Joseph's  College,  dated  8th  October
      2014, and Harris Academy, dated 29th September 2014.
      13.   The Appellants lived in Ghana prior to coming to the UK in 2007.
      The Appellant had started building  a  house  in  Ghana,  but  it  was
      unfinished. His wife's family and his half-brothers  and  half-sisters
      lived in Ghana.

14.   The Appellant arrived in the UK in August 2007 and his  family  joined
      him on 22nd December 2007. His post with the GHC ended in March  2011,
      but he continued working there on a temporary basis  until  May  2012.
      The Appellants applied for leave to remain on 19th June 2012 and their
      leave expired on 6th July 2012.

15.   I do not accept that the Appellant was offered a permanent  post  with
      GHC  because  his  evidence  was  inconsistent  and  contrary  to  the
      documentary evidence he produced. The Appellant claimed  that  he  was
      offered a permanent position at his interview in February 2011 and  he
      was asked to resign his post in the military.  This  was  inconsistent
      with his own evidence,  that  locally  employed  staff  had  permanent
      residence in the UK, and the letters  in  the  Appellants'  bundle  at
      pages 23 and 24. On 8th January 2012, the Appellant  was  informed  of
      his temporary appointment as an executive officer  and  on  7th  March
      2012 his temporary appointment was extended by two months to 10th  May
      2012.

16.   Further, the Appellant stated in his oral evidence that  he  initially
      served a probationary period of three months and was then told that he
      would be made permanent. This was inconsistent with his claim to  have
      returned to Ghana soon after his interview to resign from the military
      and his claim that he was aware of a change  in  personnel  before  he
      returned.

17.   At paragraph 6 of his statement the Appellant  claimed  that  he  made
      his application for permission to remain as  a  family  in  June  2012
      because he honestly and genuinely believed the GHC  would  honour  its
      promise to continue to keep him employed. This was  inconsistent  with
      the letter dated 28th May 2012 terminating his temporary employment.

18.   Accordingly, I find that the Appellant and his family came to  the  UK
      on a temporary basis with no legitimate expectation that they would be
      able to remain here beyond their leave, which expired  in  July  2012.
      The Appellants could not satisfy the Immigration Rules at the date  of
      application, decision or at the date of hearing. The  Appellants  were
      not prejudiced by the Respondent's delay in refusing  the  application
      in July 2013.

19.   It was agreed by the parties that the  Appellants  could  not  satisfy
      the Immigration Rules. There would be no interference with family life
      because the Appellants would be returned as a family unit.  The  minor
      Appellants had been in the UK for almost seven years and were  settled
      in school. Removal to Ghana would interfere with  their  private  life
      and I find that the consequences were of such gravity so as to  engage
      Article 8.

      20.   The decision to remove the Appellants was in accordance with the
      law and  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the  interests  of
      immigration control and the economic well being of the country.  I  am
      not persuaded by Mr Muquit's submission that this stage of the  Razgar
      test was not satisfied because the Appellants had not relied on public
      funds and a failure to satisfy the Immigration Rules did not mean  the
      decision was in accordance  with  the  law.  In  Shahzad  (Article  8:
      legitimate aim) [2014]  UKUT  00085  (IAC),  the  Tribunal  held  that
      immigration control can be assumed to be an aspect of  'economic  well
      being of the country'. The Appellants had been refused leave to remain
      because they could not satisfy the Immigration Rules and  the  removal
      decision was a lawful one.

21.   In Nasim (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC), the Tribunal  held  that
      a person's human rights were not enhanced by not  committing  criminal
      offences or not relying on public funds. The only significance of such
      matters concerning a removal from the UK was to preclude the Secretary
      of State from pointing to any public interest justifying removal, over
      and above the basic importance of  maintaining  a  firm  and  coherent
      system of immigration control.

22.   The points raised by Mr Muquit in his submissions are relevant  in  so
      far as set out in Nasim. None of the  factors  identified  in  Section
      117B NIA 2002 applied in this  case,  save  that  the  maintenance  of
      effective immigration control was in the public interest. The issue in
      this case is proportionality and  I  must  balance  the  private  life
      rights of the Appellants with the public interest.

23.   I have considered the cases  of  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions
      affecting children: onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC); Zoumbas v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  UKSC  74;  and  EV
      (Philippines) and  Others  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874.  The  best
      interests  of  the  children,  Jennifer  and  Kelvin,  are  a  primary
      consideration and they must not be blamed for matters for  which  they
      are not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent.

24.   In Azimi-Moayed, the Tribunal held:
      (i)   As a starting point it is in the interests  of  children  to  be
           with both their parents and if both parents  are  being  removed
           from the UK then the starting  point  suggests  that  so  should
           dependant children who form part of their household unless there
           are reasons to the contrary;
      (ii)  It is in the interests of children to  have  the  stability  and
           continuity of social and educational provision and  the  benefit
           of growing up in the cultural norms of the society to which they
           belong;
      (iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than the  state  of  origin
           can leave to the development of social, cultural and educational
           ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in  the  absence
           of a compelling reason to the contrary. What amounts to  lengthy
           residence is not clear cut, but past and present  policies  have
           identified seven years as a relevant period;
           (iv)  Apart from the terms of published policies and rules,  the
           Tribunal notes that seven years from the age of four  is  likely
           to be more significant to child than the first  seven  years  of
           life. Very young children are focussed on their  parents  rather
           than their peers and are adaptable;
      (v)   Short periods of residence, particularly ones without  leave  or
           with the reasonable expectation of leave  to  enter  or  remain,
           while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely to give  rise
           to  private  life  deserving  of  respect  in  the  absence   of
           exceptional factors. In any event, protection  of  the  economic
           well being of society amply justifies removal in such cases.

25.   In EV (Philippines) the Court of Appeal set  out  the  factors  to  be
      taken into account and held that the Tribunal was concerned  with  how
      emphatic an answer falls to be given to the question:  is  it  in  the
      best interests of the child to remain in the UK? The longer the  child
      has been here,  the  more  advanced  or  critical  the  stage  of  his
      education, the looser the ties with the country in question,  and  the
      more deleterious the consequences  of  his  return,  the  greater  the
      weight that falls on one side of the scales. If it  is  overwhelmingly
      in the child's best interests that he should not return, the  need  to
      maintain  immigration  control  may  well  not  tip  the  balance.  By
      contrast, if it is in the child's best interests to remain,  but  only
      on balance (with some factors pointing the other way), the result  may
      be the opposite.

26.   In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken into  account
      the strong weight to be given to  the  need  to  maintain  immigration
      control in pursuit of the economic well being of the country  and  the
      fact  that  the  applicants  have  no  entitlement  to   remain.   The
      immigration history of the parents may also be relevant.

27.   Kelvin is 13 years old and has been in the UK almost seven  years.  He
      has completed his primary school education and is currently in year  9
      at secondary school. He has a good attendance record and is working at
      a good standard in  all  subjects.  He  has  a  positive  attitude  to
      education and is likely to do well in his exams  in  the  future.  His
      head teacher is of the view that he would find it  difficult  to  move
      schools at this stage and settle in a new environment.

28.   Kelvin attended kindergarten in Ghana prior to coming to  the  UK.  He
      took some time to adapt to the education system in the  UK  and  would
      have to re-adapt  to  a  new  school  in  Ghana.  There  would  be  no
      linguistic, medical or other  difficulties  in  adapting  to  life  in
      Ghana. I accept that he would find it difficult to move  schools.    I
      find that Kelvin may well take time to re-adjust to school  in  Ghana,
      but his educational development, progress and opportunities would  not
      be affected. He is not at a crucial stage of his education  such  that
      he could not overcome the disruption  to  his  current  schooling  and
      continue his education in Ghana. It is in his best interests to remain
      with his parents.

      29.   Jennifer is 17 years old and has been in the UK  since  she  was
      10. She has completed her secondary school education and is  currently
      in her last year of A levels. She has contributed widely  to  life  at
      Harris Academy and she is respected by her teacher and her peers.  She
      is at a crucial stage of  her  education.  She  adapted  well  to  the
      education system in the UK and there were no  linguistic,  medical  or
      other difficulties in adapting to life in Ghana. It  is  in  her  best
      interests to remain in the UK to complete her A levels. Once completed
      she intends to study at university. There is  nothing  preventing  her
      from doing so in Ghana or elsewhere. Her university education  is  not
      dependant on her remaining in the UK after completion of her A levels.
      She  wishes  to  pursue  a  career  in  midwifery.   Her   educational
      development and progress would not be affected in the long term. It is
      also in her best interests to remain with her parents.

30.   Richmond was working as  an  apprentice  technician  on  a  three-year
      fixed term contract until 7th August 2014.  The  undated  letter  from
      Robins & Day stated that he may be offered an extension to his current
      contract. He wished to study mechanical engineering at university.

31.   Loretta was also undergoing an apprenticeship and had been  offered  a
      place at Swansea University to study  chemical  engineering.  She  has
      made many friends in the UK  and  a  return  to  Ghana  would  have  a
      negative effect on her social life.

32.    Mary  (their  mother)  was  working  as  a  kitchen   associate   for
      Wetherspoons and was supporting the  family  with  the  assistance  of
      Richmond because the Appellant was unable to work.

33.   The Appellants would have to sell their home in the UK. The  Appellant
      claimed, in his oral evidence, that he  was  in  debt  and  would  not
      profit from the sale. However, he had  started  building  a  house  in
      Ghana and he could seek employment there. He stated that he  qualified
      for an army pension. There was insufficient evidence before me to show
      that the adult Appellants could not gain employment on return to Ghana
      and support the family financially. The Appellants had family in Ghana
      and there was insufficient evidence to show that they could not assist
      the Appellants in finding accommodation.

34.   Looking at all the evidence in the round, I find that  it  is  in  the
      best interests of Jennifer and Kelvin to remain with their parents.  I
      find that it is in Jennifer's best interests to remain in  the  UK  to
      complete her A levels. Notwithstanding, I  find  that  Jennifer's  and
      Kelvin's best interests are outweighed by the public interest in  this
      case.

35.   The Appellants came to  the  UK  on  a  temporary  basis  and  had  no
      legitimate expectation that they would be able to remain. They did not
      leave the UK when the Appellant's employment with the  GHC  ended  and
      their leave expired. Instead, they made an application  for  leave  to
      remain, which could not  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  and
      subsequently Jennifer started her A level course.  The  disruption  to
      the education of Kelvin and Jennifer, even at this crucial  stage  for
      Jennifer, and the effect on the family as a whole  does  not  outweigh
      the public interest.

36.   Therefore, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, I  find
      that the Appellants can re-establish themselves in  Ghana.  They  have
      the  ability  to  support  themselves  financially   and   to   obtain
      accommodation. Kelvin and Jennifer can  continue  their  education  in
      school or  at  university.  Their  parents  can  seek  employment  and
      Richmond and Loretta can pursue their chosen careers.

37.   Accordingly, I find that the decision  to  remove  the  Appellants  to
      Ghana is proportionate to the  legitimate  public  end  sought  to  be
      achieved, according to the principles set out in Huang v The Secretary
      of State for the Home Department [2007] UKHL 11.

38.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside  and  remade  as
      follows: The Appellants' appeals against the decisions to remove  them
      to Ghana are dismissed.






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
5th December 2014
