
IAC-AH-VP/SAR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/34433/2013,
IA/34434/2013
     IA/34435/2013, IA/34436/2013
     IA/34437/2013, IA/34438/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court Birmingham               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3rd December 2014                            |On 17th December 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                            AMG (FIRST appellant)
                           AMB (SECOND appellant)
                            MAG (THIRD appellant)
                           SAG (FOURTH appellant)
                            AAG (FIFTH appellant)
                            YAG (SIXTH appellant)
                           (anonymity ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mrs R Manning of Counsel instructed by Rotherham &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Law promulgated on 29th January 2014.

 2. The Appellants are nationals of Libya.  The first and second Appellants
    are married and are the parents of the  remaining  Appellants  who  are
    minors born in 2003, 2005, 2007, and 2010 respectively.

 3. The Appellants had arrived in the United Kingdom on 14th June  2011  as
    medical visitors with leave valid until 25th  November  2011.   Further
    leave to remain was granted outside the Immigration  Rules  because  of
    the conditions  in  Libya,  until  5th  September  2012.   The  current
    applications were made outside the Immigration Rules on  4th  September
    2012, the Appellants relying upon Articles 3 and 8 of the 1950 European
    Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 4. The applications were made based upon the serious medical condition  of
    the fourth Appellant who suffers from Epidermolysis Bullosa which is  a
    severe genetic skin fragility disorder.   It  was  contended  that  the
    fourth Appellant required medical treatment in this country that  would
    not be available in Libya.

 5. The Appellants' case was that prior to entering the United  Kingdom  in
    June 2011, the fourth Appellant had received medical treatment  in  the
    United Kingdom in  2005  and  in  2007,  when  she  was  granted  entry
    clearance as a medical visitor.  A further visit was made in 2010.   It
    was therefore the fourth trip to the United Kingdom,  when  the  family
    arrived in June 2011.  Initially they planned to stay for only a  short
    period, but decided, when in this country, to make an  application  for
    discretionary leave to remain so that the fourth Appellant could obtain
    the appropriate treatment for her condition.

 6. The fourth Appellant's  father,  the  first  Appellant,  had  lost  his
    employment in Libya, and had sold everything including his house to pay
    for medical treatment.

 7. The applications were refused  on  8th  August  2013.   The  Respondent
    considered the applications in relation to family life  under  Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules, and private life under paragraph 276ADE of
    the rules.  The Respondent found that the Immigration Rules  could  not
    be satisfied, and did not consider  that  there  were  any  exceptional
    circumstances, and therefore did not consider  Article  8  outside  the
    rules.

 8. The Appellants' appeals were heard together by Judge Law (the judge) on
    21st January 2014, and although the judge found that it would be in the
    best interests of the fourth Appellant and her siblings, for the  whole
    family to remain in the United Kingdom, bearing in mind the uncertainty
    as to the quality of medical treatment available in Libya, the  appeals
    were dismissed both in relation to Article 3 and Article 8.

 9. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    and permission was granted.

10. At a hearing before me on 22nd September 2014 I found  that  the  judge
    had not erred in  relation  to  Article  3,  and  those  findings  were
    preserved.  I also preserved  the  finding  at  paragraph  35,  of  the
    determination which had not been challenged, that it would  be  in  the
    best interests of the fourth Appellant and her siblings for  the  whole
    family to remain in the United Kingdom.  I concluded that  it  was  not
    clear from the determination that the judge had carried out the correct
    proportionality test regarding Article 8, when considering the  factors
    said to outweigh the best interests of the  children,  and  the  fourth
    Appellant in particular.  I therefore set aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal in relation to Article  8.   Full  details  of  the
    application and the grant of permission, and my reasons for finding  an
    error of law in relation to Article 8 are set out in my decision  dated
    24th September 2014.

11. The hearing was adjourned for further  evidence  to  be  considered  in
    relation to Article 8.

Re-Making the Decision - the Upper Tribunal Hearing 3rd December 2014

12. On 2nd December 2014 the Appellants' solicitors had  served  an  expert
    report upon the Tribunal and the Respondent.  The report is  dated  1st
    December 2014 and prepared by Alison Pargeter.

13. At the commencement of the hearing  Mr  Mills  indicated  that  he  had
    considered that report, and that the Respondent accepted in  the  light
    of the report, that the appeals should be allowed under  Article  8  of
    the 1950 Convention.  Mr Mills accepted that the report confirmed  that
    the fourth Appellant would not have access  to  the  medical  treatment
    that she required if the family were returned to Libya.

14. In my view the concession by Mr Mills was rightly made  and  I  allowed
    the appeals with reference to Article 8 and indicated  that  a  written
    decision would be issued.

15. Mrs Manning applied for fee awards to be made which I indicated was not
    appropriate as the appeals had been allowed based  upon  evidence  that
    was not before the original decision maker.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16.  The  findings  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the   fourth
    Appellant's illness did not reach the high threshold required to amount
    to a breach of Article 3 were preserved, and therefore the issue before
    me related to Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.  It was  common  ground
    that Article 8 should be considered outside the  Immigration  Rules  on
    the facts of this particular case.

17. When  considering  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  it  is
    appropriate to follow the  five  stage  approach  advocated  in  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 which indicates that the following questions  should  be
    considered;

    1.   Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority
         with the exercise of the  applicant's  right  to  respect  for  his
         private or (as the case may be) family life?

    2.   If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity as
         potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

    3.   If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

    4.   If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society  in
         the interests of national security, public safety or  the  economic
         well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others?

    5.   If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate public
         end sought to be achieved?

18. The Appellants have clearly established family life  with  each  other,
    but the Respondent's decision to remove would not interfere  with  that
    family life, as the Appellants would be removed as a family.  The issue
    in this appeal relates to the fourth Appellant's private life, and  the
    need for medical treatment that is available in this country.

19. In considering the five stage Razgar approach,  it  was  accepted  that
    Article 8 was engaged, and in my view the Respondent's decision was  in
    accordance  with  the  law  as  the  Appellants  could  not  meet   the
    Immigration Rules  in  order  to  be  granted  leave  to  remain.   The
    maintenance of  effective  immigration  control  is  necessary  in  the
    interests of the economic well-being of  the  country.   Therefore  the
    question that has to be answered, is whether the Respondent's  decision
    to remove is proportionate.

20. In considering proportionality I take into account section 117B of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  which  confirms  that
    maintenance of effective immigration control is in the public interest.



21. When considering proportionality the best interests of children  are  a
    primary consideration and I set out below paragraph 35  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal determination which confirms the finding that  it  is  in
    the best interests of the children to remain in the United Kingdom;

    "35. Nevertheless, for the purposes of the  section  55  assessment,  I
         find that it would be in the best interests of S and  her  siblings
         for the whole family to remain in the United  Kingdom,  bearing  in
         mind the  uncertainty  as  to  the  quality  of  medical  treatment
         available in Libya."

22. I accept that prior to entering the United Kingdom on 14th  June  2011,
    the fourth  Appellant  had  visited  this  country  on  three  previous
    occasions as a medical visitor.  Details of her medical  condition  are
    set out in a medical report dated 11th December  2013  prepared  by  Dr
    Fiona  Browne  a  consultant  dermatologist  at  Birmingham  Children's
    Hospital.  There  is  an  updated  letter  from  Dr  Browne  dated  8th
    September 2014.  In summary it is confirmed that the  fourth  Appellant
    (S) suffers from Epidermolysis Bullosa, which is a severe genetic  skin
    fragility disorder which will affect her for  the  rest  of  her  life.
    This results in painful blistering of the skin, and the skin lining  of
    the mouth, throat and oesophagus.  This causes  difficulty  eating  and
    swallowing and S is being considered for a gastrostomy tube feeding  in
    order to maintain weight.  She has had to have a dilation procedure  to
    stretch her oesophagus as she was choking on food.

23.  S  receives  specialist  care  from  a  dentist,   gastroenterologist,
    ophthalmologist, a paediatrician, and Dr Browne.  There is  also  input
    from the physiotherapy and occupational therapy teams.  S is  described
    in Dr Browne's initial report as having made great progress.

24. Dr Browne confirms that there is no specialist care for  patients  with
    Epidermolysis Bullosa in Libya and that if S  were  forced  to  return,
    "ultimately she would succumb to her condition in early adult years."

25. In the updated letter dated 8th September 2014 Dr Browne confirms  that
    S has to undergo  daily  painful  dressing  changes  and  regular  pain
    medication, and has experienced swallowing  difficulties  and  choking.
    She continues to struggle to eat and her weight and  nutrition  are  of
    great concern.  She is having increasing problems  with  blistering  of
    the surface of her eyes causing her extreme pain and inability to  open
    her eyes for days at a time.

26. Dr Brown comments that she is aware that a number  of  Libyan  patients
    come privately to the United Kingdom to seek medical treatment  because
    the expertise is not available to them at home.  The  prognosis  for  S
    should she return home is grave.

27. The expert report which was submitted on behalf of  the  Appellants  on
    2nd December 2014 is prepared by  Alison  Pargeter  and  is  dated  1st
    December 2014.  The report is independent, comprehensive, and extremely
    helpful to the Tribunal.  I have no hesitation in accepting the  author
    of the report as an expert in her field.

28. The first section of the report gives details of the health  sector  in
    Libya  under  the  Qadhafi  regime,  while  the  second  section  gives
    information on the health sector following the fall  of  Qadhafi.   The
    third section gives an opinion as to the situation facing S, should she
    return to Libya.

29. In addition  to  reading  the  First-tier  Tribunal  determination,  Ms
    Pargeter was provided with the medical report relating to S, and a Home
    Office Country of Origin Information response  dated  5th  August  2013
    regarding the possibility of treatment for S in Libya.  This  indicated
    that a public hospital and a private clinic would be  able  to  provide
    treatment for S.  The Home Office report indicates that the information
    is limited to the  availability  of  medical  treatment  and  does  not
    provide information on the accessibility of treatment.  The information
    in the report does not purport to be exhaustive.

30. Ms Pargeter's expert report describes Libya's health sector as being in
    a desperate state and struggling to cope with the strains imposed  upon
    it by the ongoing  conflict.   Hospitals  and  medical  facilities  are
    described as being overwhelmed with patients and vulnerable  to  attack
    with the quality of care hampered by staff shortages,  and  a  lack  of
    training and equipment, as well as an absence  of  basic  hygiene.   Ms
    Pargeter confirmed that there are skin specialists  and  dermatologists
    in Libya but she had not been  able  to  identify  any  specialists  in
    Epidermolysis Bullosa and to the best of  her  knowledge  there  is  no
    dedicated medical service for those suffering from that condition.

31. In relation to the public hospital, which is said  in  the  COI  Report
    would be able to provide medical facilities, this is described as being
    allegedly hit during a NATO attack in 2011, and  the  hospital  suffers
    from many of the problems and shortages described in the  earlier  part
    of the expert report.  The hospital is described as  being  subject  to
    the usual shortages and inadequacies and facing problems such  as  lack
    of medical supplies and equipment.

32. In relation to the private clinic it is not clear to what  extent  this
    is equipped to deal with S's condition and it is not operating normally
    because of the security situation.  It is described as operating with a
    skeleton staff, with the majority of the  resident  expatriate  medical
    and nursing staff having left Libya.

33. The expert report confirms that it is probable that S would struggle to
    acquire the medication she needs on a consistent basis as  the  medical
    system,  including  pharmacies,  is  unpredictable  and  vulnerable  to
    disruption and the general security situation is  described  as  highly
    unstable.  Ms Pargeter expresses her opinion that if S were  to  return
    to Libya she would not be able to  access  the  medical  treatment  and
    support that her condition requires, nor would she be  able  to  access
    the same standard of care that she is currently receiving in the UK.

34. The production of the expert report caused Mr Mills to  take  the  view
    that it was appropriate to concede that the appeals should  be  allowed
    under Article 8.  I agree because the weight to be attached to the best
    interests of S, and the need for her to  have  access  to  the  medical
    treatment which  she  depends  upon,  outweighs  the  weight,  in  this
    particular case, to be given to  the  public  interest  in  maintaining
    effective immigration control, and the weight to be given to  the  fact
    that the Immigration Rules cannot be satisfied.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
is set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.  The appeals  are  allowed  in
relation to Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.



Anonymity

I made an anonymity order at the hearing on 22nd September 2014 because  the
third to sixth Appellants are minors.  The order is made  pursuant  to  Rule
14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellants.
Failure to comply with this direction could lead to a contempt of court.



Signed        Date       9th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeals are allowed I have considered whether to make  a  fee  award.
I make no  award.   The  appeals  have  been  allowed  because  of  evidence
produced to the Tribunal that was not produced to the Respondent.



Signed        Date       9th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

