
[pic]
Self-Typed

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/34835/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 4 August 2015                     |On 18 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mr LAHAI KOROMA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Duffy, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr B. Quee, Solicitor, Quee & Mayaaja Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State ("SSHD") appeals to the  Upper  Tribunal  ("UT")
    from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Steer  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on 23 December  2014)  allowing  outright  the  claimant's
    appeal against the decision by the SSHD to refuse to issue him  with  a
    residence card as confirmation of his right to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the extended family member of  an  EEA  national  exercising
    treaty rights here. The First-tier Tribunal ("FTT")  did  not  make  an
    anonymity order, and I do not consider that such an order is  warranted
    for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant is a national of Sierra Leone, whose date of birth  is  15
    April 1985. His sponsor is his sister-in-law who married his brother in
    the UK on 12 February 2012. The claimant entered the UK on  26  October
    2013, and applied for a residence card as a dependent relative  shortly
    thereafter. It is not clear on what basis the claimant gained entry  to
    the UK. There is reference in the papers to the claimant undertaking an
    ACCA course, and so he may have  entered  the  UK  as  a  student.  His
    application for a residence card was refused, and  his  appeal  against
    the refusal was dismissed by Judge Fisher on 23 December 2013. She  was
    not persuaded that the claimant had been dependent on his sister-in-law
    or brother before he came to the UK.

 3. The claimant made a fresh application in June 2014. The SSHD gave brief
    reasons for refusing the claimant's application in September 2014.. She
    referred to Regulation 8(2). He had not shown that he was dependent  on
    his EEA national sponsor in Sierra Leone immediately prior to  entering
    the UK, or that his sister-in-law was in the UK in 2012; or that he had
    been residing with or had been dependent on his sponsor since  arriving
    in the UK.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4.  The  judge  allowed  the  appeal  under  Regulation  8(2).  Given  the
    documentary evidence which had been produced  to  him,  which  was  not
    before Judge Fisher, and given the consistency of the evidence  of  the
    claimant and his two witnesses, he found that  the  claimant  had  been
    dependent on his sister-in-law, who  was  an  EEA  national  exercising
    treaty rights as a self-employed person, from 2010 when she had started
    a relationship with her brother; and that he was now both a  member  of
    her household and dependent upon her.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 5. The SSHD applied for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    arguing that the judge had erred in law in allowing the appeal outright
    as she had not yet considered whether to exercise her discretion  under
    Regulation 17(4) to issue him with a residence card.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 6. On 10 March 2015 Judge Lever granted the SSHD permission to  appeal  on
    the above ground.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

 7. As an extended family member (referred to by  the  shorthand  "OFM"  in
    some of the leading UT authorities) under Regulation 8(2), the claimant
    did not, and does not, have an automatic  entitlement  to  a  residence
    card.

 8. Regulation 17(4) provides that the SSHD may issue a residence  card  to
    an extended family member if two conditions are satisfied.  The  second
    condition is  that,  "in  all  the  circumstances  it  appears  to  the
    Secretary of State appropriate to issue the residence card".  In  order
    to exercise discretion under Regulation 17(4) the SSHD is  required  by
    Regulation 17(5) to "undertake an extensive examination of the personal
    circumstances of the applicant and if he refuses the application  shall
    give reasons justifying the refusal".

 9. The SSHD refused the application on the sole ground that  the  claimant
    had not shown himself to be an OFM, and so he was not  eligible  to  be
    issued with a residence card as an OFM. The SSHD  did  not  purport  to
    exercise the discretion under Regulation 17(4)  to  issue  a  residence
    card, if she deemed it appropriate, to a person who had demonstrated to
    her satisfaction that he was an OFM.

10. So the judge could not allow the appeal outright. The most that he  was
    entitled to do was to allow the appeal on the ground that the  decision
    was not in accordance with the law, "leaving the matter of  whether  to
    exercise this discretion in  the  appellant's  favour  or  not  to  the
    Secretary of State": see Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT
    00340.

The Remaking of the Decision

11. There is no challenge by the SSHD to the judge's  primary  findings  of
    fact. So  the  claimant  has  established  that  he  is  an  OFM  under
    Regulation 8(2). He thereby  meets  the  gateway  requirement  for  the
    exercise of the discretion to issue him with  a  residence  card  under
    Regulation 17(4). Only the SSHD can exercise this discretion. It is not
    necessary or appropriate for me to direct that the judge's findings  of
    fact should be preserved, as Mr Smee invited me  to  do.  The  starting
    point for the exercise of the discretion by the SSHD will be  that  the
    Claimant is eligible to be issued with a residence card. The  SSHD  has
    an unfettered discretion as to whether it is appropriate to  issue  him
    with a residence card.

Conclusion

12. The decision of the FTT contained an error of law, and accordingly  the
    decision is set aside and the following decision  is  substituted:  the
    claimant's appeal  is  allowed  on  the  ground  that  the  refusal  to
    recognise him as an OFM under Regulation 8(2)  was  not  in  accordance
    with the law, and the claimant's application for a residence card as an
    OFM is remitted to the SSHD for the exercise of  her  discretion  under
    Regulation 17(4).

Anonymity

No anonymity order is made.

Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
