





Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/34312/2014



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Manchester                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 22nd September 2017                |On 06th October 2017                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                      Mr Chaudhary Faisal Iqbal Cheema

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                        (no AnoNYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Brown instructed by Arshed & Co Solicitors

For the Respondent :   Mrs Petterson Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mr Chaudhary Faisal Iqbal Cheema date of birth 4th April
    1975  is  a  citizen  of   Pakistan.    Having   considered   all   the
    circumstances, I do not consider it  necessary  to  make  an  anonymity
    direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Simpson promulgated on 5th  December  2016  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department. The Secretary of State  had
    refused the appellant indefinite leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
    on the basis of 10 years continuous lawful  residence  in  the  UK  and
    thereby refused the appellant's application  under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR, family and private life.

 3. By a decision of 17th May 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Gibb  granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   Thus  the  case  appeared
    before me to decide whether there was an error of law in  the  original
    decision. In granting leave Judge Gibb merely stated that  the  grounds
    are arguable.

 4. The first issue raised in the grounds is that the judge failed to  give
    adequate reasons or make clear findings on the  evidence  submitted  to
    establish that the appellant was in the United Kingdom between May 2005
    and May 2008. In essence the appellant was seeking to  assert  that  he
    had been resident in the UK during that time and  as  a  result  period
    there was no break in the continuity of residence.

 5. It has to be noted with regard  to  that  there  had  been  a  previous
    determination in which it had been found that the appellant  have  been
    absent from  the  United  Kingdom  during  the  period  2005  to  2008.
    According to the evidence submitted at that  stage  the  appellant  was
    proved to have left the UK and arrived in Pakistan on the 2nd May 2005.
      Further  documents  produced  established  that  the  appellant   had
    travelled a number of  times  between  Pakistan  and  the  United  Arab
    Emirates during  that  time.  There  were  stamps  in  the  appellant's
    passport to confirm the details. I take that there were  no  stamps  in
    the appellant's passport to indicate that he had entered the UK.

 6. However the issue of whether the appellant had been in the UK  may  not
    be crucial. The appellant not only needed to be  in  the  UK  but  also
    needed to be in the lawfully in the UK.

 7. Examination of the chronology of leave discloses breaks in  the  leave.
    The appellant had first entered the United Kingdom on 16 September 2002
    with leave as a student valid until 31 October  2003.  The  appellant's
    leave was extended on several occasions until the 31 January  2009.  On
    26 January 2009 the appellant made an application for his leave  to  be
    extended but that application was refused as of April  2010.  The  next
    application by the appellant was in May 2012.

 8. With regard to the decision in April 2010 it does not appear that there
    was any appeal against that decision. Thus whatever  can  be  said  the
    appellant did not have lawful leave after April 2010. By that time  the
    appellant had only had lawful leave and therefore lawful  residence  to
    be in the United Kingdom for a period of 8 years.

 9. Whatever the period of residence by the appellant,  the  appellant  was
    not lawfully resident in the UK after  April  2010  and  the  appellant
    could not have acquired ten  years  continuous  lawful  residence.  The
    appellant therefore does not met the requirements of the rule.

10. As referred to above on 24 May 2012 the appellant made  an  application
    for indefinite leave  on  the  basis  of  10  years  continuous  lawful
    residence. The appellant appealed against the refusal. His  appeal  was
    dismissed on 26 March 2013. By 22 January 2014  he  was  appeal  rights
    exhausted.

11. On 12 February 2014 the appellant  submitted  the  current  application
    again on the basis of 10  years  continuous  lawful  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom. For the reasons set out that application cannot succeed
    under the rules. Accordingly there is no material error of law  in  the
    judge's assessment of that part of the decision.

12. The second issue raised by the appellant relates to the approach to  be
    taken with regard to the appellant's medical  condition.  According  to
    the documentation submitted the appellant was diagnosed with  leukaemia
    in early 2013. As acknowledged in the decision the  appellant  has  had
    chemotherapy and  a  bone  marrow  transplant  in  the  UK.  There  are
    references from page 41 onwards to ongoing medical  treatment  and  the
    fact that the appellant is not fit to attend to give  evidence.  It  is
    suggested that he is currently still receiving  chemotherapy,  although
    there is no confirmation of that from the hospital treating him. Whilst
    there are reports from a general practitioner, there do not  appear  to
    be any reports from the hospital that is dealing with the chemotherapy.
    There are any report from that source  as  to  a  future  prognosis  or
    likely future treatment.

13. The judge at the time made reference to the  case  of  GS  (India)  and
    others v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40 and D v UK.  At the same time  as  the
    case was promulgated the decision in the case of Paposhvili  v  Belgium
    (2016) ECtHR 1113 was issued. The approach of the judge in the  instant
    case is not in line with the guidance given in Paposhvili.  Insofar  as
    the judge's decision is not in accord with the  case  of  Paposhvili  I
    find that there is a material error of law in the judgement.

14. With that in mind the parties agreed that the matter would have  to  be
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal for a further hearing to  determine
    the relevant facts pertinent to the case law set out.

15. With that in mind directions had been drafted and are  appended  hereto
    as to what further evidence is to be submitted. The  parties  are  also
    required to lodge skeleton arguments setting out the legal framework to
    be applied by the First-tier Tribunal.

16. In the circumstances I find that there is a material error  of  law  in
    the decision by the First-tier Tribunal. I set the decision  aside  and
    remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision


17. I allow the appeal to the extent that the appeal is  remitted  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

18. I do not make an anonymity direction




Signed      Date 05 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure












Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/34312/2014



Directions

1) The matter is  to  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
rehearing.

2) The respondent  is  within  28  days  of  receiving  the  Upper  Tribunal
decision to provide a skeleton argument setting out the legal  framework  to
be applied in assessing whether or not  the  appellant's  medical  condition
engages Article 3 or Article 8 in light of the decisions  in  the  cases  of
Paposhvili v Belgium 2016 ECtHR 1113 and GS (India) and others v  SSHD  2015
EWCA Civ 40.

3) The appellant within 28 days thereafter is to file and serve any  further
medical evidence and background material  to  be  relied  upon  including  a
chronological  table  of  medical  treatment  received  in  respect  of  his
leukaemia or any other relevant medical condition and of the future  medical
treatment planned to deal with his condition.

4) If the respondent  seeks  to  rely  upon  evidence  with  regard  to  the
availability of treatment in Pakistan, leave is given to  submit  background
evidence to deal with the issue.





Signed      Date 05 October 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

