
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/34226/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 20 January 2016                   |On 5 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MOHAMMAD SHAFIQUE
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy (Senior Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Iqbal (Lincolns Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal  of  Mohammad  Shafique,  a
    citizen of Pakistan born 2 July 1943, against the  decision  to  refuse
    his application  for  further  leave  to  remain  and  to  set  removal
    directions against him under Section 47 of the Immigration  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006 of 31 July 2014.

 2. The application of 20 March 2014 was for  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules. A letter from the  Appellant's  daughter
    Dr Erum Shafique set  out  that  her  father's  coronary  syndrome  had
    deteriorated, due to the solitude, lack of social  support  absent  any
    circle of friends, and the bereavement he  suffered  after  his  wife's
    death in March 2010, all of which left him with  frequent  chest  pains
    and a depressed disposition, meaning he was unable  to  attend  to  his
    dietary needs. Servants were not a solution as  they  were  not  easily
    available and could not be relied upon: robbery and abuse  was  common.
    Her son Bilal had been largely raised by her parents during  his  early
    years in Pakistan, when she herself  had  been  unwell,  and  had  been
    especially attached to his  grandfather.  Her  father's  demeanour  had
    significantly improved having reunited with  his  grandson.  Since  his
    arrival her four year old daughter had become  profoundly  attached  to
    him. She herself suffered from Myasthenia Gravis, an autoimmune disease
    exacerbated by all forms of physical and mental stress.

 3. A letter from Yahya Khalid, the Sponsor's husband,  set  out  that  his
    father-in-law had been visiting the family since his  wife's  death  in
    2011; his loneliness in Pakistan in addition  to  his  multiple  health
    problems were the main reason for this.  His  wife  worried  constantly
    about her father's health which  affected  her  Myasthenia  Gravis  and
    trips to Pakistan to provide the necessary  support  were  incompatible
    with her  childcare  responsibilities  here:  his  relocation  to  this
    country was the only option. He believed it to be the family's  social,
    moral and religious obligation to care for their parents. They co-owned
    their own home and his permanent job as a Specialty  Registrar  in  the
    NHS was a guarantee of their ability to maintain and accommodate.

 4. Supporting evidence included a letter from Dr  Ahmed  of  Ihsan  Mumtaz
    Hospital clinic of December 2013, stating  he  had  known  his  patient
    since 2005, and that during his recent visit to the United  Kingdom  he
    had angina class III and had been advised to take a coronary  angiogram
    which treated severely diseased vessels; he made an uneventful recovery
    and was allowed home in November  2013.  On  7  December  2014  he  was
    readmitted with chest pain and had successful angioplasty.  He  was  an
    elderly widower and had longstanding diabetes with  complications  such
    as coronary artery disease, and lived by himself, finding it  difficult
    to cope with  social  isolation  and  upkeep  with  his  daily  medical
    treatment. His only child, the Sponsor, lived in  the  United  Kingdom,
    and was the only close family member who could realistically look after
    him. He strongly recommended his rehabilitation with his daughter  here
    on medical grounds: she could provide him with  family  support  and  a
    caring environment during the trying times he faced.

 5. The application was refused because, having arrived here as  a  visitor
    the Appellant had no legitimate expectation of  settlement  and  should
    have planned on the basis of returning to  Pakistan;  he  had  received
    medical treatment there and had been fit enough to travel here. He  had
    not needed emergency treatment. His relationships with individuals here
    did not qualify for consideration under Appendix  FM  and  he  had  not
    established he had severed ties  with  Pakistan.  His  daughter's  work
    commitments called into question her claim to be willing  to  care  for
    him such as to avoid his becoming a charge on public funds. He had  not
    evidenced the asserted health problems of  an  elderly  niece  and  her
    husband who had previously cared for him in Pakistan.  His  application
    was additionally refused under the general refusal reasons in  that  he
    had not honoured a declaration as  to  the  intended  duration  of  his
    visit. It was noted that  the  application  arose  wholly  outside  the
    Rules.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal, having directed itself that the  appeal  could
    not succeed applying Article 3 ECHR having regard to the high threshold
    set by the well known precedents such as GS India [2015]  EWCA  Civ  40
    which emphasised the high threshold set by the Strasbourg Court in N  v
    United Kingdom 2008 47 EHRR 885, proceeded to consider the  case  under
    the Immigration Rules, noting that the general refusal reason was  made
    out as, on balance of probabilities, the visit had been  a  contrivance
    to enter the United Kingdom with a view  to  availing  himself  of  the
    superior medical facilities here. His claim to be unable  to  integrate
    in Pakistan was unsuccessful given he had previously negotiated complex
    medical treatment there and had the financial support of  his  daughter
    to help him.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  rejected  his  claim  to  lack
    personal care in Pakistan because of the dangers posed by carers, which
    was unevidenced. There was no independent medical evidence  as  to  his
    unfitness to fly, and his last heart attack had been  some  six  months
    earlier.

 7. As to his claim under Article 8 under the Rules, the Appellant and  the
    Sponsor were close, and  the  Appellant  was  also  close  to  his  two
    grandchildren and son-in-law. Their  relationship  extended  over  many
    years and they had cohabited before the  Sponsor's  migration  to  this
    country; the Appellant had spent some half of the last three years with
    her. The interference with the relationships within the nuclear  family
    unit would plainly be significant were the refusal upheld.

 8. That left proportionality. He spoke fluent English and was not a burden
    on the state regarding accommodation;  financially  the  Sponsor  could
    amply maintain him.  He  was  part  of  an  integrated  British  family
    including breadwinners working hard and contributing  to  public  funds
    via their work for  the  NHS.  Indubitably  there  were  public  policy
    considerations which counted against the application's success: he  had
    no legitimate expectation of settlement when he arrived here, had  been
    a charge on NHS funds, and  his  actions  threatened  effective  border
    control. It would be a disproportionate interference with  family  life
    to expect the Appellant to return to  Pakistan  given  the  length  and
    strength of their relationships and the integration  of  the  Appellant
    into the family here and the  mutual  dependencies  that  ensured  from
    this.

 9. Mr Duffy for the Appellant accepted that this appeal was essentially  a
    perversity challenge, and contended that no reasonable judge could have
    come to these conclusions. The lack of intention to return to  Pakistan
    was a factor which should have received more  significant  weight  than
    had been attributed to it, and there was no evidence of a lack of  care
    abroad. For Mr Shafique it was submitted that the  human  rights  claim
    had been a tenable one given  the  established  relationships  in  this
    country, and it had been perfectly rational for the First-tier Tribunal
    to focus upon them; the public interest as expressed by section 117  of
    the  Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  had  been  fully
    considered.

Findings and reasons

10.  This  was  an  application  and  appeal  pursued  firmly  outside  the
    Immigration Rules. Accordingly the question was essentially whether the
    circumstances were 'compelling' such as to produce 'unjustifiably harsh
    consequences' so as to outweigh the public interest", having regard  to
    principles of proportionality bearing in mind that Aikens LJ  in  MM  &
    Ors [2014] EWCA Civ 985 stated that "in any event it would be necessary
    to apply a 'proportionality  test'  with  regard  to  the  'exceptional
    circumstances' guidance in order to be compatible with  the  Convention
    and in compliance with Huang at [20]." As it was put in  SS  (Congo)  &
    Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387, "it  is  accurate  to  say  that  the  general
    position  ...  is  that  compelling  circumstances  would  need  to  be
    identified to support a claim for grant of LTR outside the new  Rules".
    At [48] the Court goes on:

         "What does matter, however - whether one is dealing with a  section
         of the  Rules  which  constitutes  a  "complete  code"  (as  in  MF
         (Nigeria)) or with a section of the Rules which is not a  "complete
         code" (as in Nagre and the present appeals) - is to  identify,  for
         the purposes of application of Article 8, the degree of  weight  to
         be attached to the expression of public policy in  the  substantive
         part of the Rules in the particular context in question (which will
         not always be the same: hence the guidance we seek to give in  this
         judgment), as well as the other factors relevant to the  Article  8
         balancing exercise in the particular case (which, again,  may  well
         vary from context to context and from case to case)."

11. The First-tier Tribunal gave very clear reasons for its decision, which
    are certainly not flawed by any misdirection of law: as accepted by  Mr
    Duffy, the only challenge which could be mounted was one  that  alleged
    its conclusions were so unreasonable that no reasonable Tribunal  could
    have formed them. The matters upon which he founded  the  Secretary  of
    State's assault were essentially that inadequate weight had been  given
    to factors such as immigration control given the finding that there had
    never been any intention to return abroad at the expiry  of  the  visit
    visa, and given the cost to public funds  that  Mr  Shafique's  medical
    treatment would have occasioned.

12. Classically, questions of weight are for the primary fact-finder.  Here
    the First-tier  Tribunal  expressly  stated  that  this  was  a  finely
    balanced decision which could have been concluded either favourably  or
    adversely to Mr Shafique. The two public interest  factors  with  which
    the Home Office takes issue were expressly  identified:  it  cannot  be
    said that  they  were  overlooked.  The  statutory  criteria  by  which
    Parliament has articulated a distinct expression of the public interest
    were overtly  attributed  weight,  as  were  other  factors  which  are
    relevant given the clear policy position that can be  seen  within  the
    Immigration Rules generally, which stress the need for visitors to hold
    an intention to depart at the expiry  of  their  authorised  period  of
    stay, and aim generally to protect public funds. There was no source of
    alternative care readily  identifiable  from  the  available  evidence,
    particularly   given   the   emotional   proximity   and   professional
    qualifications of the sponsoring family members in this country.

13. Having identified the  relevant  public  interest  considerations,  the
    First-tier Tribunal found that other factors present in the case,  such
    as the close bond of the  family  unit  and  the  Appellant's  age  and
    vulnerability,  carried  the  day  for  the  family's  collective  life
    notwithstanding certain public interest factors pointing in  the  other
    direction. So both the requirements of statute and the enjoinder in  SS
    (Congo) to have regard to policies expressed by the Rules were  loyally
    followed. The Tribunal was clearly aware of the general position  under
    the Rules that adult dependent relative applications should be  pursued
    from abroad, but found that there was a compelling case to depart  from
    the norm here. An appeal based on perversity grounds must reach a  high
    threshold to succeed, and given the detailed  reasoning  here  and  the
    impeccable balancing exercise, I do not consider that any error of  law
    has been made out here.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law.

    The appeal is dismissed


[pic]
Signed:     Date: 20 January 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
