
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/34154/2015
     IA/34155/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 February 2018                           |On 16 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                   ms raa
                                     aje
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr O Yekinni, Solicitor, instructed by Supreme
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The first appellant was born on [ ] 1981 and is a citizen  of  Nigeria.
    The second appellant, who was born in the United Kingdom on [  ]  2007,
    is the first appellant's son and is also a  citizen  of  Nigeria.   The
    first appellant claims to have entered the  United  Kingdom  in  August
    2003 with her ex-partner who is the  second  appellant's  father.   The
    first and second appellants made an application for leave to remain  in
    the United  Kingdom  on  26  March  2008  on  Article  8  grounds.  The
    respondent  refused  the  appellants'  applications  because   it   was
    considered that the appellants did not meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and that there were no circumstances outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules under Article 8 that would warrant a grant  of  leave
    to remain.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellants appealed against the respondent's decision to the First-
    tier Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated on 20  June  2017  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge P S Aujla dismissed the appellants' appeals.  The  judge
    considered that it would be reasonable  for  the  second  appellant  to
    leave the United Kingdom with the first appellant and that it would  be
    proportionate for the first appellant to be  removed  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellants applied for permission to appeal  against  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision  and  on  14  December  2017  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge I D Boyes granted permission to appeal.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

Submissions

 4. The grounds of appeal assert that there were a number of errors made by
    the judge.  It is asserted that the judge does not  specifically  refer
    to Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
    (the '2002  Act').   This  is  a  significant  provision  which  places
    qualifying  children  in   a   special   category.    Section   117B(6)
    specifically states that it is not in the  public  interest  to  remove
    parents of qualifying children.  The judge materially erred in  failing
    to recognise what is and what is not in the public interest  under  the
    statutory provisions.  The judge does not have regard to  the  case  of
    Azimi-Moayed and Others (decisions affecting children; onward  appeals)
    Iran [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) and has not had regard to the  factors  that
    should be taken into consideration when considering the best  interests
    of  children.   The  judge  failed  to  consider  and  apply  paragraph
    276ADE(iv) in respect of the appellant and  her  child  and  failed  to
    appreciate that the Rules focus on length of  residence  and  therefore
    the longer a child spends above the seven year benchmark  the  stronger
    their ties must be and the  stronger  the  justification  must  be  for
    disrupting their life.

 5. The judge  erred  in  credibility  findings.   The  reasons  given  for
    rejecting the evidence of the appellant is unsustainable  and  arguably
    irrational given the guidance in MK (duty  to  give  reasons)  Pakistan
    [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC).  The judge does not give  adequate  reasons  for
    the adverse credibility findings.  The judge erred in failing  to  have
    regard to the factors at paragraph 35 of EV (Philippines) and Others  v
    Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874.
    Paragraph  276ADE(vi),  namely  the  very  significant   obstacles   to
    integration in respect of the appellant and her minor  child,  has  not
    been considered.  The judge has erred  in  concluding  that  the  Rules
    cater for all the Article 8 issues and therefore there is  no  need  to
    consider Article 8  outside  of  the  Rules.   Reliance  is  placed  on
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  SS  (Congo)  and  Others
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387 which concluded that there needed to be an  Article
    8 assessment outside the Rules.

 6. The judge errs by concluding that because the parent is  being  removed
    the child can as well.  The issue under 276ADE and 117B(6)  is  whether
    it is reasonable for the child to relocate.  The focus must be  on  the
    child first.  The judge has essentially put the cart before  the  horse
    and has failed to justify why it is reasonable that the child's private
    life and ties in the UK can be disrupted and for the child to relocate.
     The judge fails to recognise that removing the appellant would make  a
    nonsense of the British Nationality Act 1981 which allows a child  born
    in the UK to register as a British national at the age of  10.   It  is
    also asserted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision is contrary
    to the principle of natural  justice.   He  does  not  appear  to  have
    exercised the  judicial  power  and  capacity  as  an  independent  and
    impartial decision-maker.  The decision taken is largely based on a one-
    sided story.

 7. At the hearing Mr Yekinni relied on the grounds of appeal.

 8. Ms Everett submitted that the findings regarding the second  appellant,
    although quite brief, are not fatal to an adequate determination.   The
    grounds of appeal quote case law and  policy  on  qualifying  children.
    Although  these  are  serious  issues  all  the   grounds   are   quite
    generalised.  The judge did look at whether or not  it  was  reasonable
    for the second appellant to leave  the  United  Kingdom.   The  grounds
    appear to suggest that it could never be reasonable where a child is  a
    qualifying child.  That clearly cannot be right.  She  submitted  there
    is nothing perverse in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.   It  cannot
    be right that once a child is a qualifying child that is the end of the
    matter.  In this case the judge has considered a number of  factors  at
    paragraph 35 including the child's age, his  level  of  education,  the
    fact that instruction in Nigeria is in English and that it was free  up
    to the age of 15.  The judge considered whether he  would  be  able  to
    assimilate into the Nigerian education  system.   The  judge  correctly
    considered the position of the first appellant  because  she  would  be
    able to assist  the  second  appellant  in  integrating  into  life  in
    Nigeria.  She submitted that it is not correct that the  judge  has  to
    justify why it is reasonable.   The  burden  is  on  the  appellant  to
    demonstrate why return or removal would be unreasonable.  There were no
    particular circumstances provided as to why it would be unreasonable in
    this case.  Rather, the appellants are merely stating  that  the  judge
    has erred without providing any factors that ought to have  been  taken
    into consideration but which were not or factors that were  taken  into
    consideration which ought not to have been.

 9. Mr Yekinni in reply said that the second  appellant  has  now  made  an
    application  for  naturalisation,  however  that  has  not   yet   been
    determined.  He submitted that there were insufficient reasons  in  the
    decision which should show an appellant why they had lost their case.

Discussion

10. The First-tier Tribunal decision set out the background to the case and
    the issues to be decided. The appellant's  representative  stated  that
    the first appellant was relying on paragraph EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  of
    HC395 and the only issue was whether it would  be  reasonable  for  the
    second appellant to leave the UK. The first appellant was  not  relying
    on paragraph 276ADE.  The  first  appellant  was  not  called  to  give
    evidence. The judge set out various parts of the  evidence  before  him
    and the submissions made. The judge made the following findings:

         "34. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1981.  She came  to  the  United
             Kingdom in August 2003 when she was 22  years  old.   She  was
             born and brought up in Nigeria.  She was educated there.   She
             spent the first 22 years of her  life  there  compared  to  13
             years 10 months in the United Kingdom.  It would be reasonable
             to assume that she had family, relatives  and  friends  there.
             No credible evidence was presented to me to show that she  had
             no family, relatives or  friends  left  in  Nigeria.   In  any
             event, she is a 35-year old woman who is  fit  and  well.   No
             evidence of any serious health problems was placed before  me.
             She has gained experience from residing in the United  Kingdom
             which she could use to find employment  there,  especially  in
             the capital Abuja or Lagos.  She has  resided  in  the  United
             Kingdom unlawfully throughout the period  since  her  arrival.
             Section 117B of the 2002 Act  clearly  applies  in  her  case.
             Taking her circumstances into account cumulatively, I am  left
             in no doubt that it was reasonable and proportionate  for  her
             to be removed from the  United  Kingdom  as  someone  who  had
             flouted the law for a number  of  years.   Her  removal  would
             therefore be fully proportionate.

         35.  I now consider whether it would be reasonable  to  expect  the
             second Appellant to leave the United Kingdom and accompany the
             Appellant  when  she  is  removed  to  Nigeria.   The   second
             Appellant was born on [ ] 2007.  He is therefore 9 years and 9
             months old.  He is still at primary school and  therefore  not
             at a crucial stage of his education.   The  country  material,
             referred to in the decision, clearly stated that the medium of
             instruction in Nigeria was English.  The country material also
             stated that education was free under the age of 15.  He should
             therefore be able to assimilate into  the  Nigerian  education
             system without much difficulty.  He is still  very  young  and
             should be able to make friends at school and socially  outside
             school.  He had no status in the United Kingdom.  I presume he
             is a national of Nigeria as the  son  of  a  Nigerian  mother.
             There should be  no  difficulty  in  the  child  entering  the
             education system after his return to  Nigeria  and  benefiting
             from it.  As I have already noted, the Appellant is a fit  and
             well 35 years old woman.  I see no reason why she  should  not
             be able to provide for the child.  She might even be  able  to
             make contact with the child's father  and  seek  his  support.
             Regardless of that, I find that a young and fit and  well  35-
             year-old mother, who has resided in the United Kingdom for  13
             years and gained experience, should be able to sustain herself
             after her return to Nigeria and  adequately  provide  for  the
             child.

         36.  Having considered the circumstances of the  second  Appellant,
             coupled with those of the Appellant herself, I  find  that  it
             would be reasonable for the  second  Appellant  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom.  I therefore find that the Appellant  did  not
             satisfy all the requirements of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix  FM
             to the Immigration Rules.

         37.  It was not argued on behalf of the Appellant  that  article  8
             should be considered outside the Immigration  Rules.   In  any
             event,  I  am  satisfied  that  there  were   no   exceptional
             circumstances for article  8  to  be  considered  outside  the
             Immigration Rules.

         38.  I have also considered section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship
             and Immigration Act 2009 regarding the best interests  of  the
             second Appellant and his welfare.   I  am  satisfied  that  it
             would be in his best interests to remain with his mother,  his
             sole carer, and accompany her to Nigeria.

         39.  Having considered the evidence in the round,  I  am  satisfied
             that the removal of the Appellant  and  the  second  Appellant
             from  the  United  Kingdom   to   Nigeria   would   be   fully
             proportionate and would not place the United Kingdom in breach
             of its obligations under the 1950 Convention.

         40.  The  appeals  are  dismissed  in  human  rights  grounds  with
             reference to article 8."

11. I will deal with a number of the grounds of  appeal  together,  namely,
    the judge has i) not referred to s117B(6), ii) erred  in  finding  that
    there was no need to consider Article 8 outside the rules, iii)  failed
    to consider paragraph 276ADE, iv) has not had  regard  to  the  factors
    that should be taken  into  consideration  when  considering  the  best
    interests of children v) failed to appreciate that the Rules  focus  on
    length of residence.

12. Paragraph 276ADE was not relied on by the appellant as recorded by  the
    judge. Therefore, there can be no error of law in the judge failing  to
    apply that provision.

13. It is averred by the appellant that s117B(6) specifically  states  that
    it is not in the  public  interest  to  remove  parents  of  qualifying
    children. In this case the judge did not consider Article 8 outside  of
    the Immigration Rules. There would be no error of  law  in  failing  to
    consider s117 in respect of the Immigration Rules - Bossade (ss.117A-D-
    interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT  00415  (IAC).  However,  the
    appellants appeal against the  decision  that  there  was  no  need  to
    consider Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules. At  the  hearing,  as
    set out above, it would appear that the appellant was specifically  not
    relying on Article 8 outside of the Immigration  Rules.  That  is  also
    reflected in the judge's summary of submissions. The appeal was  argued
    on whether or not it was reasonable for the second appellant  to  leave
    the UK.  As there is a child involved I will consider whether it was an
    error of law for the First-tier Tribunal to have found that  there  was
    no need in this case to consider Article 8 outside the Rules.

14. The argument of the appellant is that  the  Immigration  Rules  do  not
    cater for the Article 8 rights of the appellants and reliance is placed
    on  paragraph  29  of  SS  (Congo).  This  paragraph  deals  with   the
    proposition that leave outside the Immigration  Rules  should  only  be
    granted in exceptional circumstances. In Agyarko [2017]  UKSC  11  Lord
    Reed in explaining how a court or tribunal should  consider  whether  a
    refusal of leave to remain was compatible with  Article  8  made  clear
    that the critical issue was generally whether, giving due weight to the
    strength of the public interest in removal, the  article  8  claim  was
    sufficiently strong to outweigh it.  There  is  no  suggestion  of  any
    threshold  to  be  overcome  before  proportionality   can   be   fully
    considered. It is arguable that the judge in this case has  applied  an
    exceptionality threshold test at paragraph 37.  The  question  then  to
    consider in this case is 'Is there a material  error  of  law  in  this
    case'?


15. I have considered the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal.
    I note that the first appellant says in her witness statement that  she
    has had custody and overall care for her child for more than nine years
    and states that her emotionally vulnerable son was  temporarily  placed
    into care due to the abuse suffered at the hands of his father, her ex-
    partner. The skeleton argument states 'She  was  a  victim  of  DV  and
    trafficking'. No supporting evidence of  this  has  been  produced  and
    there is no indication that the  first  appellant  has  any  particular
    problems as a result. There is no evidence that the second appellant is
    currently suffering from any long-term effects  of  having  been  taken
    into care in 2012 or that, for  example,  needs  any  support  for  his
    education, health or development. In the skeleton argument produced for
    the hearing before me and  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  there  are  no
    specific issues identified in relation to  the  second  appellant  that
    indicate that there are any particular factors over and above the  fact
    that he has been in the United Kingdom for over nine years (his  entire
    life) and is attending primary school that  the  judge  ought  to  have
    taken into consideration. There are no specific issues identified  that
    the judge failed to take into account.  No factors were  identified  in
    relation to the first appellant that the judge should have  taken  into
    account in addition to those set out in the decision.


16. The decision is unstructured and the finding at  paragraph  37  is  not
    consistent with the other paragraphs in the decision. The judge has  in
    fact undertaken a proportionality balancing exercise and has considered
    s117B when considering whether it would be proportionate to remove  the
    first appellant. The judge has taken into account the first appellant's
    personal circumstances which essentially are that she has been  in  the
    UK for 13 years  10  months,  there  was  no  evidence  of  any  health
    problems, she was likely to have friends and family in Nigeria and  was
    a fit and healthy 35 year old. There is no other evidence that appeared
    relevant to weigh in the proportionality  exercise  in  favour  of  the
    appellant other than the fact that she has a son.  There  would  be  no
    interference in the family life between the appellant and  her  son  as
    the judge did not consider that there would be any separation and found
    that it was reasonable to expect the second appellant to leave the  UK.
    Therefore, it is difficult to see how taking  this  into  consideration
    would have resulted in a different outcome. The judge  considered  that
    s117B applied and that, as the appellant has been in the UK  unlawfully
    for the entire time, it was proportionate for her to be removed. Giving
    due weight to the strength of  the  public  interest  in  removal,  the
    article 8 claim in this case was not sufficiently strong to outweigh it
    - this finding was open to  the  judge  on  the  facts  of  this  case.
    Although as I set out above there was no error in the judge failing  to
    consider paragraph 276ADE the judge  has  considered  all  the  factors
    relevant to the test of 'very significant obstacles'. On the  facts  of
    this case there could have been no other  conclusion  than  that  there
    were no very significant obstacles to the first appellant reintegrating
    in Nigeria.


17. With regard to s117B(6) the judge does not appear  to  have  considered
    this section. However, the same test applies in s117B(6) as it does  in
    EX.1 and 276ADE(1)(iv) - is it reasonable to expect the child to  leave
    the UK? The same factors should be considered whether applying  117B(6)
    or  EX.1.

18. The judge does have regard to the factors set out in the case of Azimi-
    Moayed and EV (Philippines) regarding reasonableness of leaving the  UK
    and best interest of the second appellant. The judge was aware  of  his
    age and that he has spent the entirety of his life in the UK.  He  took
    into account that he is at  primary  school  and  therefore  not  at  a
    crucial stage of his education,  education  was  free  in  Nigeria  and
    taught in English so he should be able to assimilate into the  Nigerian
    education system, he is still very young and should  be  able  to  make
    friends at school and socially  outside  school,  the  first  appellant
    should be able to sustain herself and adequately provide for  him.  The
    judge having already considered the above factors found that  his  best
    interests were to be cared for by his mother and to return with her  to
    Jamaica.  He  found  that  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the  second
    appellant to leave the UK with his  mother.  The  second  appellant  is
    still a  young  child  and  although  he  will  have  started  to  form
    friendships and will be integrating into society he will  primarily  be
    focused on his mother. The judge took into  account  all  the  relevant
    factors and the findings were open to him on the evidence available.

19. The appellant suggests that removing the second appellant would make  a
    nonsense  of  the  British  Nationality  Act  1981.  This   ground   is
    misconceived. The central issue in this case was whether or not  it  is
    reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the  UK.  That  test  applies
    equally to British Citizen children.

20. The grounds assert that there is a misdirection of fact to approach the
    appellant, his private and family life etc  in  an  unduly  restrictive
    narrow view and the appellant should be given the benefit of the  doubt
    that to a large extent had given accurate details. It is asserted  that
    the tribunal has unduly given weight to immaterial matters. It is  also
    asserted that the tribunal has made a misdirection of law on a material
    matter and that the judge erred in 'her' credibility findings, that the
    reasons given for rejecting the evidence are irrational  and  that  the
    judge does not  give  adequate  reasons  for  the  adverse  credibility
    findings. None of these  grounds  are  particularised  and  no  further
    explanation was provided at the hearing. The judge in this case has not
    made adverse credibility findings. There is no basis for these grounds.

21. There were  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision.

Notice of Decision

The appellants' appeals  are  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  respondent
stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 15 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

