
IAC-CH-AP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/34116/2013
                                                               IA/34120/2013
                                                               IA/34125/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31st October 2014                 |On 12th December 2014                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                   Mr Syed Tauqeer shah (first appellant)
                     mrs mahrukh shah (second appellant)
                    miss rijah ali shah (third appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Dhanji of Counsel instructed by M & K
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This an appeal by the Appellants, against the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Nightingale), promulgated on 20th August  2014  in
    which  she  dismissed  their  appeals  against  the  refusal   of   the
    Respondent, dated 16th July 2013, to refuse to grant further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant to the First Appellant and
    to the remaining Appellants as his dependants.

 2. The Respondent had refused the application under paragraph 322(3) of HC
    395, a discretionary general  ground  of  refusal,  because  the  First
    Appellant had worked when his visa was endorsed "no work".

 3. The Appellant appealed on the  grounds  that  the  Respondent  had  not
    established that he had worked in breach of his visa and further,  that
    the refusal breached family and private life  rights  under  Article  8
    ECHR.

 4. Judge Nightingale dismissed the appeal, finding that the Appellant  had
    worked in breach and rejecting his explanation  that  he  had  done  so
    unwittingly.  The judge considered the Article 8 rights of the  family,
    and took into account the best interests of the  child,  born  on  28th
    January 2007 in the United Kingdom, but concluded  in  the  context  of
    both the Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8  ECHR  with  reference  to
    relevant jurisprudence, the Immigration Rules and the 2014 Act that the
    child's removal in the context of her parents' return to  Pakistan  did
    not breach Article 8.

 5. The Appellants sought permission to appeal on the basis that there  had
    been insufficient consideration of the position of  the  child  in  the
    context of Article 8, as well as the length of residence of  the  First
    Appellant  who  was  only  just  short  of  the  necessary  ten  years'
    continuous residence required by  paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The First Appellant would have achieved the necessary length of
    residence on 8th September 2014, and the judge's determination is dated
    13th August 2014.

 6. Permission was granted on the basis that it was arguable that the judge
    may have failed to give adequate consideration to the child's position.

 7. The points taken  for  the  Appellants  in  the  context  of  the  best
    interests of the child are that inadequate account had  been  taken  of
    the jurisprudence: in EA (Article 8 - best interests of child)  Nigeria
    [2011] UKUT 00315 (IAC) to the point that  the  judge's  findings  that
    the  ability of a child to adapt to a life in another country, in  this
    case Pakistan,  is not a conclusive factor against a  claim  to  remain
    and further, in the case of Azimi-Moayed and Others v  SSHD  (Decisions
    affecting  children:  onward  appeals)  [2013]  UKUT  00197  (IAC)  the
    important factors of  the  child  having  been  born  here  and  having
    inevitably developed social, cultural and educational ties with the  UK
    during her seven years of residence,  and that   educational  stability
    meant that she should stay here.   She is currently attending a British
    school and can only read and write in English, being unable to read  or
    write in Urdu.  This would adversely impact her  ability  to  attend  a
    school in Pakistan and her parents would be unable  to  afford  private
    schooling so as  to  be  able  to  provide  schooling  in  the  English
    language.  The submission was  to  the  point  that  the  child's  best
    interests would be served "only" by her remaining in the  UK  with  her
    family.

 8. In addition the overall Article 8 exercise was not couched in terms  of
    the questions Razgar, and the  judge, when assessing  the  position  in
    the round, failed to take into account the length of residence  of  the
    First Appellant who if he had been here a few more  months  would  have
    met the  10 year residence  requirements   for  Rule  276B.  Length  of
    residence was a weighty factor which should have counted positively  in
    the round.

 9. In the context of parents who, as in this case it is conceded, have  no
    basis to remain under the Rules, it is entirely  reasonable  to  expect
    their  child  to  go  to  Pakistan  with  her  parents  absent   strong
    countervailing arguments  concerning  her  best  interests.  The  Judge
    correctly self directed, referring to both the cases relied upon before
    me.  The conclusions the judge reached are not counter to either  case.
    The issues were for her to decide. The   judge found that it is plainly
    in the child's best interest to be with  her  parents  and,  whilst  in
    broad terms, it can be said that this 7 year old child will suffer some
    disruption in her education  as  a  result  of  the  change,  that  was
    insufficient to undermine the overall position that she would be better
    off with her  parents,  wherever  they  were.  The  factors  raised  to
    militate against removal did not outweigh the strong weight to be given
    to the need to maintain immigration control. In the specific context of
    this case the Appellant had breached the  conditions  attached  to  his
    visa in a manner in which the judge concluded,  meant  that  discretion
    should not be exercised in his favour.  That  was  a  matter  that  was
    bound to factor into the overall consideration of the position of these
    Appellants, indeed I note that it is also a matter which in  the  event
    that the Appellant had achieved the ten year residence may  well  still
    have militated against the grant of leave to remain on the basis of his
    long residence.

10. The Appellants' second and  related  point  concerning  paragraph  276B
    started from the incorrect premise that the only issues  is  length  of
    residence, it is not, either in terms of the rules or Article  8  ECHR.
    The judge took into account the length of residence and no error of law
    is revealed by the ground.

11. I find that the judge  has  given  an  adequate  consideration  to  the
    position of the child and the family and private  life  of  the  family
    unit as a whole.  Although the case of EV (Philippines)  and  Others  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  874  was  not  before  the  judge,  the  judge's
    consideration  and  conclusions  are  entirely  consistent  with   that
    jurisprudence.

Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal reveals no  material  error  of
    law requiring it to be set aside and the decision dismissing the appeal
    on all grounds stands.

13. No anonymity direction has been previously made, and no request for  an
    order was made to me. I see no reason to make one.



Signed        Date 11th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD
I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed            Date 11th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


