

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/34948/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |            Decision & Reasons        |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 15 January 2018                    |            On 01 February 2018       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                               md rafizul alam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Price of Counsel, instructed by Prime Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, born on 1 November 1970,  appeals
    with permission against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Amin, who in a determination promulgated on 15  March  2017,  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State  to
    refuse to grant him leave to remain on both human rights grounds and on
    immigration grounds, under the long residence  provisions.   There  has
    been no challenge to the judge's findings that the  appellant  did  not
    qualify for leave to remain under the Immigration Rules.

2.   In considering the appellant's claim under Article 8  the  judge  noted
    that  the  respondent  had  not  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a
    relationship with a child who was under 18 who was in Britain and was a
    British citizen, or had lived in the UK continuously for at least seven
    years preceding the date of application, and furthermore did not accept
    that his relationship with the sponsor was genuine and  subsisting,  or
    that they intended to live together permanently in the United  Kingdom.
    Moreover, it was not considered there are any exceptional circumstances
    relating to the appellant  or  his  wider  family  members  that  would
    warrant a grant of leave to remain.

3.   The appellant claimed that he had private  and  family  life  with  his
    partner, Ms  Mozna  Begum  and  her  three  children  from  a  previous
    relationship.  His initial claim was that he had stayed with her  since
    2008.  The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant, Ms Mozna Begum
    and one of Ms Begum's daughters.  In paragraph 16 onwards  he  set  out
    his findings and conclusions.  The appellant's evidence was that he had
    met Ms Begum in 2008 and that he had lived with her since then but then
    he changed his evidence to claim that he had started living with her in
    2014.  She has two children, the third of whom is 14 years old.   There
    were no details of any way in which the appellant was involved with the
    upbringing of that child and that child was not named in his  evidence.
    The judge found that that was a significant factor as the appellant had
    claimed that he has private and family life with  his  "step-children".
    There was a discrepancy in the evidence between the  appellant  and  Ms
    Begum in that he had said that he had lived with her  since  2008  when
    she had said that they had  started  living  together  in  2014.   They
    asserted that they had entered into an Islamic marriage in 2014 but the
    judge said that there was no confirmation of that before him.  Ms Price
    argued before  me  that  the  Islamic  marriage  certificate  had  been
    available to the judge but had not been placed before him.

4.   The judge stated he did not find that the appellant  was  credible  and
    stated that he had  not  seen  any  evidence  of  any  money  that  the
    appellant had given to the children and said that  neither  he  nor  Ms
    Begum had made any mention of his providing any  financial  support  to
    the family.  He did accept, however, that the appellant  and  Ms  Begum
    had been in a relationship since 2014 but stated that it was short  and
    one he had believed was entered into for the purpose of stabilising his
    immigration status.  He stated he did not believe  that  they  had  any
    intention of living together "in the near future".

5.   He placed weight on the fact that when making an  application  in  2012
    for leave to remain on human rights grounds the judge had not mentioned
    Ms Begum.  He went on to say he did not accept the appellant  had  been
    supporting the children financially as he had claimed.

6.   While he accepted that the removal of  the  appellant  would  interfere
    with the family and private life which he had with  Ms  Begum  and  her
    children he did not consider that removal was disproportionate.  As  he
    pointed out the appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and in any event the  youngest  child  would  not  be
    expected to leave the United Kingdom as he has his  mother  in  Britain
    and the appellant is not the biological father.  The  judge  said  that
    even if he accepted that the appellant's relationship with his  partner
    was genuine there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life  with
    his partner continuing outside Britain.  He referred to Section 117B of
    the 2002 Act and stated that he felt that the appellant fell far  short
    of  demonstrating  that  his  circumstances  were  exceptional   and/or
    compelling.  He referred to the fact that the appellant had  overstayed
    since 2003.  He therefore dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.

7.   The grounds of appeal refer largely to the issue  of  family  life  and
    the relationship between the appellant  and  Ms  Begum's  children  and
    their best interests.  They also asserted that the judge had been wrong
    to say that there was no evidence that the appellant had supported  the
    children.

8.   Although permission was  refused  in  the  First-tier,  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Gill granted permission in the following terms:-

         "It is arguable that Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Amin may have
         erred in law by  overlooking  potentially  relevant  evidence  (for
         example, the evidence of the  appellant  and  Mrs  Begum  in  their
         witness statements that the appellant provided  financial  support)
         at para 20 where she said that "the appellant  and  Ms  Begum  have
         made no mention of providing any financial support to the family"."

9.   At the hearing of the appeal before me Ms Price stated that  the  judge
    had erred in not finding that there was a subsisting relationship.  She
    referred to various documents in the  bundle  dating  from  2014  which
    included an electricity bill addressed to both  the  appellant  and  Ms
    Begum.  She also referred to the Muslim marriage certificate  dated  10
    January 2014 and stated that it had not been  submitted  to  the  court
    because the respondent had not been represented at  the  hearing.   She
    stated that given the fact that Ms Begum had a child  here  there  were
    insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  relationship  carrying  on  abroad.
    Moreover, there was evidence of financial support in the statements  of
    the appellant and Ms Begum and the judge had erred  in  his  conclusion
    that there was not financial support  and  overall  had  erred  in  his
    consideration of the proportionality of the decision.  Having  accepted
    that the appellant had private and family  life  here  he  should  have
    found there were insurmountable obstacles to the relationship  carrying
    on abroad, particularly given the fact that there was a child under  18
    years of age.  She referred to the judgment of  the  Supreme  Court  in
    Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11, where at paragraph 15 it was pointed  out  that
    where an applicant is in Britain unlawfully he is  entitled  to  remain
    only temporarily.  The significance of that consideration  depended  on
    what the outcome of  immigration  control  might  otherwise  be.   That
    decision drew a distinction between somebody who would be deported as a
    foreign criminal and someone who, even if they  had  been  residing  in
    Britain unlawfully, would have been entitled to leave to enter  because
    they met the requirements of the Rules.

10.  Ms Price went on to argue that there  was  evidence  now  in  existence
    indicating that Ms Begum was in receipt of  benefits  such  that  would
    mean that the appellant would not be required  to  meet  the  financial
    requirements of the Rules.

11.  In reply Ms Pal referred to the various discrepancies in the  case  and
    stated there was evidence that Ms  Begum  did  not  speak  English  and
    therefore it was not clear how she had been able to give the  statement
    which supported the appellant's claim.  She stated that the  judge  had
    erred in that she should have said that this was merely an issue of his
    private life but she asked me to find that there was no material  error
    of law in the determination.

Discussion

12.  I consider that there is no material error of law in the  determination
    of the immigration judge.  The reality is that he was entitled to refer
    to discrepancies in the evidence regarding how long the  appellant  had
    lived with Ms Begum.  More importantly, however,  he  was  entitled  to
    place weight on the fact that when  the  appellant  had  made  a  human
    rights application in 2012 there had been no mention  of  Ms  Begum  as
    being a reason why the appellant should have been allowed to remain  on
    human rights grounds.  Such an assertion would surely  have  been  made
    whether or not the appellant was living with Ms Begum or merely, as  is
    now argued, was in a relationship with her which eventually  culminated
    in their marriage and living together in 2014.  Moreover,  the  reality
    is that this is an appellant who has built up his  private  life  at  a
    time when he did not have leave to remain  in  Britain  and  under  the
    provisions of Section 117B that is an important  factor  to  take  into
    account.  The appellant would not meet the requirements  for  leave  to
    enter.  There is nothing to indicate that he  could  meet  the  English
    language requirement and clearly there is nothing to indicate  that  he
    would meet the maintenance requirements.  I am  aware  that  there  are
    letters from Ms Begum's doctor suggesting that  the  appellant  is  her
    carer and that therefore he is a necessary support for her  here.   But
    there was nothing before the judge to indicate that she  was  incapable
    of managing her own life here.  I consider the  judge  was  correct  to
    find that there is nothing exceptional  and  compelling  in  this  case
    which would  mean  that  the  removal  of  the  appellant  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with his rights under Article  8  of  the
    ECHR and that the appellant should be allowed to  remain  here  outside
    the Immigration Rules.

13.  I would add that if it is the case that  the  appellant  would  qualify
    for leave to remain as a spouse  because  the  maintenance  requirement
    would be waived because of Ms Begum's health  then  that  is  a  matter
    which, along with the  marriage  certificate,  should  be  put  to  the
    respondent.  If the appellant wishes to make  such  an  application  or
    indeed to get married and then make such an application then that would
    be a matter for him.  As it stands I consider that  the  judge  reached
    findings of fact and conclusions which were fully open to  him  on  the
    evidence and therefore I find that his determination stand.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds and  under  the  Immigration
Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed[pic]                         Date: 18 January 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
