
IAC-TH-LW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34785/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25 June 2015                     |On 2 July 2015                        |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mrs Rousonara begum
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. E. Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. N. Hasan, Solicitor.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known, before the First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    the Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and Mrs Begum as
    "the appellant".

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 15 January 1978.   She
    appealed against a decision of the respondent dated 5  August  2013  to
    refuse to vary leave to remain in the United Kingdom and to remove  her
    by way of directions under Section 47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.   Her appeal came before Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Adio who in a decision promulgated on 9 March 2015 allowed  it
    to the limited extent that the decision was not in accordance with  the
    law and he remitted the appeal back to  the  respondent  for  a  lawful
    decision to be made.

 3. The respondent sought permission to appeal.  It was granted by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Osborne on 6 May  2015.   His  reasons  for  so
    doing are as follows:-

         "1.  The grounds seek permission to appeal a decision  and  reasons
             of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Adio  who  in  a  decision  and
             reasons promulgated  9  March  2015  allowed  the  Appellant's
             appeal for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis
             that the Respondent's decision is not in accordance  with  the
             law.

         2.   The grounds assert that the Judge erred in  finding  that  the
             decision is not in accordance with the law.   The  application
             was made on 6 July 2012 on the basis that the Appellant wished
             to stay in the UK as the carer of her aunt.   The  application
             was refused on 5 August 2013.  At the date of the hearing  the
             Appellant was residing with a partner and had recently  had  a
             child.  The representative submitted that the  decision  of  5
             August 2013 was not in accordance with the  law  as  the  best
             interests of the child had not been  considered.   A  decision
             can only be unlawful for a failure to consider Section  55  if
             the Secretary of State knew or ought to have  known  that  the
             decision might affect children in the United  Kingdom  as  per
             Behary v SSHD [2013] EWHC 3575 (Admin) at [39].  The  case  of
             JO and Others (Section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 517  (IAC)
             provides nothing to contradict Behary.

         3.   The judgment of Judge Grubb in Behary at [39] confirms that as
             a minimum the  Section  55  duty  can  only  arise  where  the
             Secretary of State knows (or perhaps ought to know)  that  the
             immigration decision may affect children in the UK.   Were  it
             otherwise, Parliament would  be  requiring  the  Secretary  of
             State to engage in a wholly futile exercise with  no  relevant
             factual basis to trigger the need for  the  assessment.   That
             cannot have been Parliament's intention.  Merely to  establish
             that a relevant 'function' falling within  Section  55  is  in
             play, does not necessarily resolve whether  the  duty  is,  in
             fact, triggered.

             It cannot be otherwise than in accordance with the law for the
             Secretary of State not to assess the best interests of a child
             pursuant to Section 55 if there was no reason to believe  that
             such a child existed or was due to be born.  In  that  context
             the Section 55  duty  as  per  JO  and  Others  had  not  been
             triggered (to use Judge Grubb's term).  In that context it  is
             at least arguable that the Judge should not have  allowed  the
             appeal on the basis that he did and that as there had  been  a
             change of circumstances (the birth of a child) it was a matter
             for the Appellant to make a new application on behalf of  that
             child.

         4.   As this arguable error of law has  been  identified,  all  the
             issues raised in the grounds are arguable."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me today.   Both  representatives  were  in
    agreement that the judge  had  materially  erred  as  asserted  in  the
    respondent's grounds.  He had failed to appreciate that the Section  55
    duty could only arise where the Secretary of State  knows  (or  perhaps
    ought to know) that the immigration decision may affect children in the
    United Kingdom.  Plainly here that was the position.

 5. I share the analysis of the  two  representatives.   I  find  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and  has  to
    be set aside in its entirety.  All parties were  agreed,  that  in  the
    circumstances, it was appropriate for the appeal to be  considered  and
    all matters decided afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr. Hasan is to
    provide the respondent with all materials in relation to any additional
    grounds so that that too can be decided by the respondent ahead of  the
    next hearing and thereby  enabling  all  issues  in  relation  to  this
    particular appellant to be considered, if needs be, at one hearing.

Decision

 6. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.   The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh,
    pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunal Courts and  Enforcement
    Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v), before  any  judge  aside  from
    Judge Adio.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 1 July 2015.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
