

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
IA/34681/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated               |
|On 12 March 2014                            |On 20 March 2014          |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                              Mariam Shubitidze
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

For the appellant:           Mr D Sills, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.       This case comes before the Upper Tribunal following the grant of
      permission to appeal on  30  January  2014  by  Designated  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Murray in respect of the  determination  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge M A Khan who dismissed this appeal on 10 January  2014.



   2.       The appellant, a Georgian national born on 7 May 1993,  made  an
      in country application under the ten year family route, as the  mother
      of a British child and on Article 8  grounds.  When  her  appeal  came
      before Judge  Khan,  it  was  determined  under  the  entry  clearance
      provisions and on this basis  permission  to  appeal  was  sought  and
      granted. Other criticisms of the determination were also made  and  at
      the hearing before me, which the appellant attended, Mr Sills expanded
      on his grounds.

   3.       He pointed out that not only  did  the  judge  apply  the  wrong
      rules, but he also made several typographical errors and made findings
      that were unsupported by the evidence. He did  not  need  to  go  into
      further details in his submissions as Mr Tarlow readily conceded  that
      the  application  of  the  incorrect  rules  resulted  in   a   flawed
      determination.

Findings and Conclusions

   4.       There is little that I need to add to what  was  agreed  between
      the  parties  at  the  hearing  with  respect  to  the  flaws  in  the
      determination.  The  judge  in  at  least  three  paragraphs  of   the
      determination (4, 5 and 33) cited the entry clearance provisions which
      plainly do not apply, this being an in country  application.  I  agree
      with Mr Sills  that  this  misconception  taints  all  the  subsequent
      findings and means that the determination  cannot  stand.  As  stated,
      other criticisms have also been made of the determination  but  having
      found it flawed on the first point, there is no necessity  to  go  any
      further.

   5.       The determination is set aside in its entirety and  no  findings
      are preserved.


Decision

   6.       The First-tier Tribunal Judge made errors of law.  I  set  aside
      the determination and remit the appeal for hearing afresh  by  another
      judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

      Signed:





      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


      13 March 2014



