
IAC-BH-PMP-V1
                                    [pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34486/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7th January 2015                    |On 16th January 2015         |
|                                       |                             |

                                   Before

             DESIGNATED JUDGE OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL COATES


                                   Between

                           MISS PHATTRA PHIROMNAM
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes instructed by Cartwright King Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Thailand born on 2nd December 1981.   She
    has appealed against the Respondent's decision made on 20th August 2014
    to refuse to vary leave to remain in the United Kingdom and  to  remove
    by way of directions under Section 47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The Appellant was present at the appeal  hearing.   She  speaks  fluent
    English and did not require  an  interpreter.   Representation  was  as
    mentioned above.

 3. I heard oral evidence from the Appellant  and  one  witness.   I  heard
    submissions from both representatives and I have taken into account the
    following documents:

      i) The Respondent's bundle.

     ii) A paginated and  indexed  bundle  of  documents  submitted  by  the
         Appellant's representatives.

    iii) Home Office PBS evidential flexibility guidance.

     iv) Skeleton argument on behalf of the Appellant.

 4. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now give  with
    my reasons.

 5. In immigration appeals the burden of proof is on the Appellant and  the
    standard required is a balance of probabilities.  As  this  is  an  in-
    country appeal I able to take into account matters appertaining  up  to
    and including the date of the hearing.

 6. The Appellant's immigration history shows that she  first  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 19th September 2007 with entry  clearance  conferring
    leave to enter until 31st October 2009 as a student.   On  17th  August
    2009 the Appellant was granted leave to remain until 17th  August  2011
    as a Tier 1 (Post-Study) Migrant.  On 4th July 2011 the  Appellant  was
    granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom until 18th August 2014 as
    a Tier 2 (General) Migrant.

 7. The Respondent's reasons for refusing  the  application  which  is  the
    subject of this appeal are set out in a Home Office letter  dated  20th
    August 2014.  The application was  considered  under  the  points-based
    system  and  the  Appellant  was  awarded  20  points  as  claimed  for
    appropriate salary; she was awarded 10 points as claimed under Appendix
    B: English language and she was awarded 10 points under Appendix C  for
    maintenance.  The application was refused  because  the  Appellant  was
    awarded no points under Appendix A: attributes  for  sponsorship.   The
    Respondent was not satisfied that the job which she was being sponsored
    for met the minimum required skill level as defined in  Appendix  A  on
    the Codes of Practice.  The certificate of sponsorship stated that  her
    prospective employment most closely corresponds to occupation code 3111
    on the Home Office's Codes of Practice for Sponsors.   This  occupation
    code is not on the list of NQF level 4 occupations, as  stated  in  the
    Codes of Practice.  Therefore, the Appellant did not  qualify  for  the
    NQF 4 level  skill  exemptions  as  laid  out  in  Appendix  A  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  For those reasons no points were awarded in respect
    of sponsorship.

 8.  Detailed  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  submitted  by   the   Appellant's
    representatives by letter dated 29th August 2014.  The grounds  seek  a
    review of the Respondent's decision and point out that the  Appellant's
    Sponsor had chosen code 3111 as they had incorrectly assumed  that  she
    would be able to continue to work for the  same  Sponsor  in  the  same
    occupation as the previous visa had allowed her to do.  As far as  they
    were concerned only a  simple  extension  was  required  to  allow  the
    Appellant to carry on in her present job.  The  grounds  further  point
    out that the Tier 2 Guidance for Sponsors is a highly complex  document
    and was simply misinterpreted by the  Sponsor  who  thought  that  they
    could assign the same SOC code  as  was  used  previously  as  she  was
    carrying on working for  the  same  Sponsor  in  the  same  occupation.
    Clearly this was a mistake on the part of the Appellant's  Sponsor  and
    was no fault of hers.   However,  the  consequences  are  very  serious
    because she now faces removal from the UK.

 9. I do not propose to recite the grounds in further detail at this  stage
    because they are largely repeated in the skeleton argument provided  by
    Mr Vokes on behalf of the Appellant, to which I will refer later.

10. The Appellant was called to give evidence and adopted as her  evidence-
    in-chief her witness statement which is at pages 94 to 98 in the appeal
    bundle.  In summary, the Appellant's case is as follows.

11. The Appellant entered the UK in September 2007 to study for  a  masters
    degree.  She was then granted leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Post-Study)
    Migrant.  In July 2011 she received her  first  Tier  2  visa  and  was
    sponsored by her  current  employer,  Liphook  Equine  Hospital,  as  a
    laboratory technician.  Her visa was  valid  until  August  2014.   The
    Appellant enjoyed her work with the equine hospital.

12. As the Appellant was proposing to extend her visa in the same role with
    the same Sponsor it was  considered  acceptable  to  extend  using  the
    existing code.  The Appellant considers that  she  was  misled  by  the
    guidance because it was not clear that she needed to have  a  different
    SOC code when continuing in the same role with the same employer.

13. The Appellant was shocked  when  she  received  the  decision  refusing
    further leave.  Having  taken  advice,  the  Appellant's  employer  was
    informed that due to the fact that her job was at level 3 prior to  the
    reclassification that the exemption regarding the SOC code change would
    not apply in her case and she should have been looking to do a job at a
    higher level.  Ironically, in February 2014 a job for  a  higher  level
    post was advertised at the practice where the  Appellant  worked.   The
    Appellant did not apply for it at that stage because she was  happy  in
    her present job and did not feel the need to apply.  With  the  benefit
    of hindsight, she  realised  that  had  she  been  informed  about  the
    required skill level she would have started to apply for jobs  such  as
    microbiologist either within her current organisation or elsewhere.

14. The Appellant points out that she has been in the UK  for  seven  years
    and is well settled.   She  thoroughly  enjoys  her  job  and  is  well
    regarded by her employer.  She has a good immigration  record  and  has
    never intentionally breached the Immigration Rules.

15. The Appellant was asked by Mr Vokes to clarify  her  present  situation
    with particular reference to paragraph 9 of her witness statement.   At
    that point in the statement the Appellant claims that many of the  jobs
    which she carries out can be  done  by  microbiologists.   Periodically
    roles become available within the organisation for microbiologists  and
    the Appellant has applied for one such post.  In response to  Counsel's
    question, the Appellant explained that this  application  is  presently
    "on hold" pending the outcome of her immigration appeal.   No  decision
    has as yet been made.

16. I then heard evidence from Ms Carrie Goodbourn who is  the  Appellant's
    employer at Liphook Equine  Hospital.   Ms  Goodbourn  adopted  as  her
    evidence-in-chief her witness statement which is  at  page  99  in  the
    appeal bundle.  In response to supplementary questions from  Mr  Vokes,
    Ms Goodbourn confirmed that the Appellant had used the same code in her
    certificate of sponsorship as that which had applied previously.

17. At paragraph 10 of her witness statement Ms Goodbourn states  that  her
    company always needs experienced microbiologists and they have recently
    advertised for such a position.  They  have  had  some  applicants  and
    intend to interview them at the end of  the  period  of  advertisement.
    The Appellant has also applied and if she  proves  to  be  the  correct
    candidate for the role they would wish to  employ  her.   Ms  Goodbourn
    stated that in her opinion the Appellant is a perfect candidate for the
    role of microbiologist.  She said  that  the  equine  hospital  is  the
    biggest laboratory of its type in  Europe.   New  staff  are  regularly
    required.  They cannot find experienced microbiologists at the  present
    time.  Losing the Appellant as an employee would have a dramatic effect
    on the company.  So far no applicants have come forward who possess all
    the requisite qualifications except for the Appellant.

18. Neither the Appellant nor Ms Goodbourn were challenged by Mrs Aboni  in
    cross-examination.

19. At the end of the evidence, Mrs Aboni's submission  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent was short and succinct.  She relied  upon  the  Respondent's
    reasons for  refusal  letter.   She  said  it  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant and her employer had made a genuine  mistake.   However,  she
    submitted that there was no obligation  on  the  Home  Office  to  make
    further enquiries and that the decision to refuse the  application  was
    justified.

20. For the Appellant, Mr Vokes relied upon his skeleton argument which  is
    equally clear.

21. It is submitted on behalf of the Appellant that  an  inadvertent  error
    had been made in relation to her Tier 2 (General)  Migrant  application
    in that she did not realise, and neither  did  her  employer,  that  to
    merely carry on working as a laboratory technician under code 3111  did
    not qualify her for leave to remain  under  NQF  level  4.   Given  the
    complexity of Tier 2 guidance, and the Codes of Practice, this  was  an
    understandable mistake.  It  is  noted  that  the  Respondent  did  not
    contact the Appellant or her employer to consider  whether  indeed  the
    Appellant's employment had been correctly characterised, or  whether  a
    re-evaluation would show skills equal to NQF level  4.   It  is  argued
    that this appears to be in breach of the policy in respect  of  points-
    based system: evidential flexibility and the necessity of enquiry where
    it is possible that an applicant meets the criteria for leave to remain
    - for if the missing information was provided the Appellant could  have
    succeeded.  There is no evidence that the policy was even considered in
    relation to the application which was made.

22. It occurs to  me  that  in  this  context  the  concept  of  evidential
    fairness, as explained in recent decisions such  as  Rodriguez,  is  of
    relevance.

23. Mr Vokes further argues on behalf of the  Appellant  that  the  refusal
    without enquiry or explanation in  relation  to  the  policy  takes  on
    greater significance as the Appellant does not have the opportunity  to
    correct the matter  within  the  Rules  by  making  another  "in  time"
    application as her leave expired on 18th August 2014 and  the  decision
    under appeal was made on 20th August.   The  Tribunal  is  required  to
    determine any matter raised as a Ground  of  Appeal;  evidence  can  be
    considered as to the  fairness  of  the  decision  taken,  because  the
    question of fairness and the exercise of discretion  was  raised  as  a
    Ground of Appeal.  The Appellant meets the criteria for  microbiologist
    (and indeed had her job been re-valued would have done so at  the  date
    of application) and a resident labour market test by her employer  (now
    undertaken) shows the necessity of her employment by her company.

24. It is submitted that the Appellant's present position is now troubling.
     If required to return to her home country in order to make  a  further
    application for entry clearance as a Tier 2 Migrant, she would have  to
    wait a further twelve months to  do  so  because  of  the  Respondent's
    policy for a "rest period" between applications and so it  is  unlikely
    she could continue to work for her present employers and so the refusal
    would have severe consequences for her.

25. Mr Vokes also points out that the Respondent's bundle  contains  papers
    relating to an entirely separate case, which reinforces the  impression
    that the Appellant's application  had  not  been  properly  considered.
    This is in fact a reference  to  a  matter  which  I  raised  with  the
    representatives at the commencement of the  appeal  hearing  because  I
    noticed that the Respondent's bundle contains  a  reasons  for  refusal
    letter addressed to a Ghanaian applicant who had  applied  for  an  EEA
    residence card.  A  Notice  of  Refusal  to  issue  a  residence  card,
    addressed to the same Ghanaian applicant,  is  also  included.   Whilst
    that is obviously a mistake, it suggests a singular  lack  of  care  in
    preparing the papers for this case.  So far as the documents themselves
    are concerned, I confirm that  I  have  disregarded  them  because  the
    contents were of no relevance whatsoever to this appeal.

26. I agree with Mr Vokes that the question of procedural fairness  in  the
    decision-making process is an emerging area of law before the  Tribunal
    as evidenced by cases such as Rodriguez and Miah, which is mentioned in
    Mr Vokes' skeleton argument.   I  have  concluded  that  principles  of
    fairness and the Respondent's  declared  policy  would  show  that  the
    decision under appeal is procedurally unfair for  the  reasons  of  not
    considering and/or not applying the policy.  I conclude that the appeal
    should be allowed on the basis that the decision is not accordance with
    the law.  It therefore remains outstanding with the  Respondent  for  a
    lawful decision to be taken.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed.

There is no order for anonymity since none has been requested.



Signed        Date 9th January 2015

Judge Coates
Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Even though I have allowed the appeal, I have decided  not  to  make  a  fee
award because there was an error in  the  original  application.   Had  such
error not been made this hearing could have been avoided.



Signed        Date 9th January 2015

Judge Coates
Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
