
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34479/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Upper Tribunal Hearing in Field House|Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 May 2014                                |On 10 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR WALTER RICHAARD MSECHU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    No representative


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.
    I shall refer to the  parties  for  the  sake  of  convenience  as  the
    claimant who is Mr Walter Richaard Msechu and to the appellant  as  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department.

2.   The claimant whose date of birth  is  11  May  1985  is  a  citizen  of
    Tanzania.  The Secretary of State appeals the decision made  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  Trevaskis  in  which  he  allowed  the  appeal  on
    immigration grounds.

Background

3.   On 22 May 2013 the claimant made a combined application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant
    under the points-based system  (PBS)  and  for  a  biometric  residence
    permit (BRP).

4.   On 6 August 2013  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    refused the application under  paragraph  245ZX(c)  with  reference  to
    paragraph 115A of Appendix A and paragraph 245ZX(d) of the  Immigration
    Rules.  With regard to attributes the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules because he did not provide a valid CAS.  As a
    result  of  the  failure  to  meet  the  attributes  requirements   the
    respondent was unable to consider the issue of maintenance (funds).

Immigration History

5.   The claimant first entered the UK on  31  August  2007  with  conferred
    leave to enter as a student from 7 August 2007 until 30 November  2009.
    On 28 January 2010 the appellant was granted leave to remain as a  Tier
    4 (General) Student until 16 April 2012.  On 30 June 2012 the appellant
    was granted leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)  Student  until  31
    October 2012.  His leave was  continued  on  the  same  basis  from  11
    February 2013 until 22 May 2013.  In  support  of  his  application  he
    provided a copy of his previous CAS.

6.   In a determination following a hearing on 4 February 2014 before First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Trevaskis the Tribunal allowed the appeal under the
    Immigration Rules having reached the conclusion that the decision  made
    by the Secretary of State was not in  accordance  with  the  law.   The
    appeal was to be remitted to the respondent  to  apply  the  evidential
    flexibility policy.  The Tribunal heard evidence from the claimant  who
    was not represented who confirmed that he did not have a valid CAS  and
    would not be able to obtain one unless and until he enrolled for a  new
    course.  His dissertation was due to be completed by 5 June 2014.   The
    Tribunal followed the Upper Tribunal decision of Rodriguez (Flexibility
    policy) [2013] UKUT 00042 (IAC) and found  at  [13]  the  Secretary  of
    State should have contacted the appellant to inform him  that  his  CAS
    was not valid and give him time to obtain a new CAS.

Permission to Appeal

7.   Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Pooler  on  15  April  2014.
    His reasons for granting permission were set  out  in  paragraph  4  as
    follows:

         "The grounds make reference to SSHD v Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ  2,
         in which an appeal against the decision of the UT was allowed,  and
         submit that the judge failed to consider  paragraph  245AA  of  the
         Immigration Rules, which incorporated 'flexibility' provisions into
         the Rules.  The application discloses an arguable error of law."

Error of Law Hearing

8.   At the hearing before me Mr Kandola for the  Secretary  of  State  made
    submissions that the judge had erred firstly because he relied  on  the
    Upper Tribunal decision of Rodriguez and made a decision on  the  basis
    that the  Secretary  of  State  ought  to  give  the  claimant  further
    opportunity in order to produce a valid CAS.  However the Tribunal  had
    heard evidence from the claimant that he had no valid CAS and would not
    be able to obtain the same until he proceeded on a new course.

9.   His second submission was that in any event the Court  of  Appeal  have
    now declared the law in Rodriguez and the Upper Tribunal  decision  has
    been overturned.  The Section 47 removal decision  was  valid  and  the
    claimant would not be able to meet the requirements of Article 8  under
    the new Rules.

10.  Mr Msechu responded by stating that  he  was  currently  finishing  his
    dissertation which had  to  be  submitted  on  5  June  2014.   He  was
    receiving supervision from his university and  if  he  were  unable  to
    finish the dissertation it would be a complete waste of his  resources.
    He had  paid  all  of  the  college  fees  and  wanted  to  finish  the
    dissertation.  He was not able to obtain a valid CAS until  he  applied
    for a new course.

Discussion and Decision

11.  I find a material error of law in the determination  before  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Trevaskis.   The  Tribunal  erred  by   applying   the
    principles in Rodriguez as decided by the Upper Tribunal.  The  amended
    Rules under paragraph 245AA(b) and (c)  were  relevant  and  applicable
    from 6 September 2012.  The undisputed position was that  the  claimant
    did not submit a valid CAS with  his  application.   The  claimant  had
    further given evidence before the Tribunal that he would not be able to
    obtain a new CAS unless he enrols for a new course [6].

12.  I entirely agree with the submissions made by Mr Kandola and  the  same
    were not challenged by the claimant who accepted that at  the  time  of
    his application he had no valid CAS which  was  a  requirement  of  the
    Rules.

13.  I am therefore satisfied that the decision taken by  the  Tribunal  was
    wrong in law firstly because the Tribunal wrongly  concluded  that  the
    evidential flexibility policy applied, wrongly concluded that the Upper
    Tribunal decision in Rodriguez applied and ultimately because the Court
    of Appeal judgment  has  overturned  the  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in
    Rodriguez.  The Tribunal  erred  by  way  of  a  misdirection  of  law.
    Accordingly I set aside the determination  and  go  on  to  remake  the
    decision.  I allow the appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department and I remake  the  decision  by  dismissing  the  claimant's
    appeal under the Immigration Rules.






Signed                                  Date 06.06.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


1.   No anonymity order made or requested.

2.   No fee award.






Signed                                  Date 06.06.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


