
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34453/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 October 2017                            |On 14 November 2017           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                mrs yetunde olajumoke akinremi aka osibamurwo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms D Revill, Counsel instructed by Peer & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Walters promulgated on 10 February 2017.  In
    that decision the judge allowed the appeal by the respondent
    (hereinafter "the claimant") against the decision of the Secretary of
    State to refuse her application for leave to remain in the UK on the
    basis of her private and family life.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the claimant, who was born on 19
    October 1963, claims to be a citizen of both the UK and Nigeria who has
    resided in the UK for over 25 years.  On 17 June 2013, on returning to
    the UK from a three week stay in Nigeria, the claimant was informed
    that the British passport in her possession which she sought to rely on
    when entering the UK had been revoked by HM Passport Office because she
    was not the rightful holder.  She was refused leave to enter and
    detained.  The claimant was subsequently released with reporting
    restrictions. She claimed that she is the rightful holder of the
    passport when questioned and maintains this position.

 3. On 18 June 2013 the claimant made a human rights application for leave
    to enter the UK on the basis of her family and private life. In a
    decision dated 19 November 2015 the Secretary of State refused the
    claimant's application.  The key reason for the refusal was that the
    Secretary of State maintains that the claimant sought to rely on a
    British passport and identity which was not hers and consequently is
    unable to satisfy the suitability requirements under the Immigration
    Rules.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appeal came before Judge Walters in the First-tier Tribunal.  At
    the hearing, the Secretary of State applied for an adjournment.  The
    reason for the application was that evidence was missing from the
    Secretary of State's bundle. The evidence in question was a witness
    statement dated 28 May 2015 by Jasmeet Lotey, a civil servant employed
    by HM Passport Office, concerning the passport that was revoked. Only
    the first page of the statement was in the bundle.  This page sets out
    some background information about the passport but gives no information
    about why it was revoked or why it was determined that the claimant is
    not the rightful owner.  The Secretary of State's representative
    understandably wished to rely on the full statement and sought an
    adjournment for it to be obtained.

 5. The judge refused the application on the basis that the Secretary of
    State had already had ample time to prepare the case for trial and had
    been made aware that the statement of Ms Lotey was incomplete.  The
    judge noted that the claimant's solicitors wrote to the Secretary of
    State before the hearing pointing out that the statement was incomplete
    but had not had a response to that letter.

 6. The judge found that the Secretary of State had failed to produce any
    evidence to support its case that the claimant was an imposter and that
    the burden of establishing she was an imposter had not been discharged.



 7. The judge found that the claimant met the requirements of paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii) of the Immigration Rules on the basis of having lived
    continuously in the UK from the age of 26 to the age of 49 a total of
    23 years.  At paragraph 28 of the decision the judge stated that the
    Secretary of State appears to accept this and quoted from paragraph 37
    of the Secretary of State's refusal letter where it is stated as
    follows:

         "Whilst you have submitted numerous documents in relation to your
         claimed length of residence in the United Kingdom due to the fact
         you have previously used deception to gain entry to the United
         Kingdom and have used the identity and passport that did not belong
         to you little weight has been placed on the submitted
         documentation".

Grounds of appeal and submissions

 8. The grounds of appeal argue that the Secretary of State was denied a
    fair hearing by the decision not to adjourn as the consequence of not
    adjourning was that material evidence in the form of a witness
    statement from HM Passport Office was not considered.  A further
    argument put forward in the grounds was that the judge recorded that
    the Secretary of State accepted that the claimant lived continuously in
    the UK for over twenty years when this was never conceded.

 9. Before me, both Mr Singh and Ms Revill focused on the issue of whether
    it was unfair of the judge to fail to adjourn the hearing.

10. Mr Singh argued that the statement in question was highly material and
    the Secretary of State should have been given the necessary time to
    obtain it.

11. Ms Revill argued that the Secretary of State had been treated fairly by
    being given considerable time to prepare its evidence and that it was
    incumbent on the Secretary of State to properly submit evidence in
    support of the claim.  She also added that no evidence had been
    submitted in the present proceedings before the Upper Tribunal to show
    that the Ms Lotey's statement would have made a difference to the
    outcome.

Consideration

12. Failure to accede to an adjournment request can amount to an error of
    law and the relevant question is whether there has been any deprivation
    of an affected party's right to a fair trial. See Nwaigwe (adjournment
    fairness) [2014] UKUT 418 IAC.

13. I am satisfied that the Secretary of State has not been deprived of a
    fair trial in this appeal. On 19 October 2016 the claimant's solicitors
    wrote to the Secretary of State stating, inter alia, that the copy of
    Ms Lotey's statement in the Secretary of State's bundle that had been
    served on them was incomplete.  The Secretary of State therefore had
    over two months before the hearing during which they were on notice
    that their bundle contained an incomplete copy of Ms Lotey's statement.
     This was ample time to file and serve a complete statement.

14. Given that the Secretary of State had sufficient time to prepare for
    the hearing and that she was given unambiguous and timely notice about
    Ms Lotey's statement being incomplete, the decision to proceed did not
    deprive her of a fair hearing.  Fairness required that the Secretary of
    State was given sufficient opportunity to submit evidence to support
    her case, not that the appeal should be adjourned because on the day of
    the hearing her representative realised that key evidence was missing
    even though the Secretary of State had been given notice of this.

15. The grounds of appeal also maintain that the judge erred by mistakenly
    finding that the Secretary of State had accepted that the claimant had
    lived in the UK continuously for over twenty years.  This ground lacks
    merit.  The judge did not say the Secretary of State conceded the
    point. He only stated that the Secretary of State "appears to accept"
    the duration requirement was met.  Given that no arguments were made by
    the Secretary of State to refute the claimant's extensive evidence to
    establish length of residence, this was a reasonable characterisation
    of the Secretary of State's position.  In any event, having looked
    afresh at the claimant's evidence before the First-tier Tribunal
    concerning her length of residence in the UK, I am satisfied that the
    judge was entitled to conclude that the evidence adduced by the
    claimant was adequate to establish that the duration requirement of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) was satisfied.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material error
of law and stands.

No anonymity direction is made.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 10 November 2017              |

