
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34942/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 30 September 2015                          |On 30 September 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                       Miss Ophelia-Bertha Weidenhamer
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr S Walker, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I N Kwocha of K&S Law Solicitors


          DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

     1. In this appeal the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
        appeals against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  allowing  the
        appeal of Miss Weiderhamer ('the claimant') who appealed  against  a
        decision taken on 19 August 2014  refusing  her  application  for  a
        residence card as a confirmation of a right to reside in the  United
        Kingdom as an extended  family  member  of  European  Economic  Area
        ('EEA') National exercising treaty rights in the UK.


   Background Facts


     2. The claimant is a citizen of St Lucia who was born  on  15  November
        1979. On 24  June  2014  she  applied  for  a  Residence  Card.  The
        Secretary of State refused her application on 19  August  2014.  The
        reason for refusal was that the Secretary of State was not satisfied
        that the appellant was a partner of, and in a  durable  relationship
        with, a qualifying EEA national as required by Article 8(5)  of  the
        Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ('the  EEA
        Regulations').


     3. The claimant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
        Tribunal.


The First-tier Tribunal Judge's Decision


     4. In a decision promulgated on 7 May 2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Herbert  OBE  allowed  the  appeal.  The   substantive   issue   for
        determination was whether the appellant satisfied the requirement of
        article 8(5) of the Regulations, namely that  she  was  an  extended
        family member of an EEA national. In this  case  that  would  be  by
        virtue of being a partner of, and in a  durable  relationship  with,
        the sponsor. The judge, having heard evidence from the  sponsor  and
        the claimant and having considered the documentary  evidence,  found
        that the claimant was in a durable  relationship  and  therefore  an
        extended family member of the sponsor and allowed the appeal against
        the refusal to issue a residence card.


Permission to Appeal


     5. The Secretary of  State  applied  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
        permission to appeal against the decision on a single ground, namely
        that the judge should have remitted the case  to  the  Secretary  of
        State  for  consideration  under  Regulation  17(4)   of   the   EEA
        Regulations instead of allowing the appeal outright.  Permission  to
        appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pirotta.


Discussion


     6. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Walker on behalf  of  the
        Secretary of State and Mr Kwocha on behalf of the claimant.
Legal Framework


     7. The relevant provisions of the EEA Regulations provide:
         Regulation 8 (Extended family member)

         (1) In these Regulations "extended family member" means a person
         who is not a family member of an EEA national under regulation
         7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the conditions in paragraph
         (2), (3), (4) or (5).

         ..................

         (5) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
         person is the partner of an EEA national (other than the civil
         partner) and can prove to the decision maker that he is in a
         durable relationship with the EEA national.

         ...

         Regulation 17 (Issue of residence card)

         ...

         (4) The Secretary of State may issue a residence card to an
         extended family member not falling within regulation 7(3) who is
         not an EEA national on application if-

         (a) the relevant EEA national in relation to the extended family
         member is a qualified person or an EEA national with a permanent
         right of residence under regulation 15; and

         (b) in all the circumstances it appears to the Secretary of State
         appropriate to issue the residence card.

         (5) Where the Secretary of State receives an application under
         paragraph (4) he shall undertake an extensive examination of the
         personal circumstances of the applicant and if he refuses the
         application shall give reasons justifying the refusal unless this
         is contrary to the interests of national security.



     8. Mr Walker relied on the grounds of appeal  and  submitted  that  the
        judge ought to  have  remitted  the  matter  to  the  respondent  to
        exercise her discretion with the fact findings in place. The grounds
        of appeal set out that Regulation 17(4) provide that  the  Secretary
        of State has a discretion as to whether or not to issue a  residence
        card. He relied on the case of Ihemedu (OFMs-meaning) Nigeria [2011]
        UKUT 340 (IAC) at paragraph 20. The judge ought to have allowed  the
        appeal only on the basis that it was not in accordance with the law.


     9. Mr  Kwocha  made  submissions  regarding  the  durable  relationship
        findings. He accepted that the Secretary of State had  a  discretion
        as to whether or not to issue a residence permit even if the clamant
        was in a durable relationship.


Error of Law

    10. I find that there was a material error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
        Tribunal  decision.  The  appeal  was  against  a  decision  of  the
        respondent to refuse to issue a residence card. It was that decision
        that was under appeal not merely the reasons for the decision,  i.e.
        that the Secretary of State was not satisfied that the claimant  and
        sponsor were in a durable  relationship.   At  paragraph  2  of  the
        decision the judge records that 'The appellant appeals  against  the
        decision taken on 19 August 2014 to  refuse  to  issue  a  residence
        card...' The judge allowed the appeal.


    11. This difference may not be material in many appeals but it is  clear
        from Regulation 17(4) that the Secretary of State has  a  discretion
        as to whether or not a person is to be  granted  a  residence  card,
        even if found to be an extended family member.




    12. The First-tier Tribunal in the Ihemedu case had made a finding  that
        the claimant was entitled to a residence  card.  The  judge  in  the
        instant case did not make such a finding but by allowing the  appeal
        against the refusal to issue a residence card the judge  effectively
        denied the respondent the opportunity to exercise her discretion and
        consider other  relevant  matters  notwithstanding  the  finding  on
        Regulation 8.  At paragraph 20 of Ihemedu the Upper Tribunal held:
         '..... In exercising that discretion matters  such  as  whether  an
         applicant has entered the UK  lawfully  or  otherwise  are  plainly
         relevant (although not necessarily determinative...). But  in  this
         case the Secretary of State had not yet exercised  that  discretion
         and so the most the IJ was entitled to do was allow the  appeal  as
         being not in accordance with the law leaving the matter of  whether
         to exercise the reg 17(4) discretion in his favour to the Secretary
         of State...'

    13. Accordingly, the judge erred by allowing the  appeal  outright.  The
        proper course was to allow the appeal  on  the  Regulation  8  issue
        leaving the matter of  whether  to  exercise  the  Regulation  17(4)
        discretion in the claimant's favour to the Secretary of State.


Conclusions


    14. There was a material error of law such  that  the  decision  of  the
        First-tier Tribunal is set aside to the extent that the  appeal  was
        allowed in full. The finding of the judge that the appellant was  an
        extended family member of the sponsor and  therefore  satisfied  the
        requirement of article 8(5) of the Regulations is maintained.
    15. Mr Walker asked for the matter to be remitted to  the  Secretary  of
        State for consideration under Regulation 17(4) of the Regulations if
        the appeal was  successful.  In  Greenwood  (Automatic  Deportation:
        Order  of  Events)  [2014]  UKUT  00342  (IAC)  the  Upper  Tribunal
        considered the power of the First-tier Tribunal to 'remit' a  matter
        to the respondent. At paragraph 16 the Upper Tribunal  indicated  as
        follows:
        16.     As I indicated above, there is a third possible error in
        paragraph 23 of the Tribunal's decision. In the second sentence, the
        Tribunal says:

          "Given the fundamental nature of the respondent's error, we remit
          the matter back to the respondent for the error to be remedied".



        17    Ignoring the pleonasm of  "remit  back"  I  think  it  is  in
        general doubtful whether the First-tier Tribunal  has  jurisdiction
        to remit a matter to a decision-maker. It has a power to  allow  or
        dismiss an appeal; and if allowing an appeal it has a power to give
        directions, with which the Secretary of State must comply. It  does
        not formally have the power to quash the decision under appeal, but
        it is well understood that a decision of the Tribunal to the effect
        that the decision was not in accordance with the law  prevents  the
        decision-maker from relying on it or acting on it, so that it is to
        that extent of no effect. In those circumstances, if  the  decision
        is one which results from an application made by an individual, the
        position is that the application is outstanding, awaiting a  lawful
        decision. No remittal is necessary. Any circumstances arising  from
        the fact that an application has not yet been decided (for  example
        under s.3C of the 1971 Act, or s.77 of the 2002 Act) will continue,
        and will be treated as not having been interrupted by the  unlawful
        decision. If there is any doubt about the  matter,  the  First-tier
        Tribunal, in allowing the appeal, can direct the decision-maker  to
        treat the applicant accordingly.


16. I conclude that a direction is  appropriate  rather  than  remittal  as
    requested.  The  Secretary  of  State  is  directed  to  consider   the
    claimant's application in accordance with the findings  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge on Regulation 8(5).

17. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.


   Notice of Decision


   The appeal is allowed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  allow
   the appeal outright is set aside. The  finding  of  the  judge  that  the
   claimant was an extended family  member  of  the  sponsor  and  therefore
   satisfied the requirement of article 8(5) of the Regulations stands.  The
   Secretary  of  State  is  directed  to  reconsider  the  application   in
   accordance with the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  Regulation
   8(5).


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 30 September 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
































