

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/34630/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17th July 2014                             |On 24th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           OLIVIA NKEECHI ONONUJU
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

Appellant:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent:   Mrs Bassiri, instructed by Michael and Company Legal Services


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision dated 12 August 2013 made on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State  for  the  Home  Department  (the  "Secretary  of  State"),   the
    Respondent's application for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on
    the basis of her family and private life was refused.  At the stage  of
    her appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") a  further  dimension
    was added to the Respondent's case, by the mechanism of amended grounds
    of appeal. These grounds invoked protection under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR
    and are summarised in [4] of the FtT's determination as follows:

         "......  She feared that her child would be mutilated  through  FGM
         and that there is a real prospect that they will get into a lot  of
         difficulties with family members and that the authorities will  not
         step in to prevent any mishap."

    In passing, I record that there was no application  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State to adjourn the hearing at  first  instance.  In  the
    event, the appeal was allowed under Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.

 2. At this juncture, I  draw  attention  to  two  pieces  of  evidence  in
    particular.  The first is the  Respondent's  witness  statement,  which
    contains the following passages:

         "When my daughter was born [in the United Kingdom on 05  May  2012]
         my family in Nigeria asked me to bring her to Nigeria to go through
         female genital  circumcision.  I  bluntly  refused  to  subject  my
         daughter to this evil and dangerous practice.  Since  then  I  have
         had calls from my family members persuading and threatening  me  to
         return home with my daughter.  I have  also  received  letters  and
         emails to visit home with my  daughter  for  them  to  conduct  the
         rituals in line with family traditions ....


         The idea of going home with my  daughter  meant  that  I  would  be
         putting her in danger; this trip would have  given  my  family  the
         opportunity to accomplish their aim to attack  my  daughter,  as  I
         have no place to live and wait for the outcome of  the  application
         [for settlement, from abroad] other  than  the  family  home.   The
         application process may drag on for months as is common  with  visa
         applications."

    In the next section of her statement, the Appellant explained  at  some
    little length why she could not leave her daughter with her husband  in
    the United  Kingdom,  the  main  factors  being  the  child's  age  and
    dependency on her mother and the  father's  involvement  in  full  time
    studies.  Furthermore, the Appellant is the only  income  earner.   The
    evidence also included a detailed letter from  the  Appellant's  mother
    emphasising the powerful  family  expectations  relating  to  what  the
    Appellant describes as "this evil and dangerous practice". This  letter
    speaks of, inter alia, "our communities ....  the entire community ....
      your uncle and elders ....   traditional  cutting  ....  [and]   ....
    outcast."  The evidence considered by the FtT also included two reports
    on the subject of female genital circumcision in Nigeria.

 3. At the conclusion of the hearing, I gave an ex tempore judgment,  which
    I now summarise.  The appeal proceeded on three grounds. The first  was
    that the finding in [25] of the FtT's determination was  insufficiently
    reasoned.  This states, in the relevant passage:

         "I accept firstly that the Appellant failed to mention  this  whole
         issue of FGM to her legal advisers until after the refusal  of  her
         application.  I still find it very strange that  such  an  enormous
         concern regarding return was not raised by her but  I  accept  that
         nonetheless it is credible in this case that she did not."

    This finding must be considered in its full context.  This includes the
    following passage in [21]:


         "She did not think she had to raise it with  her  lawyers  and  the
         letter from her mother was sent well before the appeal was lodged."


    And in [23], the Judge stated:


         "I have considered all the evidence in the round and  I  make  the
    following findings."


    This was followed by:


         "[24]     I accept that the Appellant and her spouse have  provided
             generally  a  credible  account  in  their  oral  and  written
             evidence."

    This is an omnibus finding of unmistakable significance, as it  applies
    to and embraces everything which  follows,  including  the  credibility
    finding in [25].  Viewed in its full context, I am satisfied  that  the
    finding in [25] is adequately reasoned.

 4. The second ground of appeal criticised the findings of the FtT in  [27]
    and [28] of the determination on the same  ground  viz  that  they  are
    inadequately reasoned.  There is an extensive  series  of  findings  in
    [27] and [28].  They relate to  various  aspects  of  the  Respondent's
    account and claims.  On all of these issues, the  fundamental  question
    for the FtT was whether  the  Appellant  was  telling  the  truth.   In
    determining this question, it was incumbent on the Tribunal to evaluate
    all the evidence in the round.  I am satisfied that, as stated in [23],
    supra, the Tribunal did so.  Indeed, there was  no  contention  to  the
    contrary.  I consider  that  the  key  to  a  review  of  the  findings
    contained in [27] and [28]  of  the  determination  by  this  Appellate
    Tribunal is the omnibus finding rehearsed in [24],  supra.   In  short,
    the reason for these further findings is the Judge's acceptance of  the
    veracity of the Appellant's account.  This is apparent on the  face  of
    the determination.  Thus I consider these  findings  to  be  adequately
    reasoned.

 5. The third ground of appeal was that the FtT failed to make a finding on
    the issue of internal relocation.  This ground  of  appeal  prompted  a
    careful review of the course of the hearing at first instance.    There
    was no evidence before this Tribunal that this was an issue before  the
    FtT, in circumstances where the Judge rehearsed the  evidence  at  some
    little length, including the cross examination  of  the  Appellant,  in
    [12] - [19]. Furthermore, there was nothing on  the  file  to  indicate
    that this was a live issue. As I observed at the hearing, if this issue
    had been raised one would have  expected  quite  extensive  questioning
    bearing  on  matters  such  as  choices,   viability,   practicability,
    connections,  experience,   qualifications,   available   support   and
    resources generally.   One  would  also  have  expected  to  find  some
    indication of this in the Judge's summary of  the  evidence.   However,
    there is none. The only mention of relocation is a  brief  one  in  the
    final sentence of [21], which summarises the submissions on  behalf  of
    the  Appellant  and  tends  to  suggest  that  while  the  matter   was
    ventilated, it emerged only in submissions - and then briefly - and not
    in questioning by either representative  or  by  the  Tribunal  itself.
    Given this analysis, I am satisfied that it was not  incumbent  on  the
    Judge to make a finding on this discrete issue.

 6. In the alternative, when one juxtaposes  the  Judge's  omnibus  finding
    about the Appellant's credibility with  the  various  elements  of  the
    evidence which I have highlighted in [2] above, I consider the  correct
    analysis to be that, by inference, the Judge  (since  he  accepted  the
    Appellant's account and claims), found that internal relocation was not
    a reasonable option.  In the  further  alternative,  if  there  is  any
    substance in the error of law for which the Appellant contends in  this
    respect, I am satisfied that it is not material, as  it  is  abundantly
    clear from the determination as a whole that the Judge would have  made
    this finding.

 7. Accordingly, I conclude that the grounds of appeal have no merit.

DECISION

 8. I dismiss the appeal and affirm the decision of the FtT.







                                    [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                          Date: 17 July 2014
