
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34084/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26 September 2017                     |On 26 October 2017                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Oleksander Diyak
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms P Solanki of Counsel instructed by LS Legal
                    Immigration Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Carroll promulgated on 13 January 2017 following a  hearing  at  Taylor
    House hearing centre on 12  December  2016.   I  mention  the  date  of
    hearing only because the decision of Judge Carroll appears  wrongly  to
    date the hearing as having taken place on 12 December 2015.


2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the Appellant  and  Mr  Diyak  is  the  Respondent,  for  the  sake  of
    consistency with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall
    hereafter refer to the Secretary of State  as  the  Respondent  and  Mr
    Diyak as the Appellant.


3.   The Appellant's immigration history is helpfully set out at  paragraphs
    2 and 3 of the decision  of  Judge  Carroll.   He  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in 2002; since his arrival in the United  Kingdom  he  met  and
    married Ms Bodhana Bihun - the couple have had two  children,  born  in
    October 2008  and  November  2010.   The  Appellant's  wife  and  their
    children are British citizens.  The Appellant was granted discretionary
    leave to remain in April 2012 until 17 April 2015. On 17 March 2015 the
    Appellant made an application  for  further  leave  to  remain  on  the
    grounds of his family and private life.


4.   The application was refused with reference  to  paragraphs  322(1)  and
    (5) of the Immigration Rules on the basis that the  Respondent  decided
    that the Appellant had submitted a TOEIC certificate  from  Educational
    Testing Services in support of the application that  he  had  made  for
    discretionary leave to remain on 22 December 2011.  The certificate was
    issued in respect of a test taken by the Appellant on 18  October  2011
    at OPAL College.  The Respondent considered that the Appellant had made
    use of a  proxy  tester  to  acquire  this  certificate,  and  in  such
    circumstances determined that the Appellant had employed  deception  in
    the context of his earlier application that justified the invocation of
    the paragraphs under the Rules to which I have referred above.


5.   The  Respondent  also  gave  consideration  to  other  aspects  of  the
    Immigration Rules, in particular the so-called 'partner route' and  the
    so-called 'parent route' under Appendix FM, and also paragraph  276ADE.
    In respect of the partner route the Appellant was refused on the  basis
    that the finding in respect of deception meant that he did not meet the
    suitability  requirements.   It  was  otherwise  acknowledged  in   the
    Respondent's 'reasons for refusal' letter  ('RFRL')  that  he  met  the
    eligibility requirements and also  that  he  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph EX.1.


6.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


7.   The Appellant's appeal was allowed by Judge Carroll.


8.   The Respondent, dissatisfied with the outcome  in  the  appeal,  sought
    permission to appeal,  which  was  granted  by  Acting  Resident  Judge
    Appleyard on 19 July 2017.  The  Respondent's  grounds  of  appeal  are
    essentially that the Judge failed to assess  correctly  the  burden  of
    proof in line with the authority of SM and Qadir v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016]  UKUT
    00229 (IAC).  It was also pleaded that the Judge  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons why the Respondent had not met the legal burden in the
    case. Judge Appleyard considered these matters to be arguable.


9.   The Appellant has filed a Rule 24 response in these  proceedings  dated
    4 September 2017 which essentially argues that the Judge's reasons  and
    findings were adequately set out in the decision  notwithstanding  that
    it is acknowledged "the IJ could have written more in her decision".


10.  Mr Tarlow has reminded the  Tribunal  this  morning  of  the  important
    passages in the case of SM and Qadir, and in particular the  concluding
    guidance set out at paragraph 68  to  the  effect  that  the  'generic'
    material relied upon by  the  Respondent  in  cases  of  this  kind  is
    sufficient - albeit by a narrow margin - to discharge the legal  burden
    on the Respondent  in  respect  of  the  alleged  deception,  and  that
    thereafter an evidential burden rests upon an Appellant  to  raise  "an
    innocent explanation".


11.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision covers  approximately  a  page
    and a half.  The  first  page  essentially  rehearses  the  immigration
    history and quotes from the RFRL.  It notes that the Appellant and  his
    wife adopted the contents of their witness statements and that evidence
    is contained in the record of proceedings.


12.  Thereafter the Judge says the following at paragraphs 6 to 9:

         "6.  The burden of proof lies upon  the  respondent  to  show  that
             deception or dishonesty has been used  by  the  applicant,  or
             someone acting on his behalf, and the standard of proof is the
             balance of probabilities.


         7.   The issue of fraudulently obtained TOEIC certificate has  been
             considered by the Upper Tribunal in R (on the  application  of
             Ghazi) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  (ETS  -
             judicial review) [2015] UKUT 00327 and by the Court of  Appeal
             in Qadir v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]
             EWCA Civ 1167.


         8.   In this appeal the respondent relies upon the generic evidence
             submitted in similar appeals together with a witness statement
             of Hillary Rackstraw.  The  representatives  for  the  parties
             confirmed at the hearing of this  appeal  that  there  was  no
             possibility of now of obtaining the audio record of  the  test
             undertaken by the Appellant in 2011.


         9.    I  have  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant  as   to   the
             circumstances in which he took the test in 2011 and  in  which
             he was asked to return two weeks later  to  collect  the  test
             certificate.  In the light of the authorities to which I  have
             referred above, and in the light of the appellant's  evidence,
             I find that the respondent has not discharged  the  burden  of
             proof upon her in respect of the decision made by reference to
             paragraph 322 of HC 395."




13.  In my judgment those  passages  do  not  display  anything  by  way  of
    reasoning such that the reader can understand the basis upon which  the
    Judge allowed this appeal.  Although the Judge has  made  reference  to
    relevant authority and has stated that the burden of  proof  lies  upon
    the Respondent to show that deception  or  dishonesty  has  been  used,
    there is nowhere any express reference to  the  concept  of  the  legal
    burden being upon the Respondent but being  satisfied  by  the  generic
    evidence, and the evidential burden shifting to the Appellant to  raise
    'an innocent explanation'.


14.  There is no finding specified  as  to  the  Judge's  conclusion  as  to
    whether the Respondent had, or had not, discharged  the  legal  burden;
    indeed there is no finding on the Respondent's generic evidence.  There
    is no consideration of whether the evidential burden had, or  had  not,
    shifted to the Appellant.  If it was considered by the Judge  that  the
    evidential burden had shifted to the Appellant, there is nothing by way
    of  explanation  as  to  why  the  Appellant's  evidence  as   to   the
    circumstances in which he had taken the test and had  returned  to  the
    test centre to collect his test certificate offered anything by way  of
    an innocent explanation in answer to the allegation of deception.


15.  It is to be recalled from the evidence  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    relies upon - and indeed from the Panorama programme which is expressly
    referred to in that evidence - that in many cases the person making use
    of a proxy nonetheless attended the test centre and, as it were,  stood
    to one side whilst the proxy tester took up  position  at  the  testing
    desk or terminal.  The ability to recall how one went to a test centre,
    and indeed the ability to recall  how  one  went  back  to  pick  up  a
    certificate, does not seem to me remotely to address the concerns  that
    are raised in cases of this type.  Even if it were otherwise, the Judge
    in this particular quite simply fails to offer any  explanation  as  to
    why the Appellant's evidence was  adequate.  The  Judge  has  stated  a
    conclusion but has provided no supporting reasons.


16.  In all of those circumstances it seems to me that there is  a  manifest
    error of law and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  must  be  set
    aside.


17.  It follows that the decision requires to be  remade.  Bearing  in  mind
    the complete lack of findings, in my judgment this must  be  done  back
    before the First-tier Tribunal.


18.  This is an Article 8 appeal and not an appeal  under  the  Rules.   The
    Judge may not have recognised - certainly in  allowing  the  appeal  no
    reference is made to Article 8.  That said,  as  I  have  indicated  in
    rehearsing the facts above, the Respondent only refused the Appellant's
    case with reference to Appendix FM under the so-called partner route by
    reason of the suitability requirements and that was premised  upon  the
    allegation of deception. It is likely in those  circumstances  that  if
    the Appellant is able to meet the concerns in respect of the allegation
    of  deception  that  his  appeal  should  succeed  under   Article   8,
    particularly bearing in mind that he is in  a  subsisting  relationship
    with a British citizen wife and two British citizen children.  It  does
    not follow, however, that if the deception is made out by the Secretary
    of State that the Appellant does not have a residual Article 8 case  to
    pursue: it  will  be  for  the  decision-maker  then  to  balance  that
    deception against the potential disruption to family and  private  life
    in the event of the Appellant's removal.


19.  In the circumstances, and further to the observations above, this  case
    is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with all issues at large.


Notice of Decision

20.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
is set aside.


21.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Carroll.


22.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.



Signed:                                 Date: 25 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
