
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
IA/34150/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |  Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                    |
|On 1 March 2016                        |  On 22 April 2016             |
|                                          |                            |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                          MISS TAMIWE TRACY MUSYANI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr L Lourdes, Counsel instructed by Crested Associates
Limited
For the Respondent: Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge P  J  M  Hollingworth  dated  22nd
    December 2015.    The  appeal  relates  to  a  decision  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Suffield-Thompson promulgated on 24  August  2015.   The
    Judge dismissed the appeal based on the Immigration Rules and Article 8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights.

2.    The  Appellant's  original  application  to  the  Respondent  was  for
    indefinite Leave to Remain. She had contended that there had  been  ten
    years lawful residence and that therefore she had met Paragraph 276B of
    the Immigration Rules. Alternatively she  contended  she  ought  to  be
    permitted to remain in the United Kingdom based on Article 8 ECHR.  The
    case raises an interesting point  in  respect  of  Paragraph  276B  and
    whether the Appellant had broken her  continuous  lawful  residence  in
    excess of 28 days. The Appellant's grounds of appeal can be  summarised
    as:


    1) The Judge materially erred at paragraph 29 in  failing  to  consider
       the burden of proof relating to administrative  problems  which  the
       Appellant had faced;
    2) The Judge erred  in  failing  to  take  into  account  the  guidance
       provided in the case of Basnet (validity of  application-respondent)
       [2012] UKUT 00113 (IAC); and
    3)  There  was  no  witness  statement  and/or  administrative  related
       evidence tendered by the Respondent.



4.    Mr Lourdes said that he relied on the grounds of appeal and the  grant
    of permission. I was asked to look at paragraph  25  of  the  decision.
    Whenever  the  application  was  refused  the  Appellant  had  made  an
    application within 28 days. Where the Respondent says that there was no
    leave that was refuted. At paragraphs 22 and  23  the  Judge  said  she
    followed all of the evidence but that was not the case. She had  put  a
    lot of blame on the Appellant. Paragraph  31  cannot  be  correct.  The
    Appellant had adopted all subsequent applications within 28  days.  The
    grant of permission was being adopted. At paragraph 32 it was said that
    the Appellant had a good immigration history. In the decision of  R  on
    the application of Shaikh v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 2586 (Admin) at paragraph 25 made clear that there is a
    residual  discretion.  The  headnote  of  Basnet  at  paragraph  3  was
    stressed. It was submitted that the  case  ought  to  be  remitted  for
    rehearing before a different Judge.

5.    Ms Fijiwala said she relied on the Rule 24  Reply.  It  was  submitted
    that the only ground was Basnet so it was not appropriate for the Judge
    to raise other matters. I was  referred  to  paragraph  27(ii)  of  the
    Judge's decision. The case of Mitchell (Basnet revisited)  [2015]  UKUT
    562 (IAC) at paragraph 11 was referred to. There  had  never  been  any
    suggestion that the form was validly completed. The  Appellant  had  to
    raise the point at that time. Paragraph 12 of Mitchell made that clear.
    It was also clear that after  18  months  payment  information  is  not
    retained. The 14 November 2009 aspect was not challenged.  It  was  too
    late to check it by the time of  the  long  residence  application.  At
    paragraph 15 in Mitchell the Appellant can take it up with  their  bank
    at any time. It was a more nuanced burden of proof. They could raise it
    with their bank at any time and therefore there  needs  to  be  a  more
    nuanced burden of proof. It was submitted that therefore  paragraph  29
    of the FTTs decision was correct

6.    Ms Fijiwala said I should note paragraph 13 of  the  Judge's  decision
    that the Appellant was asked to pay again by bank card  and  that  time
    the payment did go through.  The  fault  was  with  the  Appellant.  In
    relation to the other points this  was  not  part  of  the  Appellant's
    grounds. But if I was to consider  these  matters  then  there  was  no
    material error of law. On 26 June 2009 the application was refused.  It
    was accepted by  the  Appellant  that  the  Rules  could  not  be  met.
    Paragraph 13(a) and (b) referred to. As did 13(d). As for the forms the
    Judge might have erred  in  respect  of  the  forms  which  changed  in
    December 2009 and the application was made in November  2009,  but  the
    error was not material. At paragraph 13(e)  the  application  had  been
    rejected. There was no application made within 28 days. It was made  on
    21 September 2010 and therefore 14 days late. The Rules could still not
    be met Article 8 was not raised in the grounds.


7.    Mr Lourdes said in reply that paragraph 3(b) had raised  the  28  days
    ground. He said that there was a material error of law. In  respect  of
    paragraph 13(e) there had been a request to  resubmit  the  application
    and that is what was done. It was an ongoing process and therefore  was
    not outside the 28 day time period. It was not  a  refusal,  it  was  a
    rejection. It was submitted the matter be remitted to a different judge
    to rehear the appeal.

8.    The question to be decided can be encapsulated as follows.  Was  there
    more than a 28 day gap in the 10 years  residence  that  the  Appellant
    relied upon for her ILR application?  The  Respondent's  case  is  that
    there was, even when taking various dates into account. The  Respondent
    says the first gap  was  after  June  2009  when  the  Appellant's  ILR
    application was rejected on 21 August 2009 and against which there  was
    no appeal. Instead a new application was made 10 September  2009.  That
    application was rejected in November 2009 and it was only by  the  time
    of a further payment card being used  on  14  November  2009  that  the
    payment cleared.

9.    The Appellant submits that  the  issue  is  not  whether  any  of  the
    Appellant's applications were rejected but whether they  were  refused.
    That is because the Appellant accepted that some  of  her  applications
    were rejected. Her argument is that  she  was  given  opportunities  to
    correct the deficiencies and that they were corrected within  28  days.
    It is said that the rejections did not cause gaps of more than 28 days.



10.   I had reserved my decision.

11.   The Judicial Review decision of HHJ Allan  Gore  QC  sitting  as  High
    Court Judge in Shaikh reviewed numerous cases and he noted  that  there
    were a wide variety of full and part time  Judges  who  had  considered
    issues in respect of invalidity of  applications.  The  Judge  said  at
    paragraph 25 of his judgment that in reality each case shows a decision
    based on its own facts.

12.   That indeed does seem to be so. I was  referred  to  the  decision  in
    Basnet and the later decision  in  Mitchell.  I  note  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal made it clear in Mitchell that it was rejecting the submission
    that  Basnet  imposed  on  the  Secretary  of  State  the   burden   of
    establishing a previous application was invalid for failure to sign the
    payment mandate. The Appellant had failed to raise the  matter  at  the
    time. It was also stressed that no one  could  be  expected  to  retain
    documents indefinitely. The payment pages were retained for 18 months.

13.   The present appeal before me does not relate directly only to  payment
    pages  on  application  forms  submitted  by  the  Appellant   to   the
    Respondent, but the totality of the issues  which  arise  are  similar.
    There were previous rejections of this  Appellant's  application  forms
    for other reasons too.

14.   With some hesitation I allow the Appellant's appeal.  It  does  appear
    that there have been rejections of applications by the  Respondent  and
    not refusals. Further it appears that on each occasion there  have  re-
    submissions of forms or applications by the Appellant  within  28  days
    thereafter. As indicated by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth when
    granting permission, there is some uncertainty in respect of  paragraph
    29 of  the  Judge's  decision.  That  aspect  remains  unclear.  It  is
    therefore unsafe to assume that the error did lie with  the  Appellant.
    It appears that no evidence was actually filed at  the  hearing  before
    the Judge, other than a chronology. The subsequent  oral  evidence  did
    not appear to have cleared up some of the confusion and uncertainty.

15.   The Judge may well have taken a different approach  if  the  case  law
    now relied upon had been brought to her attention, but I conclude  that
    there was a material  error  of  law  because  the  rejections  of  the
    applications, as  opposed  to  refusal  decisions  could  have  made  a
    difference to the assessment of the appeal. There appear to be no  gaps
    of more than 28 days, but this will need to be specifically  considered
    at the remitted hearing.  Noting  what  the  decisions  in  Basnet  and
    Mitchell state, it will be for the Appellant to produce  the  necessary
    evidence to deal with the evidential issues raised and not depend  upon
    the Respondent to produce documents which are  unlikely  to  have  been
    retained.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal  Judge  involved  the  making  of  a
material error of law and is set aside. None of the findings stand.

The Appellant's appeal shall be reheard at the First Tier Tribunal.

An anonymity direction is not made.

Signed                                       Date: 15 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

