

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
IA/34602/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated on:           |
|On 7 February 2014                          |On 11 February 2014       |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                                 Ruiko Asaba
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                           Secretary of State for
                             the Home Department
                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr A Berry, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

Background

   1.       This appeal comes before me following First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      Grimmett's grant of permission to the  appellant  in  respect  of  the
      determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kaler  who  dismissed  her
      visit appeal by way of a determination dated 9 December 2013.
   2.       The appellant is a citizen of Japan born on 9 November 1987. She
      has been lawfully present in the UK since her arrival on 24 April 2000
      and on 21 December 2012 applied for indefinite leave to remain on  the
      basis  of  having  completed  ten  years  of  lawful  residence.   The
      application was refused on 31 July 2013 under paragraph  276B  because
      the appellant had been absent from  the  UK  for  a  period  over  the
      minimum number of days permitted. She lodged an appeal  on  Article  8
      grounds.

   3.       Following an oral hearing the appeal was  dismissed.  The  judge
      considered Article 8 but concluded  that  removal  was  proportionate.
      Permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis  that  the  judge  had
      arguably  erred  in   expressing   the   necessity   for   exceptional
      circumstances when assessing proportionality.

Appeal Hearing

   4.       At the hearing I heard submissions from the  parties.  Mr  Berry
      relied upon his grounds and submitted that the  judge  had  made  five
      errors.  First,  she  had  applied  the  wrong  test  in  looking  for
      exceptional circumstances, Secondly, she had inappropriately relied on
      case law which neither party had submitted and which did not apply  to
      the circumstances of the appellant's case. Thirdly, when carrying  out
      the balancing exercise, she had failed to consider whether the  public
      interest would be served by retaining the appellant. Fourth, the judge
      had not had due regard  to  the  appellant's  integration  in  the  UK
      following her education here from a  young  age.  Finally,  the  judge
      erred in taking account of hypothetical entry  clearance  applications
      the appellant might make in the future.

   5.       Ms Everett submitted that whilst the assessment of Article 8 was
      brief, all the relevant factors had been taken account  of  and  there
      was nothing to suggest that  the  judge  had  looked  for  exceptional
      circumstances. The consideration of future applications  was  part  of
      the forward looking assessment of how the appellant would cope outside
      the UK and the reliance on case law to find that a relationship with a
      girlfriend was not sufficiently serious or settled enough to amount to
      family life was not erroneous.

   6.       Ms Everett submitted that once the conclusions of the  DVR  were
      accepted then any subsequent documents from the appellant  seeking  to
      confirm the disputed document could  carry  no  weight.  It  could  be
      safely assumed that the official  had  seen  the  certificate  as  the
      references to it were so specific.

   7.       Mr Berry responded and I then formally reserved my determination
      but indicated that I would be setting aside the determination.  I  now
      give my reasons.


Findings and Conclusions

   8.        I  have  taken  into  account  the  submissions  made  and  the
      determination of the First-tier Tribunal.

   9.       There  is  no  issue  that  the  appellant  does  not  meet  the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules. The sole  question  is  whether
      the decision to remove her is proportionate.

  10.       At paragraph 24, having cited a number of  cases  which,  as  Mr
      Berry  rightly  pointed  out,  involved   deportation   and   unlawful
      residence, the judge proceeded to "consider  whether  there  were  any
      exceptional circumstances in this case".   That is the wrong test  and
      the wrong approach. It was submitted by Mr Berry (not Denby as  stated
      in the determination) in his skeleton argument that, as  confirmed  in
      Patel [2013] UKSC 72, the test of exceptionality should no  longer  be
      used and that instead decision makers should focus on the question  of
      whether the applicant has shown a good arguable case that his  or  her
      application should be dealt with outside the rules. The judge  appears
      to have disregarded this guidance. It follows that  her  reasoning  is
      flawed because  one  cannot  be  satisfied  that  she  considered  the
      evidence as she should have done. Once this error has been established
      then Grounds 3 and 4 do little to advance the case however it  has  to
      be said that the judge's assessment of the factors pleaded  on  behalf
      of the appellant is cursory and that there is little  engagement  with
      the substantial life that the appellant has established  here  over  a
      number of years and from a young age.

  11.       The judge relied on case law that  neither  party  had  adduced.
      Given that she used it to make an adverse finding, it would have  been
      fairer had she given the parties the opportunity to address her on  it
      prior to using it against the appellant in her determination.  In  any
      event, she did not appreciate that the family  circumstances  of  that
      appellant differed substantially to those of our  appellant.  Moreover
      any finding on a non marital  relationship  should  be  based  on  the
      particular facts and merits of that case rather than an adoption of  a
      general principle as has happened here.

  12.       I am not persuaded that the last ground carries much  merit.  It
      was open to the judge to look ahead and assess the  possible  ways  in
      which the appellant might resume her life here in the future.

  13.       For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
      is set aside in its entirety except as a Record of Proceedings.  There
      being no clear findings, none can be preserved.



Decision

  14.       The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  errors  of  law  and  her
      decision is set aside.  The  matter  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for a re-hearing afresh and for the decision to be re-made.



      Signed:






      Dr R Keki?
      Judge           of            the            Upper            Tribunal






      7 February 2014



