
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35013/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14th July 2015                    |On 30th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     deputy upper Tribunal JUDGE D KELLY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MS FAHIMA MALLICK
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Leskin, Solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal A. Kelly to allow the appeal against her decision to refuse Ms
    Mallick's application for leave to remain on the  basis  of  10  years'
    continuous residence in the United Kingdom. For  convenience,  I  shall
    refer to the parties in accordance with their status in the  First-tier
    Tribunal; that is  to  say,  I  shall  refer  to  Ms  Mallick  as  'the
    appellant' and to the Secretary of State as 'the respondent'.

Background

 2. The appellant first  entered  the  United  Kingdom,  with  valid  entry
    clearance and leave to remain, on the 23rd June  2004.  She  thereafter
    received successive grants of further leave to remain, the most  recent
    of which ended on the 21st March 2015. On  the  20th  March  2015,  she
    applied for indefinite leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of  10  years'
    continuous residence under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.  By
    that time she had continuously resided in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    period of 10 years and 9 months. The sole issue, therefore, was whether
    there had been any break in the lawfulness of that residence.

The reasons for refusal and findings of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. On the 27th February 2009, the appellant had submitted  an  application
    for further limited leave to remain, some  two  days  before  her  then
    extant leave to remain was due to expire. That application was rejected
    as invalid on the  19th  March  2009.  On  the  24th  April  2009,  the
    appellant submitted a valid application. This was granted on  the  24th
    July 2009.

 4. The respondent gave her reasons for refusal in the following terms -

         When an application is rejected, you then have 28  days  to  submit
         another application which will subsequently be granted. You did not
         submit another application until 24th April 2009. This was 36  days
         after your application was originally rejected. Although  you  were
         then granted further leave to remain on 14th July  2009  (sic)  you
         were in fact without leave from the 20th March 2009 (the day  after
         your application was rejected) to 13th July 2009  (the  day  before
         your next period of leave was granted). This was  a  total  of  116
         days without leave. As such it is not considered that you have  had
         10 years continuous lawful residence and your application does  not
         satisfy Paragraph 276B(i)(a).

 5. It was the appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal that she had
    not been served with notice of the invalidity of her application of the
    27th February 2014 until the very end of March. Judge Kelly found  this
    to be a fact. She  did  so  because  (i)  the  appellant  had  given  a
    plausible reason for being able to recall when she received the  notice
    of  notice  of  invalidity  (its  late  receipt  had  left   her   with
    insufficient  time  to  submit  a  further  application  prior  to  the
    introduction of the Tier 4 system, on the 31st March 2009) and (ii) the
    application fee was returned to her under cover of a letter  dated  the
    27th March 2009 which, being a Friday, may have meant that it  was  not
    delivered until the following Monday.  The  judge  therefore  concluded
    that the 28-day period of grace had only started to run  on  or  around
    the 30th March and, therefore, that her application of the  24th  April
    2009 had been made well within that period.

The respondent's grounds of appeal

 6. Although not specifically drafted as such, the application  leading  to
    the grant of permission to appeal in effect raised two grounds -

          i) Home  Office  records  show  that  the  letter  rejecting  the
             application for want of correct photographs was  sent  on  the
             19th March 2009;

         ii) even if the rejection letter was sent  at  the  end  of  March
             (which  is  not  accepted),  it  cannot  have  the  effect  of
             conferring leave to remain on the appellant between  the  29th
             March  2009  (the  date  the  Judge  Kelly  found   that   the
             application was rejected) and the  13th  July  2009  (the  day
             before her next period of leave to remain was granted.

Analysis

 7. The first ground of appeal is easily disposed of and  was  not  pursued
    with any degree of vigour by Mr Duffy. I am satisfied that the  judge's
    finding that the appellant did not receive a notice of invalidity until
    the very end of March 2009 was one that was reasonably open to  her  on
    the evidence, and that the reasons she gave adequate reasons  for  that
    finding (see paragraph 5, above).

 8. The legal issue throughout these proceedings has  been  the  method  of
    calculating the continuity of the appellant's lawful residence  in  the
    United Kingdom. This is set out at sub-paragraph (v) of the Rule -

         The applicant must not be in the UK in breach of  immigration  laws
         except that any period of overstaying for a period of  28  days  or
         less will be disregarded, as will any period of overstaying between
         periods of entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to remain of up
         to 28 days and any period of overstaying pending the  determination
         of an application made within that 28 day period.

 9. The Home Office guidance to caseworkers concerning the  calculation  of
    10 years' continuous lawful residence reads as follows -

         The 28 day period of overstaying is calculated from the  latest  of
         the:

           . end of the last period of leave to enter or remain granted

           . end of any extension of leave under sections 3C or 3D  of  the
             Immigration Act 1971

           . the end point that a migrant is  deemed  to  have  received  a
             written notice of invalidity , in line with paragraph  34C  or
             34A of the  immigration  Rules,  in  relation  to  an  in-time
             application for further leave to remain

10. It is possible to read paragraph 276B(i)(v) as meaning that the 28 day-
    period of grace is calculated from the first of the three  events  that
    are listed  in  the  Home  Office  guidance.   Thus,  if  an  applicant
    submitted a valid application for further leave to remain on  the  27th
    day of a period of overstaying, the period of grace would  nevertheless
    expire on the following day. This  is  essentially  the  interpretation
    that would need to be adopted if  the  respondent's  second  ground  of
    appeal is to succeed. However, the respondent's own guidance interprets
    the provision as meaning that the 28-day period of grace is  calculated
    from "the latest" of the three events.  Thus,  in  the  example  quoted
    above, the period of grace would  not  end  until  28  days  after  the
    application had been determined,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the
    applicant had already overstayed by some 27 days  prior  to  submitting
    her application. On this interpretation of the provision, it was  right
    for Judge Kelly to conclude that there had not been any  break  in  the
    continuity of the appellant's lawful residence during 2009.

11. I have concluded  that  there  is  merit  in  both  interpretations  of
    paragraph 276B(v). That being the case, it is perhaps ironic  that  the
    success of the respondent's appeal is dependent  upon  my  adopting  an
    interpretation that runs counter to her own  guidance  on  the  matter.
    Moreover, Mr Duffy did not strenuously argue that I  should  do  so.  I
    therefore  hold  that  the  relevant  Home  Office  guidance  correctly
    reflects  the  proper  construction  of  paragraph   276B(v)   of   the
    Immigration Rules. It follows from this that  the  respondent's  appeal
    must be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

12. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed   Date

Judge Kelly
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

