
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/35388/2014
                                                               IA/37064/2014
                                                               IA/37065/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 August 2015                    |          On 20 August 2015          |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AT
                                     KTM
                                     JTM
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER CONTINUED)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Preliminary

    I note that the First-tier Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  direction  in
    relation to the appellants because  of  the  nature  of  the  case.   I
    consider it appropriate to make a similar order in the  Upper  Tribunal
    under Procedural Rule 14(1) to prohibit the disclosure  or  publication
    of any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
    appellants.  To give effect to this order  the  appellants  are  to  be
    referred to by the initials above

 1. There was no attendance by or for the respondents.  The Upper  Tribunal
    had been notified that Khan & Co Solicitors were no  longer  instructed
    which explains  their  absence.   There  was  no  explanation  why  the
    appellants were not present and, being satisfied  that  notice  of  the
    hearing had been properly given, I decided it was in  the  interest  of
    justice to proceed.

 2. Mr Mills conceded the appeals.   He  said  that  the  grounds  advanced
    lacked merit and he had nothing to argue.  The best he  could  say  was
    that even if Judge Graham had erred in law with regard  to  her  direct
    application of Article 8 any such errors were not material because  she
    had  found  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect   the   first
    respondent's eldest child, who had resided in the  UK  for  over  seven
    years at the date of application, to leave the UK.  The grounds did not
    challenge Judge Graham's finding or reasoning on this point.

 3. As such, the First-tier  Tribunal  appeals  of  the  first  and  second
    respondents had to succeed whether by application of paragraph EX.1  of
    appendix FM or directly by application of Article 8.  Since appendix FM
    was introduced to give effect to family life rights it was unsurprising
    that the same conclusion was reached by both avenues.  Given  that  the
    sponsor was settled in the UK and  the  first  and  second  respondents
    succeeded in their appeals to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  it  would  be
    disproportionate to expect the remaining family member, the  five  year
    old third respondent, to leave the UK.

 4. I accepted the concession made by Mr  Mills  and  as  I  indicated  had
    reached a similar preliminary view when reading the papers.   The  fact
    the respondents failed to attend it irrelevant.  I  find  there  is  no
    material legal error in Judge Graham's decision and  reasons  statement
    that was promulgated on 6 January 2015 and it is upheld.

Decision

There is no material legal error in the decision and  reasons  statement  of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Graham and her decision stands.




                               Signed   Date


                               John McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
