
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: IA/35582/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 17 June 2014        On 12 September 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                               Toumiat Yassine
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. Z. Nasim of  Counsel  instructed  by  Lee  Valley
                       Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Gillespie promulgated on 14 March 2014 allowing  Mr  Yassine's  appeal
      against the Secretary of State's decision  dated  12  August  2013  to
      remove him from the UK.


   2. Although before me the Secretary of State  is  the  appellant  and  Mr
      Yassine is the respondent,  for  the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
      proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer  to
      Mr Yassine as  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
      Respondent.

Background

   3. The Appellant is a national of Algeria born on 8 December 1969.


   4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  accepted  the  credibility  of  the
      Appellant and his supporting witnesses, and set  out  the  Appellant's
      personal and immigration histories in accordance with the evidence  at
      paragraphs 3-8 of the determination. It is unnecessary to repeat  that
      history in detail here. I note, however,  because  of  its  subsequent
      significance in these proceedings, that although  the  Appellant  last
      entered the UK in 1995, he had previously entered the UK in  1991  and
      had been absent on two occasions for about three months each  in  1994
      and 1995.


   5. On 27 September 2012 the Appellant applied for leave to remain in  the
      UK relying on Article 8 of the ECHR.


   6. The Appellant's application was refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
      'reasons for refusal' letter dated 12 August 2013, and a  decision  to
      remove the Appellant in consequence was made by way  of  a  Notice  of
      Immigration Decision also dated 12 August 2013.


   7. The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for  reasons   set   out   in   his
      determination.


   8. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Simpson on 24 April 2014.


Consideration: Error of Law

   9. In my judgement the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  the  following
      material errors in determining the appeal:

(i) The Judge proceeded on a factual misconception amounting to an error  of
      law in characterising the  Appellant's  circumstances  when  initially
      entering the UK as being "of genuine subjective need" (paragraph  19).
      The Judge stated "I observe no more than at the time of his claim  for
      protection in 1995, the appellant  was  perceived  as  having  certain
      genuine fears of return, which, however, were thought  not  to  amount
      persecution involving risk of death. It is a relevant factor that  his
      departure from Algeria and his resort to deception to avoid  returning
      there was actuated by some genuine subjective fear of harm, and he was
      not simply an economic migrant". Such an observation was  either  made
      in disregard of, or without explaining any reason for departing  from,
      the  finding  of  Special  Adjudicator  Yelloly  who   dismissed   the
      Appellant's asylum appeal in a determination promulgated on 10 October
      1995 (ref HX/78829/95), concluding - "Looking at  the  evidence  as  a
      whole, I have come to the conclusion that neither the  subjective  nor
      the objective element  of  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for
      Convention  reason  has  been  made  out  to  the   required   degree"
      (Appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal, page 53).

(ii) The Judge was in error to place weight on  the  circumstance  that  the
      Appellant met the requirements of the previous  Immigration  Rules  in
      respect of 14 years long residence (paragraph 276B)  at  a  time  when
      that particular Rule was still in force. The Judge specified  this  to
      be "a highly relevant  factor"  (paragraph  15).  The  matter  is  put
      succinctly in the Respondent's grounds: "The Secretary  of  State  was
      entitled to change the Rules. She  duly  did  so.  The  Appellant  was
      entitled to apply under the Rules before their change. He did  not  do
      so." It is important to note that the changes in the Rules represented
      an  express  intent  to  accord  more  weight  to  the  imperative  of
      maintaining  effective  immigration  control  when  considering  cases
      involving periods of unlawful  residence.  To  accord  weight  to  the
      balance struck under the previous Rules was to disregard the shift  in
      that balance represented by the change of emphasis in the  new  Rules,
      and thereby to fail to give proper regard to the  Respondent's  public
      interest justification for refusing the Appellant's  application.  The
      Appellant's application - and in turn appeal - required to be  decided
      by reference to the current zeitgeist and not by reference  to  policy
      issues that had been superseded

(iii) Further in the context of the change in the  Rules,  in  my  judgement
      the Judge was also in error in according weight  to  the  Respondent's
      failure to respond to  enquiries  about  'Legacy'  as  a  contributory
      factor in the Appellant's failure to make  an  application  under  the
      previous Rules: determination at paragraph 16. It has not  been  shown
      that the Appellant was entitled to consideration under  'Legacy',  far
      less  a  favourable  consideration.  At  best,  it  appears  that  his
      representatives raised  an  enquiry  (not  an  application)  with  the
      Respondent in this  regard  (eg  see  Appellant's  own  email  to  his
      solicitors dated 22 June 2011 - "what we send is not application  just
      a request"). Whilst it is the case that there was no  prompt  response
      to such an enquiry or chasing letters, there is absolutely nothing  in
      the raising of such an enquiry that would have prevented the Appellant
      from  making  an  application  under  paragraph  276B  of  the  Rules.
      Moreover, there is  not  apparent  any  evidence  that  the  Appellant
      refrained from doing so in part because he was awaiting a response  to
      the enquiry concerning 'Legacy': indeed the contrary is  indicated  by
      the email quotation set out above. The Judge has in effect  found  the
      Respondent's conduct to have contributed to a failure of the Appellant
      to make an application under Rule 276B prior to  it  ceasing  to  have
      effect: there is no basis for such an evaluation and the Judge was  in
      error to accord weight to  such  a  circumstance  in  considering  the
      Article 8 proportionality balance.


  10. Because the Judge has expressly given weight to these matters  in  the
      Article 8 proportionality balancing exercise,  the  errors  identified
      are necessarily material. Accordingly I conclude that the decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside.


Re-making the decision

  11. It is not necessary for  further  evidence  to  be  filed  or  further
      testimony to be heard in order to re-make the decision. Accordingly  I
      heard submissions from the representatives as to how the appeal should
      be remade on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal Judges findings of
      primary fact were sound and unchallenged.


  12. The analysis set out above in respect of error of law is  relevant  to
      the remaking of the decision. I do not accord weight to any  of  those
      matters in respect of which, in my judgement, the First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge should not have accorded weight.


  13. It is common ground before me that the Appellant  does  not  meet  the
      requirements of paragraph  276ADE  in  respect  of  private  life,  or
      Appendix FM in respect of family life. Neither party seeks to persuade
      me to take any different view from that expressed  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge at paragraphs 12 and 13.


  14. Whilst the Rules are intended to be Article 8 compliant  and  to  give
      expression to the  Executive's  view  on  where  the  balance  between
      individual rights and public interest is to be struck, they are not  a
      complete code. In Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules -  correct  approach)
      [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and Nagre [2013] EWHC  720  (Admin),  guidance
      was given to the effect that where an  Appellant  does  not  meet  the
      requirements of the Rules the Tribunal  must  turn  its  mind  to  the
      question whether there is good reason to  give  consideration  to  the
      case beyond the express wording of the Rules, mindful that  if  so  it
      will  be  necessary  to  explore   whether   there   are   exceptional
      circumstances which would result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
      if the Appellant were removed from the UK. Whilst some disapproval  of
      the 'intermediate step' referred to in Nagre has now been expressed in
      MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985 (paragraph 128), recent  case  law  -
      including Nagre and Shahzad [2014] UKUT 85  (IAC)  (which  effectively
      followed Gulshan) - is not disapproved (paragraphs 87, 88,  and  131).
      The necessity remains "to identify other non-standard  and  particular
      features of the case of a compelling nature to show that removal would
      be unjustifiably harsh".


  15. Mr Duffy in an admirably brief submission invited me to conclude  that
      on the particular facts of this case the  Rules  provided  a  complete
      answer to the  Appellant's  claim.  He  had  not  completed  20  years
      continuous residence in the UK by the  date  of  his  application,  he
      should not be afforded any benefit by reason of  a  'near  miss',  and
      whilst the First-tier Tribunal Judge had plainly  found  that  he  had
      established a private life  in  the  UK,  there  was  nothing  in  his
      circumstances not covered  by  the  Rules  that  warranted  taking  an
      exceptional approach to relax the requirements of the Rules.


  16. Mr Nasim, in addition to pleading the merits of the case by  reference
      to the length of time in the UK since last entry  and  the  favourable
      findings in respect of private life by reference to presence of family
      members, friendships in the UK, and employment (determination of First-
      tier Tribunal paragraphs 6 and  7),  submitted  that  there  were  two
      unusual features that  warranted  exceptional  consideration.  Firstly
      that the Appellant had been in contact with the Respondent at  a  time
      when he could  have  had  the  benefit  of  the  old  paragraph  276B;
      secondly, although the Appellant had last entered the UK in  1995,  he
      had initially entered in 1991, and had only been absent for two  brief
      periods prior to his last entry - as such he in effect now  had  a  23
      year association with the UK.


  17. I am not persuaded  in  respect  of  the  first  of  these  matters  -
      essentially for the reasons explored in considering 'error of law'.


  18. In respect of the second matter,  Mr  Nasim's  submission  is  to  the
      effect that  if  the  Rules  recognise  that  the  fact  of  20  years
      continuous  residence  in  the  UK  would   in   itself   reflect   an
      establishment of a private life that should be respected  and  allowed
      to continue in the UK, a period of association  and  residence  dating
      back over 23 years and only interrupted by two short  absences  abroad
      should also be considered to reflect the establishment  of  a  private
      life that should be allowed  to  continue.  The  Appellant's  previous
      residence in the UK prior to his last entry is not a matter adequately
      reflected in the Rules and is, it is submitted, a matter that sets him
      apart from another applicant without such an association with  the  UK
      prior to the commencement of the last continuous period of residence.


  19. I agree with this submission. The quality of private life  established
      over 23 years, notwithstanding the two short interruptions is,  in  my
      judgement, and in the absence of any  countervailing  factors,  to  be
      accorded a similar weight to a continuous period  of  20  years,  such
      that the proportionality balance is to be struck  in  a  similar  way.
      There are no countervailing factors in  this  particular  appeal,  and
      indeed much that is said, favourable to the Appellant in  the  primary
      findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  The  overall  period  of
      residence in the UK is  a  non-standard  and  particular  feature  not
      recognised in the Rules and is of a compelling nature.


  20. Accordingly, in respect of the five Razgar questions, there is no real
      issue that the first and second questions are to be  answered  in  the
      Appellant's favour. Further, there is no issue between the parties  in
      respect of the third and fourth Razgar questions. As regards the fifth
      question, proportionality, whilst  I  take  into  account  the  public
      interest in maintaining  effective  immigration  control  through  the
      consistent application of published Rules, and take into  account  the
      Appellant's previous use of deception to secure entry, I find that the
      very particular circumstances of this case mean that the impact on the
      private life established by the Appellant would be unduly harsh if  he
      were to be removed in consequence of the  Respondent's  decision:  the
      proportionality balance favours the Appellant.


  21. I find that the  removal  of  the  Appellant  in  consequence  of  the
      Respondent's decision would involve a disproportionate breach  of  his
      Article 8 rights.

Decision

  22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  an  error  of
      law and is set aside. I re-make the decision in the appeal.


  23. The appeal is allowed.

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     11 September 2014
