
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/35032/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10 April 2018                      |       On 01st May 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                              zohaib aslam raja
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Raw, Counsel, instructed by Middlesex Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, has permission to  challenge  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Brewer  sent  on  27  June  2017
    dismissing his appeal against the decision made by the respondent on 16
    December 2015 refusing his application for  a  residence  card  as  the
    family member of an EEA national.

2.   I am grateful to Mr Raw and Ms Fijiwala for their submissions  in  this
    case.

3.   There are two aspects to this appeal, one procedural, one  substantive.
     The procedural aspect was not raised in the written grounds of  appeal
    but was addressed by  Mr  Raw  with  reference  to  the  chronology  of
    proceedings.  It seemed to me that this aspect could not be ignored and
    that it was important for me to hear submissions from both  parties  on
    it.  Mr Raw contended that the judge's decision made in June  2017  was
    procedurally flawed  because  it  made  no  reference  to  the  earlier
    directions made by a FtTJ judge on 22 March (adjourning the case) or to
    the subsequent notice of hearing sent  on  25  April  2017.   The  said
    direction included the stipulation that "If Respondent  is  relying  on
    the marriage interview record full transcript and  summary  identifying
    issues relied on by Respondent to be provided within 21 days".  Mr  Raw
    submitted that the respondent did in fact reply to that  direction  but
    not until 24 August 2017 when she sent to  the  appellant's  solicitors
    supplementary reasons to be attached to the 2015 refusal.

4.   Ms Fijiwala did not object to Mr Raw raising  this  ground  but  argued
    that the chronology did not disclose a material error because the judge
    did have regard to the interview record and summary when deciding it on
    the papers in June 2017.  The case had been processed to be dealt  with
    on the papers because the appellant had indicated that  he  wanted  the
    appeal to be decided on the papers without a hearing.

5.   It is indeed odd that the respondent should have  written  to  the  FtT
    and appellant's solicitors on 24 August 2017 attaching a  supplementary
    decision dated 28 July 2017 in response to earlier directions  made  by
    the FtT in March 2017, since the court file shows that she had  already
    responded to these directions in a letter sent to the  FtT  on  24  May
    2017 stating "In accordance with the directions, please  find  enclosed
    the Marriage Interview Record and Interview Summary  Sheet".   Further,
    the author of the 24 August letter clearly knew the decision  had  been
    determined on the papers in June.  Whilst odd, I agree with Ms Fijiwala
    that this did not cause any procedural unfairness.  I  arrive  at  that
    conclusion for four reasons.  First, the appellant himself specifically
    requested that the case be dealt with on  the  papers.   Middlesex  Law
    Chambers wrote to the FtT on 2 May 2017 stating:

     "As the court will be aware our client  suffered  substantial  injuries
         to his spine and head.  This has caused him to be  immobilized  and
         unable to attend  court  for  the  next  few  months.   Our  client
         therefore requires  the  hearing  to  be  transferred  to  a  paper
         appeal."

     Second, as already  noted,  the  respondent  did  respond  to  the  FtT
    directions of March 2017 on 24 May 2017 and  produced  materials  fully
    complying with those directions.  Third, the judge's decision  made  on
    the  papers  in  June  2017  clearly  took  full  cognisance   of   the
    respondent's further materials.  Fourth, the appellant did not seek  to
    make any further submission or provide any further evidence in response
    to the FtT directions as set out in the letter of 2 May 2017  that  any
    written evidence or submissions  must  be  sent  to  the  Tribunal  and
    respondent by 30 May 2017.

6.   I turn then to the substantive grounds; which in essence are twofold.

7.   It is first contended that the judge failed to have  regard  to  or  to
    have adequate regard to the substantial body  of  documentary  evidence
    which included a will and life insurance policies, a tenancy  agreement
    signed on  29  December  2012  saying  the  accommodation  was  shared,
    photographs and medical reports.  Secondly it is argued that the  judge
    was wrong to characterise the discrepancies in the  marriage  interview
    as major; they were in fact relatively minor  and  they  arise  in  the
    context of a lengthy interview in  which  the  respondent  acknowledged
    that the couple's answers to most questions were satisfactory.

8.    Before  turning  to  specifics,  it  is  salient   to   make   several
    observations about  the  judge's  decision.   At  paragraphs  17-20  he
    correctly set out the relevant case law principles noting in particular
    at paragraph 17 that:

     "In Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14 it was held that the focus in  relation  to
         a marriage of convenience ought to  be  on  the  intention  of  the
         parties at the time the marriage  was  entered  into,  whereas  the
         question of whether a marriage was subsisting looked to whether the
         marital relationship was a continuing one.  Nonetheless, the First-
         tier Tribunal was correct to look at the  evidence  concerning  the
         relationship  between  the  Claimant  and  the  Sponsor  after  the
         marriage itself, since that was capable of casting light  on  their
         intention at the time of marriage."

     and at paragraph 20 that:

     "In Rosa ... it was held that the Secretary  of  State  had  the  legal
         burden of proving that an otherwise valid marriage was  a  marriage
         of convenience so as to  justify  refusing  an  application  for  a
         residence card.  If the Secretary of State adduced evidence capable
         of suggesting that the marriage was  not  genuine,  the  evidential
         burden shifted to the applicant."

9.   The grounds vaguely allude to the judge failing  to  clarify  that  the
    standard of proof was the balance of probability.  It is true the judge
    does not state this in terms,  but  it  is  clear  that  this  was  the
    standard applied and the grounds do not identify any passage indicating
    otherwise.

10.  It is also clear that the judge had regard to the full  corpus  of  the
    appellant's decision.  At paragraph 21 he stated:

     "I have considered the following:

         (i)  Reasons for Refusal Letter;


         (ii) Grounds of appeal and  skeleton  argument  on  behalf  of  the
             Appellant;


         (iii)    Appellant's bundle and additional bundle;


         (iv) A number of photographs."

11.  Turning to the two grounds, it is convenient to  deal  first  with  the
    contention that the judge erred in regarding the discrepancies  in  the
    couple's marriage interview as  major.   The  first  thing  to  observe
    regarding  this  matter  is  that  the  judge  did  not  describe   the
    discrepancies as "major".  That was the description the respondent used
    in her summary sheet, but it was not taken up by the judge.  Rather the
    judge refers to a number of significant differences.  It is clear  that
    an important feature  of  these  discrepancies  was  their  number  and
    cumulative effect.  Thus whether or not as Mr Raw asserts, some of  the
    discrepancies taken individually were minor, this  did  not  mean  that
    cumulative effect was not significant.  I would also  observe  that  at
    least some of the discrepancies were not easy to explain; e.g. the fact
    that the appellant said the sponsor drank coffee on  their  first  date
    whereas she said she never drank coffee.  Further, the judge  only  saw
    fit to assess these discrepancies with a view to determine whether  the
    respondent had adduced sufficient evidence to discharge the  evidential
    burden that rested on her: see paragraph 56.  This way of assessing the
    appellant's case meant that  the  discrepancies  were  not  treated  as
    determinative of the appeal.

12.  In my judgement  the  judge's  identification  and  evaluation  of  the
    discrepancies in their marriage interview was entirely within the range
    of reasonable responses.

13.   I  am  nevertheless  persuaded  that  the  appellant's  first   ground
    discloses an arguable error of law.  By virtue of the guidance set  out
    by the Court of Appeal in Rosa,  it  was  incumbent  on  the  judge  to
    consider whether the couple had entered into a marriage of  convenience
    in July 2013 by considering what light was shed on this issue  by  both
    prior and subsequent events.  In relation to prior  events,  the  judge
    appears to have proceeded on the  basis  that  there  was  no  evidence
    indicating cohabitation prior to  their  marriage.   That  was  correct
    inasmuch as the appellant had  not  been  able  to  produce  a  tenancy
    agreement naming the couple, but there was a tenancy agreement dated 29
    December 2012 at the Northampton Avenue address for two tenants,  which
    was consistent with a claim to cohabitation.   More  importantly  there
    was cogent evidence of cohabitation in 2014, evidence that  was  enough
    to satisfy the judge that "they have co-habited at  least  since  March
    2014".  Yet the judge's acceptance that the couple had been  cohabiting
    since March 2014 does not appear to have been considered at all for the
    light it potentially shed on their claim to have  begun  cohabiting  in
    late 2012.

14.  The fact that on his own findings the judge was positing was  that  the
    appellant and his wife had deliberately entered a  sham  marriage,  but
    had then entered into a  genuine  relationship  also  required  a  more
    focused approach to the  photographic  evidence.   For  the  judge  the
    weakness of this evidence was that  "there  were  remarkably  few  non-
    wedding pictures".  That was relevant to assessment of the post-wedding
    relationship between the couple,  but  since  the  judge  accepted  the
    couple were cohabiting from March 2014 anyway, the lack of photos  from
    that period onwards was little  to  the  point.   Yet  as  regards  the
    fifteen wedding photos, the judge says nothing at all.  Given  that  on
    his analysis such photos must have been staged or contrived, this is  a
    serious shortcoming.

15.  Read as a whole the judge's decision  does  not  demonstrate  that  the
    documentary evidence was analysed  from  the  correct  perspective  and
    bearing in mind that the respondent bore the ultimate legal  burden  of
    proving a marriage of convenience.  The shortcomings  identified  above
    constitute a material error of law.

16.  I do not consider I am in a position to re-make the decision since  the
    documentary  evidence  relating  to  the   nature   of   the   couple's
    relationship at the date of marriage is relatively sparse.  Because the
    judge dealt with the case on the papers,  I  lack  any  prior  judicial
    assessment of oral testimonies.  It is essential that the appellant  be
    afforded an opportunity to attend a  further  hearing  along  with  his
    spouse and witnesses who attended their wedding, so that their evidence
    can be tested in cross-examination.  It is most appropriate if the case
    is dealt with by way of remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.

17.  If despite my strong indication that oral testimony should be given  to
    the next hearing the appellant chooses (as he did  last  time)  not  to
    request (and pay for) an oral  hearing,  he  cannot  complain  (in  the
    absence of special circumstances) if the next judge treats that  choice
    as indicative of  a  lack  of  confidence  in  his  own  evidence.   To
    conclude:

        The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside  for  material  error  of
    law.

        The case is remitted to the First tier  Tribunal  not  before  Judge
    Brewer)

18.  No anonymity direction is made.





Signed:                                 Date: 26 April 2018
            [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

