
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/35304/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 11 August 2015                    |On 21 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       MARIA ESTRELLA BENITEZ GIRALDO
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Akther, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Claimant is a Colombian citizen with two grandchildren by her  son.
    Her grandchildren are British Citizens and her son has indefinite leave
    to remain. First-tier Tribunal Judge Veloso allowed  her  human  rights
    appeal under Article 8 against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    refuse her further leave to remain, either pursuant to paragraph 276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules or outside the Rules, on the  basis  of  Nagre
    exceptionality.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  that  decision,
    arguing that the First-tier Tribunal should have but did  not  consider
    the Claimant's case under the Immigration Rules and  that  insufficient
    weight was given to the public interest. The Claimant has a son in  the
    UK who has a lifelong condition, for which he has been waiting  for  an
    operation. He came to the UK with his father in 1995 at the age of  13,
    but his father went back to Colombia in or about 2011.  The  Claimant's
    son is now 33 years old, with a partner and children of his own: he  is
    working and no longer requires daily assistance. His  father  remarried
    in Colombia. The Claimant's son is not  the  principal  carer  for  his
    children, who live with his ex-partner during the week and see him  and
    the Claimant on weekends.  It is the Secretary of State's case that the
    relationship between the Claimant and her grandchildren can  reasonably
    be continued by means of modern means of communication.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Judge P J M Hollingworth
    on the basis that arguable errors of law had arisen in relation to  the
    proportionality exercise in respect of those matters  to  which  weight
    should be accorded and further in respect of the application of section
    117 of the 2002 Act.

Submissions

 4. Ms Fijiwala submitted that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  concluding
    that the provisions of paragraph 276ADE did not apply to the  Claimant.
    Ms Fijiwala referred us to Singh and Khalid v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 74. The Court of Appeal decided  in
    that case that with effect  from  the  introduction  of  HC  565  on  6
    September 2013 the Secretary of State was entitled to take into account
    the provisions of Appendix FM and paragraphs 276ADE-276DH  in  deciding
    private or family life applications even if they were made prior  to  9
    July 2012. The result was that the law as it was held to be in Edgehill
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  40  only
    obtained as regards decisions taken in the two month-period  between  9
    July 2012 and 6 September 2012. Since the Secretary of State's decision
    in this case was made on 2 September 2014 it fell outside  this  window
    and therefore the Judge should have applied the provisions of paragraph
    276ADE.

 5. Ms Fijiwala submitted that the First-tier Tribunal therefore failed  to
    apply the 'two-stage approach'. She referred us to [33] in the judgment
    of Richards LJ in Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  v  SS
    (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  and  submitted  that  that  compelling
    circumstances needed to be identified to support a claim for  grant  of
    leave to remain outside the new Rules in Appendix  FM.  The  Judge,  in
    failing to undertake the two stage approach, had failed to  accord  any
    weight to relevant public interest considerations. At [44 & 45] in  the
    judgment of Richards LJ in SS (Congo), the Court gave guidance  on  the
    proper approach:

         "44.     The proper approach should always be to  identify,  first,
             the substantive content of  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules,
             both to see if an applicant  for  LTR  or  LTE  satisfies  the
             conditions laid down in those Rules (so as to be  entitled  to
             LTR or LTE within the Rules) and to assess the  force  of  the
             public interest given expression in those rules (which will be
             relevant  to  the  balancing  exercise  under  Article  8,  in
             deciding whether LTR or LTE  should  be  granted  outside  the
             substantive provisions set out in the Rules). Secondly, if  an
             applicant does not satisfy the requirements in the substantive
             part of the Rules, they may seek to maintain a claim for grant
             of LTR or LTE outside the substantive provisions of the Rules,
             pursuant to Article 8. If there is a reasonably arguable  case
             under Article 8 which has not already been sufficiently  dealt
             with by consideration of the application under the substantive
             provisions of the  Rules  (cf  Nagre,  para.  [30]),  then  in
             considering  that  case  the  individual  interests   of   the
             applicant and others whose  Article  8  rights  are  in  issue
             should be balanced against the public interest,  including  as
             expressed in the Rules, in order to make an assessment whether
             refusal  to  grant  LTR  or  LTE,  as  the  case  may  be,  is
             disproportionate and hence unlawful by virtue of section  6(1)
             of the HRA read with Article 8.

         45.      Sometimes, the  latter  stage  of  the  analysis  will  be
             covered by the text of the Rules themselves, as in relation to
             the Rules governing deportation of foreign criminals  reviewed
             in MF (Nigeria). Those Rules laid down substantive  conditions
             which, if satisfied, would lead to the grant of LTR, but  also
             stated   that   LTR   might   be   granted   "in   exceptional
             circumstances"  if  the  substantive   conditions   were   not
             satisfied in a particular case.  Where  the  Rules  take  this
             form, it can be said that they form a "complete code", in  the
             sense that both stages of analysis are covered by the text  of
             the Rules. But this does not take one very  far,  since  under
             the "exceptional circumstances" rubric one still has to  allow
             for consideration of any matters bearing on the application of
             Article 8  for  the  purposes  of  the  second  stage  of  the
             analysis: see, e.g., AJ (Angola), above,  at  [46]  and  [55].
             This is the basic point made by this court at paras. [44]-[46]
             of its judgment in MF (Nigeria)."

 6. The First-tier Tribunal, in Ms Fijiwala's submission, had not  assessed
    the force of the public interest given expression  by  the  Rules.  The
    Claimant could not have met the requirements of paragraph  276ADE.  The
    First-tier Tribunal found at  paragraph  32  that  she  would  have  no
    problems re-integrating. She further submitted, that if the  First-tier
    Tribunal were correct to  consider  the  Claimant's  case  outside  the
    Rules, the Claimant's son had to undergo an  operation  but  he  had  a
    partner in the UK and this was not considered  in  the  proportionality
    balance. He did not require help on a daily basis. It was unclear  from
    the evidence whether at the date of hearing a further  operation  would
    be needed. The Judge should have considered the  circumstances  at  the
    date of the hearing. The effect of her return on the grandchildren  was
    considered at paragraph 36. It was accepted  that  the  children  lived
    with their mother and had their parents.

 7. Ms Fijiwala  also  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not
    properly applied s117B (4) of the 2002 Act. The First-tier Tribunal had
    made material errors of law.

 8. Ms Akther submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had made  no  material
    errors of  law  in  the  decision.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  said  at
    paragraph 26 of her decision that the consideration of  the  Claimant's
    application under paragraph 276ADE had not materially impacted  on  the
    Secretary of State's decision. Miss Akther submitted that the  Claimant
    could not in any event succeed under paragraph 276ADE. The  Rules  were
    the first port of  call  but  the  First-tier  Tribunal  could  not  be
    criticised for applying Article 8 outside the Rules. Family life in the
    UK had been established between mother and son. In  2002  her  son  was
    only just an adult. He was her only son and she could not  go  back  to
    other children. The First-tier Tribunal had given full reasons for  the
    decision. Her son had a severe heart condition. He was  still  awaiting
    further surgery. There was the ongoing danger of  a  heart-attack.  The
    Article 8 exercise was carried out  correctly  considering  the  Razgar
    test. The provisions of section  117B  (4)  were  not  engaged  as  the
    Judge's findings were in relation to family rather than  private  life.
    With regard to s55 of the UK Borders Act, the Secretary  of  State  was
    wrong to distinguish between parents and grandparents.

Decision and reasons

 9. We deal with each of the Secretary of  State's  grounds  in  turn.  The
    first ground is in  essence  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    concluding that the provisions of the new Rules were not material.  The
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal is  against  a  decision  made  on  2
    September 2014 to remove  the  Claimant  by  way  of  directions  under
    section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, over two years after
    the introduction of the new Rules.

10. The grounds of appeal are dated 1 February 2015 and rely on the case of
    Edgehill v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    40. On 12 February 2015 the Court of Appeal handed down the judgment in
    Singh. The Edgehill principles are now  restricted  to  decisions  made
    between 9 July 2012 and 6 September 2012: the decision under appeal was
    taken on  2  September  2014,  well  outside  the  Edgehill  window  of
    application, and we are satisfied, having regard to the Singh guidance,
    that the First-tier Tribunal erred in applying Edgehill to the facts of
    this case.

11. The First-tier Tribunal failed to approach the appeal on the  basis  of
    the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in Singh.  Failure  to  apply
    the Singh guidance is a plain error of law.  The  question  for  us  is
    whether it is material, that is to say, whether  applying  the  correct
    approach, the outcome might have been different. The new Rules do apply
    and the correct approach therefore was for the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    apply the provisions of paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM, and  then  to
    consider exceptionality.

12. The Appellant cannot meet the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE.  As
    stated above, she falls short of the residence  requirements  by  seven
    years and it has not been argued on her  behalf  that  there  are  very
    significant obstacles to her  integration  in  Columbia.  The  evidence
    recorded by the First-tier Tribunal was that she had run businesses and
    had family there. Her inability to meet the requirements of  the  Rules
    by a significant margin weighs heavily on the public interest  side  of
    the scales.

13. For the Claimant, Ms Akther sought to persuade us that  the  error  was
    immaterial, since the claimant could  not  have  succeeded  within  the
    Rules, applying paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM.  Although  the  Rules
    were the first port of  call  the  First-tier  Tribunal  could  not  be
    criticised for applying Article 8 outside the Rules.

14. The Secretary of State's answer to this, as set out at paragraph  6  of
    the grounds and expanded on by Ms  Fijiwala,  is  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal misdirected itself as to the threshold of proportionality.

15. We have considered the case law in relation to the  two-stage  approach
    and the interaction  between  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the  public
    interest considerations in the assessment of proportionality.

16. In R (Nagre) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWHC
    720 (Admin), Sales J (as he then was) stated at [29] that:

         "... the new Rules do  provide  better  explicit  coverage  of  the
         factors identified in case-law as relevant to  analysis  of  claims
         under Article 8 than was formerly the position, so  in  many  cases
         the main points for consideration in relation to Article 8 will  be
         addressed by decision-makers applying the new Rules. It is only if,
         after doing that, there remains an arguable case that there may  be
         good grounds for granting leave to  remain  outside  the  Rules  by
         reference to Article 8 that it will  be  necessary  for  Article  8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the  new  Rules  to
         require the grant of such leave".

17. The two-stage approach has been approved by the Court of  Appeal  in  a
    number of cases including Singh and Khalid v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  72.
    The  decision-maker  should  adopt  a  two-stage  process.   The  first
    question is whether the individual can succeed under the Rules and  the
    second is, if not, can he or she succeed outside the Rules under Art 8.
    There is no threshold requirement  of  arguability  before  a  decision
    maker  reaches  the  second  stage.  However,   the   extent   of   any
    consideration outside the Rules will depend upon whether all the issues
    have been adequately addressed under the Rules.  In Singh and Khalid in
    the Court of Appeal, Underhill LJ opined at [64]

         "...there is no need to conduct a full separate examination of  Art
         8 outside the Rules where, in the  circumstances  of  a  particular
         case, all the issues have been addressed in the consideration under
         the Rules."

18. In SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at [32] Richards LJ in the  Court  of
    Appeal clarified the relationship between the Immigration Rules and the
    public interest considerations:

          "However, even away from those contexts, if the Secretary of State
         has sought to formulate Immigration Rules to reflect a fair balance
         of interests under Article 8 in the general run  of  cases  falling
         within their scope, then, as explained above, the Rules  themselves
         will  provide  significant  evidence  about  the  relevant   public
         interest considerations which should be brought into account when a
         court or tribunal seeks to strike the proper balance  of  interests
         under Article 8 in making its own decision. As Beatson LJ  observed
         in Haleemudeen v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]
         EWCA Civ 558; [2014] Imm AR 6, at [40], the new Rules  in  Appendix
         FM:

             "... are a central part of the legislative and policy  context
             in which the interests of  immigration  control  are  balanced
             against the interests and rights of people who  have  come  to
             this country and wish to settle in it. Overall, the  Secretary
             of State's policy as to when an interference with an Article 8
             right  will  be   regarded   as   disproportionate   is   more
             particularised in the new Rules than it had previously been."

         Accordingly, a court or tribunal is required to give the new  Rules
         "greater  weight  than  as  merely  a  starting   point   for   the
         consideration  of  the  proportionality  of  an  interference  with
         Article 8 rights" (para. [47])."

19. At 33 Richardson LJ further observed:

         "In our judgment, even though a test  of  exceptionality  does  not
         apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
         accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of
         special contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances
         would need to be identified to support a claim  for  grant  of  LTR
         outside the new Rules in Appendix  FM.  In  our  view,  that  is  a
         formulation which is not as strict as a test of exceptionality or a
         requirement of "very compelling reasons"  (as  referred  to  in  MF
         (Nigeria) in  the  context  of  the  Rules  applicable  to  foreign
         criminals), but which  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the  focused
         consideration of public interest factors as finds expression in the
         Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in Appendix FM."

20. At paragraphs 44 and 45 the Court set out the proper approach cited  at
    paragraph 5 above. It is clear therefore, that in an appeal  under  the
    new Rules, where an applicant cannot satisfy the  requirements  of  the
    Rules, the Rules are to be given greater weight than a  starting  point
    and will inform the proportionality assessment as an expression of  the
    public interest.  Even  if  an  applicant  is  unable  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of the new Rules, they remain material to  the  assessment
    of  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the  public  interest   in   the
    proportionality exercise. The Tribunal's failure to  consider  the  two
    stage test therefore in our view inarguably impacted on her  assessment
    of proportionality.

21. For  the  above  reasons  we  conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    materially erred in law and the decision is to be set aside.

Re-making of decision

22. We proceed to re-make the decision on the basis of the evidence  before
    us and the parties' respective submissions.

23. It was conceded  by  Mr  Akther  that  the  Claimant  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE. It  is  also  conceded  that  she  is
    unable to demonstrate that there would be very significant obstacles to
    her integration into Colombia.  The existence of  family  life  is  not
    disputed.

24. We have therefore considered whether there is a good claim outside  the
    Rules.  We remind ourselves that the Rules  are  to  be  given  greater
    weight than a  starting  point  and  will  inform  the  proportionality
    assessment as an expression of the public interest.

25. We must however consider the  nature  of  that  family  life,  for  the
    purpose of assessing the proportionality of removing the Claimant.  The
    Claimant's grandchildren do not live in the same household as she,  nor
    in the same household as her son. The Claimant's son and the children's
    mother separated in 2012.

26. The Claimant has obtained a Contact Order dated 9  January  2012  under
    which she sees her grandchildren when they stay with her from  Saturday
    to Sunday afternoon and she stays at their mother's house at least  one
    day during the week. A letter before the First-tier Tribunal  from  the
    children's mother dated 27 November 2014  confirms  that  the  Claimant
    sees them regularly and states that she has had 'huge impact' on  their
    lives.  This evidence was not challenged in the submissions recorded by
    the First-tier Tribunal. Until they were 6 and 3 years old the Claimant
    lived with her grandchildren. We accept on the basis of  this  evidence
    that she has a close relationship with her grandchildren.

27. The medical evidence goes back to 1997 and demonstrates that her  son's
    heart condition arose as a result of rheumatic  fever.  The  Claimant's
    statement describes her concerns and fears as  the  mother  of  a  sick
    child. His witness statement describes a special bond with  his  mother
    as a result of the fact that she was always by  his  side.  We  accept,
    that particularly in view of her son's serious health condition and the
    period  they  have  lived  together  in  the  United   Kingdom,   their
    relationship is a very close one.

28. In addressing the questions in Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2004] UKHL 27 we find that the proposed interference is  of
    sufficient  gravity  to  engage  the  operation  of  Article   8,   the
    interference  is  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  necessary  in  a
    democratic society. The remaining question  is  therefore  whether  the
    interference is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be
    achieved.

29. By virtue of section 117A of the Immigration Act 2014,  in  considering
    the public interest question, we must have regard to the considerations
    listed in section  117B.  Subsection  (2)  provides  that  "the  public
    interest question" means the question of whether an interference with a
    person's right to respect for private  and  family  life  is  justified
    under Article 8(2). The public interest  provisions  are  contained  in
    primary legislation and override existing  case  law.  Section  117A(3)
    confirms that the  Tribunal  is  required  to  carry  out  a  balancing
    exercise.

30. In Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90  the  Upper  Tribunal  held  that
    Judges are duty bound to "have regard" to the specified considerations.
    In AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 the Upper Tribunal  held  that  an
    appellant can gain no positive rights to a grant  of  leave  to  remain
    from either s117B(2) or (3), whatever the  degree  of  his  fluency  in
    English, or the strength of his financial resources. Since family  life
    is not in dispute, section 117B(4) has no impact on our decision, since
    it only directs that little weight be given to private life established
    when the person has precarious or no status in the United  Kingdom,  so
    that no difference exists in relation to family life between  the  pre-
    and post- July 2014 position.

31. We have considered the strength of the Claimant's family life  ties  in
    the United Kingdom. The Appellant's son  is  her  only  child  and  his
    children are her only  grandchildren.  He  is  33  years  old  and  his
    children are 9 and 7 years old.

32. According to the medical evidence in the Claimant's bundle  with  which
    no issue was taken before the First-tier Tribunal, her son suffers from
    post-traumatic heart disease. He had an aortic and mitral valve  repair
    in 1997 due to  severe  aortic  mitral  regurgitation,  and  a  further
    procedure in 2002 also due to severe residual aortic regurgitation.  He
    had a 'redo-operation' in 2002. According his consultant's letter dated
    7 October 2014, although he appears well, he has  ongoing  dilation  of
    his aortic root and significant regurgitation from his aortic valve and
    requires a further "re-do" operation which "constitutes extremely  high
    risk surgery".

33. We have considered the best interests  of  the  children  which  are  a
    primary consideration. The Secretary of State considered  the  position
    of the children  in  the  refusal  letter  of  2  September  2014.  She
    considered section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act.
    She concluded that it was not  disproportionate  for  the  Claimant  to
    return to Columbia where should could keep  in  touch  through  mediums
    such as Skype and would be able to  enter  as  a  visitor  to  see  her
    grandchildren. Although the Claimant was mentioned on a  contact  order
    so were both the children's parents who would be able  to  provide  for
    their safety and welfare.

34. The evidence before us in relation to their best interests consists  of
    witness statements of the Claimant, her son and his current partner and
    a letter from his former partner. There are  also  photographs  of  the
    Claimant and  her  grandchildren.  All  witnesses  attest  to  a  close
    relationship.

35. In ZH (Tanzania) (FC) (Appellant) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  (Respondent)  [2011]  UKSC  4  Lady  Hale  held  that  that
    identifying the best interests of children would not lead inexorably to
    a decision in  conformity  with  those  interests.  Provided  that  the
    Tribunal did not treat  any  other  consideration  as  inherently  more
    significant than the best interests of the children, it could  conclude
    that the strength of the  other  considerations  outweighed  them.  The
    important thing, therefore, is to consider those best interests  first.
    She endorsed the UNHCR Guidelines on Determining the Best Interests  of
    the Child (May 2008) at paragraph  1.1  which  state  "The  term  'best
    interests' broadly describes the well-being of a child." The age of the
    children, the closeness of their relationship  with  the  other  family
    members in the  United  Kingdom  and  whether  the  family  could  live
    together elsewhere are to be important factors which should be borne in
    mind.

36. The children currently live with their mother and see their father  and
    the Claimant and weekends. We find that their  best  interests  are  to
    remain living with their mother in the  United  Kingdom  who  is  their
    primary carer and see their father regularly. It  is  also  clearly  in
    their best interests to enjoy the benefits of health care and education
    to which they are entitled as British citizens. The children are of  an
    age where their focus  will  be  on  their  parents.  In  view  of  the
    Claimant's presence in their lives since their birth they would without
    doubt miss her a great deal and communication by modern means would not
    allow the level of interaction  and  contact  which  currently  exists.
    Their mother is a British Citizen  as  are  they  and  they  cannot  be
    expected reasonably to  relocate  to  Colombia.  Consequently,  if  the
    Claimant is removed, any meaningful family life between them is  likely
    to be interrupted.

37. With regard to the factors in section 117B, we take account of the fact
    that the maintenance of immigration controls is in the public interest.
    It is also in the public interest that a person  seeking  to  enter  or
    remain speaks English. The Appellant has studied English  and  produced
    certificates at pages 42 to 47 of her bundle demonstrating that she had
    been awarded the Cambridge ESOL Entry Level Certificate in ESOL  Skills
    for Life. We accept therefore that she speaks English. This does not of
    course, give her a positive right to leave to remain.

38. It is in the public interest that persons who seek to enter  or  remain
    in the United Kingdom are financially independent which the Claimant is
    not, as she depends entirely on her son. She has not, however,  been  a
    burden on the state. In Forman (ss 117A-C considerations)  [2015]  UKUT
    00412 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held that the public  interest  in  firm
    immigration control is not diluted by the consideration that  a  person
    pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at no time been  a  financial
    burden on the state or is self-sufficient or is  likely  to  remain  so
    indefinitely.  The significance of these factors is that where they are
    not present the public interest is fortified.

39. According to section 117B, little weight should be  given  to-  (a)   a
    private life, or (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying  partner,
    that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully. Little weight should be given to  a  private
    life established by a person at a time when  the  person's  immigration
    status is precarious. We therefore give little weight to the Claimant's
    private life as it has been  established  whilst  she  was  in  the  UK
    unlawfully.

40. The Claimant's case is advanced on the strength of  her  family  rather
    than private life.  The Claimant arrived in the UK with a  valid  visit
    visa on 18 March 2002. She was subsequently  granted  an  extension  of
    stay until 30 December 2002. On 15 November 2002 she applied for  leave
    as a parent of a settled person and this application was rejected on  7
    February 2003 as her son  had  not  been  granted  settled  status.  An
    application for leave outside the rules on the basis of a need to  care
    for her son was made on 28 February 2003 and this  was  refused  on  26
    August 2003. An application was then made on 28 February 2012 based  on
    the Claimant's human rights which was refused on 19 March 2013.

41. The Claimant's son does not currently require her care. Indeed,  he  is
    working. However, he continues to be unwell: he was scheduled  to  have
    his fourth surgery to replace his aortic valve with a mechanical  valve
    on 11 December 2013, but his surgeon decided  not  to  operate  on  him
    because of the high risk involved and also  knowing  that  there  is  a
    fifth surgery to replace his pulmonary  valve  lined  up.  His  surgeon
    therefore suggested prolonging the surgery delay, to see if both valves
    could be replaced at  the  same  time,  even  though  the  risk  became
    greater. He states that his cardiologist said he needed this surgery as
    soon as possible or there was a chance he could 'just drop dead' or his
    heart will tear with irreversible repairs.

42. The letter from Dr Cullen does not  specify  a  date  for  surgery  but
    states that he has arranged for a further cardiovascular MRI  scan  and
    the timing of the surgery will depend on the serial echocardiograms and
    MRI scans. Although no date is specified we do not find the information
    provided by his cardiologist inconsistent with  the  Appellant's  son's
    statement that he requires surgery as soon as possible. In view of  the
    fact that the surgery is 'extremely high-risk' we conclude  that  there
    are exceptional and compelling circumstances in this case. In  view  of
    her son's condition, it would not be reasonable for him to relocate  to
    Colombia to continue family life with his mother there. We note that he
    gave evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that he was unable to  fly
    and that evidence was accepted.   We do not find that this is  unlikely
    in the light of the evidence in relation to his heart condition.

43. We have carefully weighed the public interest  considerations  set  out
    above against the strength  of  the  Claimant's  family  life  and  the
    interests of her son and grandchildren. We find that there  are  strong
    factors on the public interest side of the balance  consisting  of  her
    inability to satisfy the Immigration Rules by a significant margin, her
    absence of leave and the s117 factors discussed above.   We  have  also
    taken account of the fact that her son has a partner who would be  able
    to provide him with care after an operation. However, her son with whom
    she has a very close relationship is facing extremely high-risk surgery
    which we accept is likely  to  be  urgent.  Her  presence  during  this
    surgery is of extreme significance  to  both  of  them.  We  also  take
    account of the fact that it will be a very  difficult  period  for  the
    children. We consider that the refusal of  leave  to  remain  in  these
    circumstances is disproportionate.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We set aside the decision.

We re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Consequential Directions

Forthwith on receipt  of  this  decision  the  respondent  shall  grant  the
appellant leave to remain for such period as is necessary to give effect  to
this determination.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and there  is  no
application before us nor any reason on  the  evidence  why  such  an  order
would be necessary.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray




Fee Award

In the light of our decision to  re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
allowing it, we have considered whether to make a  fee  award  (rule  9  (1)
(costs) of the Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2014 and section 12(4)(a)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007).

We have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

We have decided to make no fee award.

Reasons:

We have allowed the appeal on the basis of the evidence that was not before
the Respondent at the date of the decision.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

