
[pic]
IAC-CH-SA-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35622/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Fields House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18th February 2016                     |On 9th March 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                          mr md ariful hoque sunny
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M A Syed-Ali of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 29th August 1987.   He
    appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated 30th August 2014 to
    refuse his application for leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules under Article 8 (right to respect for private and family life) of
    the Human Rights Convention.  His appeal was allowed at first  instance
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Clarke sitting at Taylor  House  on
    9th June 2015 such that a lawful decision remained to  be  taken.   The
    Respondent appeals with leave against that decision but for the sake of
    convenience I shall continue to refer to the parties as they were known
    at first instance.

2.   The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 17th September  2009  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student with leave valid until 31st July  2012.   This
    was extended  until  28th  June  2015.   On  10th  September  2013  the
    Appellant married Ms Rukiya Khanom, a British citizen ("the  Sponsor").
    On 25th July 2014 the Appellant submitted his application for leave  to
    remain as the spouse of a settled person the refusal of which has given
    rise to the present proceedings.

The Explanation for Refusal

3.   The Respondent refused the application under  Section  S-LTR.2.2(a)  of
    Appendix  FM  to  the  Immigration  Rules  and  paragraph  320  of  the
    Immigration  Rules.   This  provides  that  whether  or  not   to   the
    applicant's  knowledge:   (a)  false  information  representations   or
    documents have been submitted in relation to the application  including
    false information submitted to any person to obtain a document used  in
    support of the application or (b) there has been a failure to  disclose
    material facts in relation to the application the application is to  be
    refused. By virtue of paragraph 320 leave to enter  or  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom is to be refused where false representations  have  been
    made or false documents or information have been submitted  whether  or
    not material to  the  application  or  material  facts  have  not  been
    disclosed in  relation  to  the  application  or  in  order  to  obtain
    documents from the Respondent or a third party required in  support  of
    the application.  (320(7A)).

4.   The Respondent gave the following reasons for her decision:


         "Educational Testing Service (ETS) is obliged to report test scores
         that accurately reflect the performance of test takers.   For  that
         reason ETS routinely reviews testing irregularities  and  questions
         test results believed to be earned under abnormal  or  non-standard
         circumstances.  ETS's score cancellation  policy  states  that  ETS
         reserves the right to cancel scores and/or take other action deemed
         appropriate where ETS determines your test centre was not following
         established guidelines set forth by the TOEIC programme.  During an
         administrative review process, ETS have confirmed  that  your  test
         was obtained through deception.  Because the validity of your  test
         results  could  not  be  authenticated   your   scores   from   the
         certificates submitted with your application of 13th July 2012 have
         been cancelled.  You are specifically considered a person  who  has
         sought leave to remain in the United Kingdom by deception following
         information provided to us by Educational Testing Service  that  an
         anomaly with your speaking test indicated the presence of  a  proxy
         test taker".

5.   The Appellant met the eligibility requirements but  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of EX1 because  there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles
    preventing the Appellant from continuing his relationship with his wife
    from outside the United Kingdom.  There were no  legal  impediments  or
    insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  continuing
    their  relationship  overseas.   The  Appellant  could  not  meet   the
    requirements for leave to remain on  the  basis  of  his  private  life
    because he had failed the suitability requirements and therefore  could
    not meet the Rules on eligibility grounds.  The Appellant  had  entered
    the United Kingdom on 17th September 2009 and as at  the  date  of  the
    refusal letter had lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  four  years  and
    eleven months.  He  could  not  meet  the  requirement  to  have  lived
    continuously in the United Kingdom for at least twenty years.

6.   There were no exceptional  circumstances  as  to  why  the  Appellant's
    application should be granted outside the Rules.  When he  entered  the
    United Kingdom his leave was as a Tier 4 Student and therefore  he  was
    not in the United Kingdom on a route to settlement.  He could have  had
    no expectation that he would be allowed to remain in the United Kingdom
    indefinitely.  His private life had accrued in the  knowledge  that  he
    would have to return to Bangladesh  one  day.   There  was  nothing  to
    prevent the Sponsor from returning to Bangladesh  with  the  Appellant.
    The Appellant's removal remained appropriate because while  there  were
    no  known  criminal  convictions  the  Appellant  had  submitted  false
    information in the form of fraudulent English language certificates and
    therefore had tried to obtain leave by deception.

The Respondent's Evidence

7.   The burden of proof of establishing that the Appellant had submitted  a
    fraudulent test certificate rested on the Respondent.  To support  that
    allegation the Respondent relied  on  three  witness  statements.   The
    first was from Matthew Harold a Senior Case Worker at the Home  Office.
    He stated that the decision to  take  enforcement  action  against  the
    Appellant was taken in the light of the cancellation of the Appellant's
    English language test result by the test provider.  The test result had
    been cancelled by ETS because its own analysis indicated that the  test
    result had been obtained via the use of a proxy tester.  The Respondent
    was notified of this by way of an entry on a spreadsheet annexed to  Mr
    Harold's statement.  This was the spreadsheet record that had  all  the
    names of the TOEIC test takers.  "Invalid"  was  recorded  against  the
    named certificates of the Appellant.

8.   The  second  statement  was  from  Mr  Peter  Millington  an  Assistant
    Director at the Home Office who explained the procedure used by ETS  in
    some detail.  The voice biometrics technology used by  ETS  to  analyse
    the English language tests was considered to be reliable.  He concluded
    at paragraph 48 that ETS  could  state  that  where  matches  had  been
    identified the individuals taking English language tests which had been
    submitted on behalf of different test takers were highly likely  to  be
    the same person.

9.   The third statement was from Rebecca Collings a Grade 6  Civil  Servant
    working  for  the  Respondent.  She  indicated  how  it  was  that  the
    Respondent had become aware of the potential issues with  testing  ETS.
    In late March 2014 ETS informed the Respondent that it had been able to
    identify  impersonation  and  proxy  testing  using  voice  recognition
    software.  Early analysis demonstrated evidence  of  cheating  but  ETS
    confirmed that it would take time to complete analysis  for  all  tests
    taken since April 2011.  Paragraph 29 stated  that  ETS  had  explained
    that those  applicants  categorised  as  questionable  (as  opposed  to
    cancelled or invalid) were inconclusive and one could not be certain of
    impersonation or proxy test taking.  Where an individual's test  result
    was still cancelled on the basis of  test  administration  irregularity
    including the fact that their test was taken at  a  UK  testing  centre
    where numerous other results had been invalidated on  the  basis  of  a
    match that would come within the definition of questionable.   ETS  had
    analysed over 10,000 test scores at that point of  which  the  majority
    were  cancelled  as  invalid.   The   remainder   were   cancelled   as
    questionable.

The Decision at First Instance

10.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  the  Respondent's  decision  on  the
    grounds that the Respondent  had  wrongly  considered  the  Immigration
    Rules. Judge Clarke having heard submissions  (the  Appellant  did  not
    give evidence) found that  the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the
    Appellant's application was not in  accordance  with  the  law  because
    there had been defects in the procedure.  Rejecting the evidence of the
    three witness statements the Judge wrote at paragraph 11:

         "What the witnesses are doing is merely describing the steps  taken
         by ETS but there is no evidence from  the  individual  at  ETS  who
         conducted this procedure when examining the  Appellant's  two  test
         certificates.  That is the  missing  link  in  the  chain  and  the
         crucial one because in the absence of a witness  testifying  as  to
         what they did there is the possibility for error by the compiler of
         the spreadsheet and the Appellant  is  denied  the  opportunity  to
         cross-examine or at least make submissions as to the compilation of
         data".

11.  The Appellant had scored ESOL Grade 2, equivalent to A1, on  11th  June
    2014 some two years after the ETS test in question.  The fact that  the
    Appellant passed the test in June 2014 with  distinction  was  of  some
    relevance.  The Respondent had not discharged the burden of proof  upon
    her of  showing  that  the  Appellant  had  practised  deception.   The
    approach  by  the  Respondent  was  tainted  by  considering  that  the
    application made by the Appellant was under Article 8 and there was for
    example no consideration of the maintenance  issue.   She  allowed  the
    appeal to the extent that the decision  remained  outstanding  for  the
    Respondent to take.

The Onward Appeal

12.  The Respondent appealed the decision arguing that he  Judge  had  given
    inadequate reasons for her findings on a material matter.  The  Judge's
    point that the witness statements and the extract from the  spreadsheet
    did not assist  the  Respondent's  case  was  incorrect.   The  witness
    statements  when  read  in  conjunction  with  one   another   detailed
    extensively the investigation undertaken by  ETS  in  this  Appellant's
    case along with thousands of other applicants and showed the process of
    identifying those tests found to be invalid.  It was clear  from  these
    statements that ETS identified  this  Appellant  after  a  lengthy  and
    systematic  investigation.   The   Tribunal   should   have   had   due
    consideration to the specific evidence which identified  the  Appellant
    as an individual who had exercised deception together with the  witness
    statements outlining the investigation process.  The Appellant did  not
    meet the suitability requirements of Section S-LTR.2.2(a)  of  Appendix
    FM.

13.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on  8th  October  2015.   In  refusing
    permission to appeal he wrote that this case was one of many  in  which
    an Appellant had produced an ETS  English  language  test  certificate.
    The Respondent had produced the generic evidence relied upon  in  every
    case of this nature.  At paragraph 11 of her decision  the  Judge  gave
    adequate reasons why she found that the burden of proof  had  not  been
    discharged.  In essence the grounds were no more  than  a  disagreement
    with that decision.  The Judge reached a conclusion which was  open  to
    her on the evidence presented.

14.  The  Respondent  renewed  her  application  for  permission  to  appeal
    arguing that Judge Fisher had not fully engaged  with  the  grounds  of
    appeal. The witness statements had outlined the  investigation  process
    which identified the Appellant  as  an  individual  who  had  practised
    deception  and  the  extract  from   the   ETS   spreadsheet   referred
    specifically to the Appellant.

15.  The renewed application for permission  to  appeal  came  before  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Taylor on 4th November 2015.  In granting permission  to
    appeal she wrote:

         "It is arguable that the original Judge  misdirected  [herself]  in
         considering that there was an error in procedure and  allowing  the
         appeal on a limited basis.  The claimant applied  for  leave  as  a
         spouse which was considered in the refusal letter  and  refused  on
         suitability  grounds  because  the  Respondent  believed  that  the
         claimant had practised deception in his ETS.   There  was  specific
         evidence in relation to this individual.  Arguably the Judge  erred
         in law in not providing adequate reasons for rejecting it."

The Hearing Before Me

16.  The Appellant responded to  the  grant  of  permission  in  a  skeleton
    argument submitted to me for the hearing.   It  was  possible  that  an
    honest test taker had had the misfortune of taking the test at a centre
    where there was mass corruption and that as a result the honest taker's
    result might have a match and be invalidated.  ETS did not provide  the
    basis how they were able to distinguish these  cases  from  those  that
    were genuinely deception cases.  ETS had made what was described in the
    argument as a "big  blunder"  by  allowing  unscrupulous  operators  to
    administer its tests who had a vested interest  in  showing  100%  pass
    rate.  Individual foreign students were now victimised instead  of  the
    test administrators.  The Appellant had no incentive  to  use  a  false
    test taker as could be seen by the fact that when he took another  test
    in June 2014 he had obtained a high  score.   Even  if  the  Judge  had
    considered the Respondent's witness statements in  greater  detail  the
    outcome of the decision would have been no different.  The basis of the
    Judge's reasoning was sufficiently demonstrated.

17.  In oral submissions counsel argued that this was not a case  to  decide
    whether the Appellant had an in-country or  out  of  country  right  of
    appeal.  This appeal involved a general attack on the validity  of  the
    evidence supplied by the Respondent in  English  language  test  cases.
    There were defects in the Respondent's  evidence.   In  this  case  the
    Appellant's name came in the list of candidates that  were  taking  the
    test.   The  Appellant  did  not  deny  that  he  had  used  his  TOEIC
    certificate because it had been honestly obtained.  Given the  evidence
    heard the Judge was entitled to make the findings that  she  did.   The
    conclusion at paragraph 11 of the determination would still be the same
    even though the Judge had made no reference to paragraph 29 of  Rebecca
    Collings' statement (for which see paragraph 9 above).  Paragraph 47 of
    Peter Millington's statement said that  where  a  match  had  not  been
    identified and verified an individual's  test  result  might  still  be
    invalidated on the basis of test administration.   This  could  include
    the fact that their test  was  taken  at  a  UK  testing  centre  where
    numerous other results had been invalidated on the basis  of  a  match.
    The Judge was correct to disregard  the  Respondent's  refusal  of  the
    application on suitability grounds.  Once the Judge had made a  finding
    that the suitability ground did  not  hold  the  Judge's  options  were
    narrow.  The Respondent had refused to engage with the application.  It
    was correct to refer the matter  back  to  the  Respondent  to  make  a
    decision on the FLR(M) application form.

18.  In reply the presenting officer argued that this was a  discrete  point
    and the Respondent stood by her grounds.  The  findings  of  the  Judge
    were flawed.  There was some discussion as to whether there had been  a
    recent decision on the validity of the TOEIC but neither party was able
    to cite that to me. In conclusion  Counsel  reiterated  the  difference
    between the judicial review decisions on whether or  not  an  applicant
    had an in-country right of appeal from the present case.  Even  if  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set  aside  the  matter  should
    still be sent back to the First-tier to be heard again.

Findings

19.  The evidence before the Judge which this case turned on  was  contained
    in an extract from a spreadsheet prepared by ETS which was exhibited to
    the witness statement of Matthew  Harold.   This  has  the  Appellant's
    name, his date of birth and shows his test centre was the London School
    of Technology.  It gives the certificate number and states that it  was
    invalid not that it was questionable.  It shows the test date was  20th
    June 2012 and that the speaking score was 180.

20.  The Judge did not accept this spreadsheet evidence as proving that  the
    Appellant had employed a proxy taker because there was no evidence from
    an individual at ETS who conducted the  procedure  when  examining  the
    Appellant's two test certificates.

21.  This was as the Presenting  Officer  submitted  to  me  a  very  narrow
    point.  It is correct that the three  statements  relied  upon  by  the
    Respondent are used in a very large number  of  cases.   The  important
    point however is that what individualises the evidence in this case  is
    the annex to Mr Harold's  statement.  That  annex  is  the  spreadsheet
    extract which relates to the Appellant and not to any other test taker.
     The statements therefore  are  generic  in  terms  of  describing  the
    procedure used by ETS to identify  fraudulent  tests  but  Mr  Harold's
    statement is also specific to the  issues  in  this  case  because  the
    spreadsheet refers to this Appellant.

22.  The Judge's argument that  there  was  a  missing  link  in  the  chain
    because there was no witness testifying as to how the  spreadsheet  was
    compiled is I find misconceived.  The Respondent's  evidence  describes
    the procedure carried out by ETS in compiling  the  spreadsheets.   The
    Respondent then produces the  relevant  extract  from  the  spreadsheet
    which relates to the Appellant.

23.  The burden of proof of showing deception rests on  the  Respondent  and
    the standard of proof is the usual civil standard.   As  the  Court  of
    Appeal have pointed out there is only one standard  of  proof  in  such
    cases.  However it is correct  to  point  out  that  the  more  serious
    allegation the more cogent the proof needs to be.   In  this  case  the
    spreadsheet information is very detailed and identifies precisely  this
    Appellant and that his test is invalid and not questionable.  I do  not
    consider that there is a missing link as the Judge identified at  first
    instance.  The three  witnesses  are  reporting  what  they  have  been
    informed by ETS but I see no reason why  what  they  are  reporting  is
    inaccurate.  ETS were faced with a situation as Rebecca Collings points
    out in paragraph 30 that the numbers of tests to be analysed  was  huge
    and the level of cheating was "incredibly high".   What  was  important
    was to show that this Appellant had an invalid test because of what was
    revealed by investigations by ETS.  That there was not a statement from
    an ETS employee but rather three statements from senior figures in  the
    Respondent is not in my view something which can be used to impugn  the
    results of ETS's investigations.  The Respondent's statements are  very
    detailed and it is clear from them how ETS have  compiled  the  results
    which have been produced.  It would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    entire spreadsheet to be produced as that would relate to persons other
    than the Appellant.  All  that  could  reasonably  be  expected  to  be
    produced was an extract from the  spreadsheet  which  related  to  this
    Appellant and which showed that his test  result  was  invalid.   There
    could be no doubt why ETS formed the view that  this  Appellant's  test
    result was invalid because it had been taken by a proxy taker.

24.  This was not a case where an innocent applicant had taken a test  at  a
    fraudulent test centre and was therefore tarred with  the  same  brush.
    The evidence which related to  this  Appellant  was  specific  to  this
    Appellant.  That evidence amply demonstrated that the Appellant had not
    taken his test.  That was deception and in relying subsequently on  the
    test  certificate  obtained  the  Appellant  was   practising   further
    deception.

25.  Whether or not the Appellant two years later was able to  take  a  test
    and pass it was irrelevant.  The issue was not so much the  Appellant's
    English language ability as that there was a time  when  he  could  not
    take a test on his own and had relied on someone else to take the  test
    for him and had then used that fraudulently obtained test.  That  meant
    he fell  foul  of  both  the  suitability  requirements  and  paragraph
    320(7A).  The burden of proof on the Respondent had been discharged  by
    the evidence produced.  The Judge erred in law in  not  accepting  that
    evidence.

The Re-hearing

26.  The decision of the Judge therefore falls  to  be  set  aside  and  the
    issue remains as to the outcome in  the  case.   I  note  that  at  the
    hearing at first instance neither the Appellant nor  the  Sponsor  gave
    evidence.  The Judge noted at paragraph 6  of  her  determination  when
    informed that the Appellant was not going to give evidence:

         "I therefore  indicated  that  he  should  not  adopt  his  witness
         statement prepared for the  hearing  or  Ms  Butt  [the  presenting
         officer] was entitled to cross-examine him".

27.  The Respondent was entitled to find that the Appellant could  not  meet
    the Immigration Rules because he had fallen  foul  of  the  suitability
    requirements and because of the deception employed.  For the  Appellant
    to succeed outside the Rules the Appellant  would  have  to  show  that
    there were compelling circumstances why the appeal should  be  allowed.
    The question of whether the Appellant and the Sponsor  could  meet  the
    financial requirements was irrelevant.  Whether or  not  the  Appellant
    could meet  those  requirements  he  could  not  meet  the  suitability
    requirements and therefore failed under the Rules.

28.  As Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor pointed out when granting permission  to
    appeal the Respondent had considered the  Appellant's  application  for
    leave as a spouse in some detail.  The Respondent's view was  that  the
    Appellant and Sponsor could continue  their  family  life  together  in
    Bangladesh. The Judge was given no oral evidence (that could have  been
    examined in cross examination) to contradict that. The family  life  of
    the Appellant and Sponsor had been  built  up  whilst  the  Appellant's
    status here was precarious in that he only had leave  to  remain  as  a
    student.

29.  Given the lack of oral evidence it would not  have  been  possible  for
    the Judge to have found that the application would  have  been  granted
    such that it could be argued that there was little useful purpose to be
    served in requiring the Appellant to return to Bangladesh to  make  his
    application for entry clearance from there.  The  Appellant  needed  to
    establish far more than he has done until now to  show  that  he  could
    succeed under the Rules. The Appellant could not meet  the  Immigration
    Rules and could not demonstrate any compelling reasons why  his  appeal
    should be allowed outside the Rules.

30.  The relationship between the Appellant and the Sponsor  appears  to  be
    accepted as genuine and subsisting and there was  family  life  between
    them.  That family life would  be  interfered  with  by  requiring  the
    Appellant to return to Bangladesh to make  his  application  for  entry
    clearance from there but that interference would be in accordance  with
    the legitimate aim of immigration control since the  Appellant's  leave
    in this country had been obtained through deception by  the  use  of  a
    false language certificate. It had been built up as  a  result  of  the
    deception employed. That is  a  factor  which  weighs  heavily  on  the
    Respondent's side. I find it would be proportionate to  the  legitimate
    aim being pursued that the Appellant should return to Bangladesh and if
    he so wished to make an  application  from  there  to  return  to  this
    country. It follows that the appeal in relation to family life must  be
    dismissed.

31.  The Appellant's private life had been established whilst his stay  here
    was precarious and was based on the use of  a  false  document.  Little
    weight could be given to it. It was proportionate that the  Appellant's
    private life in this country should be interfered  with  (by  requiring
    him to  leave)  pursuant  to  the  legitimate  aim  being  pursued.   I
    therefore dismiss the Appellant's appeal  under  both  the  Immigration
    Rules and Article 8.

Notice of Decision

     The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I  have  set  it  aside.  I  remake  the  decision  by
    dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision  to
    refuse leave and to give directions for the Appellant's removal.

     Appellant's appeal dismissed.

     I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy  reason  for  so
doing.


Signed this 1st day of March 2016

.......................................................

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft










TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed this 1st  day of March 2016


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


