

                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/35646/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination Promulgated   |
|On June 24, 2014                     |On July 23, 2014            |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                             MR HARPINDER SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Hashmi (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born January  9,  1979,  is  a  citizen  of  India.  The
    appellant claimed to have entered the United  Kingdom  on  January  19,
    2010. He submitted an application to remain in the United  Kingdom  but
    this was rejected on September 3, 2012. He  was  then  served  with  an
    overstayer notice on November 2, 2012. In response the appellant lodged
    his current application on November 5, 2012 seeking a residence card as
    an extended family member. He claimed to be the un-married  partner  of
    an EEA national who was exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.
    The respondent refused this application on July 13, 2013.

 2. On August 28, 2013 the appellant appealed under Regulation  26  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 3. The matter came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  VA  Osborne
    (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on March  26,  2014  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on April 11, 2014 she found the appellant did
    not satisfy the EEA Regulations because she was  neither  satisfied  he
    was living in a relationship akin to a marriage nor  that  the  sponsor
    was a qualifying person. She  went  on  to  dismiss  his  appeal  under
    article 8 on the basis the appellant did not meet the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  she
    further found there were no exceptional  circumstances  that  persuaded
    her to consider the appellant's family life/private claims  outside  of
    the Immigration Rules.

 4. The appellant appealed that decision on April 22, 2014.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted on May 15, 2014 by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    N Osborne on the basis he accepted it was arguable there was sufficient
    evidence that the Sponsor was a qualifying person.  He  also  found  it
    arguable that having found they were living together  at  the  date  of
    hearing the length of the separation was  of  less  importance  and  he
    maybe should have considered the appeal under article 8 ECHR.

 5. There was no Rule 24 response from the respondent.

 6. The matter was listed  before  me  on  the  above  date  and  both  the
    appellant and sponsor were in attendance.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Miss Hashmi submitted there were two grounds of appeal-


     a. Firstly, there was ample evidence the sponsor had  been  exercising
        treaty rights. She had been employed  between  September  2009  and
        March 2012 and had supplied evidence to support her claim. She  had
        been in receipt of job seekers allowance  between  March  2012  and
        April 2013 at which time she had found further employment  and  she
        maintained  that  her  employment  continued.  In  order  to  be  a
        qualifying person the sponsor had to satisfy Regulation  6  of  the
        2006  Regulations.  She  submitted  the  sponsor   satisfied   this
        Regulation  because  she  had  a  history  of  working  (Regulation
        6(1)(b)), she had been a job seeker (Regulation 6(1)(a) and  during
        the  period  she  was  unemployed  she  remained  a  worker   under
        Regulation 6(1)(b) because she had  been  employed  for  more  than
        twelve months before she became unemployed.


     b. Secondly,  the  FtTJ  erred  by  not  considering  Article  8.  The
        appellant was a father figure towards the  sponsor's  two  children
        and they had been together since 2011. The FtTJ's  concern  related
        to their period of  separation  and  she  accepted  they  were  now
        together. There was a good arguable case for dealing with the  case
        outside of the Immigration Rules.

 8. Mr Johnstone submitted the appellant  was  an  extended  family  member
    because the parties were not married. He had to satisfy the  FtTJ  that
    they satisfied Regulation  8(5)  of  the  2006  Regulations.  The  FtTJ
    considered the evidence  and  concluded  at  paragraph  [33]  that  the
    appellant did not meet the Regulation. The FtTJ was not satisfied  they
    had been together in a relationship akin  to  marriage.  Regardless  of
    whether the FtTJ had erred on whether  the  sponsor  was  a  qualifying
    person the application had to be refused under  the  2006  Regulations.
    Even today Miss Hashmi had not challenged this finding in  the  context
    of the 2006 Regulations. As regards the  second  ground  of  appeal  Ms
    Johnstone submitted that if the appellant could  not  demonstrate  they
    were in a relationship akin to marriage then there  could  be  no  good
    arguable case for considering this case outside the Rules.

 9. I reserved my decision.

    ERROR OF LAW DECISION

10. The FtTJ was invited to grant  the  appellant  a  residence  card.  The
    appellant and sponsor are not married and accordingly the sponsor  must
    satisfy Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations. This states-


         "A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the  person
         is the partner of an EEA national (other than a civil partner)  and
         can  prove  to  the  decision  maker  that  he  is  in  a   durable
         relationship with the EEA national. "

11. In YB (EEA reg 17(4) - proper approach) Ivory Coast [2008] UKAIT  00062
    the Tribunal held that in deciding whether to issue a residence card to
    an extended family member of an EEA national under Regulation 17(4) the
    decision-maker should adopt a three-stage approach so as to:


     a. First determine  whether  the  person  concerned  qualifies  as  an
        extended family member under Regulation 8.


     b. Next have regard, as rules of thumb only, to the criteria  set  out
        in comparable provisions of the Immigration Rules. To do so ensures
        the like treatment of extended family members of  EEA  and  British
        nationals and so ensures compliance with the general  principle  of
        Community  law  prohibiting  discrimination  on  the   grounds   of
        nationality. The fact that a person meets  or  does  not  meet  the
        requirements of the relevant immigration rules cannot be treated as
        determinative of the question of whether a residence card should or
        should not be issued; and

     c. Ensure there has been an  extensive  examination  of  the  personal
        circumstances of the applicant/appellant. It may be  that  in  many
        cases such an examination will have been  made  in  the  course  of
        assessing the applicant's position vis a vis the immigration rules.
        But in principle the  third  stage  is  distinct,  since  the  duty
        imposed by the Directive to undertake "an extensive examination  of
        the personal circumstances..."  necessitates  a  balancing  of  the
        relevant factors counting for and against the  issuing  of  such  a
        card."


12. The FtTJ had a 170-page bundle of documents in front  of  her  and  she
    also took oral evidence from both the appellant and  the  sponsor.  The
    appellant had also provided a witness statement in which he  stated  he
    had been in a relationship with the sponsor since  2010  and  had  been
    with her and her two children (5 and 7 years of age)  since  2010.  The
    sponsor also adopted her statement.


13. In assessing whether  the  sponsor  and  appellant  satisfy  Regulation
    8(2)(b) I have referred to the FtTJ's determination and I set  out  the
    following findings:-

     a. The FtTJ accepted she could take into account all  evidence  up  to
        and including the date of hearing.


     b. The sponsor's council tax bills for 2012/13 and 2013/14 were in the
        sponsor's sole name at the address they previously claimed to  live
        at and showed she was receiving a 25% discount as a single occupier
        for parts of those periods.

     c. The appellant claimed they separated for two weeks  but  was  vague
        about the dates whereas the sponsor stated they had lived apart for
        five months. Both claimed that since their reconciliation they  had
        lived together.

     d. The FtTJ accepted they were living  together  as  at  the  date  of
        hearing but he was unclear as to the length of separation.

     e. Based on this information he was not satisfied they were living  in
        a relationship akin to marriage.

14. The FtTJ was unconvinced by the evidence that had  been  placed  before
    her that the parties were living in a relationship  akin  to  marriage.
    Strictly speaking the exact wording of the test is whether the  parties
    were in a durable relationship but no issue was  taken  either  in  the
    grounds of appeal or at the hearing before me about this.


15. The FtTJ had to be satisfied the appellant and sponsor had  been  in  a
    subsisting relationship for two years or more (see Guidance  Notes  for
    persons applying for a residence card) and whilst the FtTJ accepted the
    parties were together at the  date  of  hearing  she  was  clearly  not
    satisfied that this met the Regulations and in paragraphs [27] and [33]
    she considered a number of matters that she said raised concerns.

16. In particular, she had conflicting evidence about the period they  were
    apart, she had evidence suggesting that only one person was  living  at
    their previous address and she raised questions about  bank  statements
    that impacted on where they may have lived.

17. The burden of proof is on the appellant to satisfy the  respondent  and
    the FtTJ that the Regulations are met. It is clear that  the  appellant
    did not do this. If the test had merely  required  the  parties  to  be
    together at the date of the application or hearing then this appeal may
    have had  a  different  outcome.  The  appellant's  application  failed
    because he failed to demonstrate to the FtTJ's  satisfaction  that  the
    relationship was durable.

18. The FtTJ has given reasons for rejecting  the  appellant's  application
    based on what was before her. This was a decision she was  entitled  to
    take and consequently the appellant's appeal cannot succeed  under  the
    2006 Regulations.

19. I have also considered the other challenge to the FtTJ's decision under
    the 2006 Regulations.  There  is  evidence  the  appellant  was  either
    working to some degree or had an income  at  various  times.  There  is
    evidence that she was registered with  the  job  centre  and  had  been
    employed for at least a year albeit the amount of wages paid to her  is
    not totally clear. I accept there is probably  sufficient  evidence  to
    show the sponsor is a  qualified  worker.  Regulation  6  of  the  2006
    Regulations would therefore be met.

20. However, for the reasons set out above I reject  the  submission  there
    has been an error in relation to the FtTJ's conclusion on the residence
    card application.

21. I turn now to the second ground of appeal. The difficulty the appellant
    has on this is firstly, there is no removal direction and secondly, the
    FtTJ rejected his claim about the strength of their relationship.

22. As this application was made after July 9, 2012  any  article  8  claim
    must be considered within  the  Rules.  The  appellant  cannot  satisfy
    Appendix FM as they do not meet the financial requirements in any event
    and they would also struggle,  based  on  the  above,  to  satisfy  GEN
    1.2(iv) of Appendix FM that states the appellant must be "a person  who
    has been living together with the applicant in a relationship akin to a
    marriage or civil partnership for at least two years prior to the  date
    of application." There was no submission  to  the  FtTJ  that  he  came
    within EX.1 of Appendix FM.

23. I am asked to find the FtTJ erred by not considering  the  family  life
    claim under article 8 but little evidence of family life  was  adduced.
    The FtTJ rejected the extent of the relationship and there  was  little
    evidence placed before the FtTJ about the children.  He  is  not  their
    father. In order to consider family life outside  of  the  Rules  there
    must be a good arguable case. No such case has been presented. Recently
    in MMM (AP) v The Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]
    COSH 43. The court confirmed the appellant has to show there is a  good
    arguable case in order to have his case considered outside of the Rules
    and the case re-affirmed the findings  in  R  (on  the  application  of
    Onkarsingh Nagre) 2013 EWHC 720. Based on the evidence  presented,  the
    FtTJ was entitled to reach the conclusion she did.

24. The FtTJ found the appellant could not  establish  private  life  under
    paragraph 276ADE HC 395. No  challenge  has  been  made  to  this.  The
    appellant did not place before the Tribunal  any  evidence  that  would
    support an argument that private life should be considered  outside  of
    the Rules.

25. The FtTJ made that finding and nothing that has been argued  before  me
    today suggests any error.

26. Clearly, an application for a residence card can always be renewed  and
    it may well be that the concerns raised by the  FtTJ  can  be  properly
    addressed with a fresh application. That is of course a matter for  the
    appellant and his legal advisors.

    DECISION

27. There was no material error of law. The original decision  shall  stand
    and the appeal is dismissed.


28. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.

Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no fee award I dismissed the appeal.

Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
