
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35849/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Laganside Courts, Belfast   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31/10/2014                        |On 14/09/2015                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           FRANKLIN OBEHI ATAMEWAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent:   Mr S McTaggart (of Counsel) instructed by  Paul  K  Nolan  and
                    Company Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This appeal raises certain questions  relating  to  the  appeal  rights
    established by regulation 26  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 (hereinafter "the EEA Regulations").  Regulation
    26 of and Schedule 1 to the EEA  Regulations  operate  in  tandem.   In
    unison, they create a right  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber (the "FtT") against an  "EEA  decision",
    as defined.  The question which this determination addresses is whether
    the FtT has jurisdiction to determine an  appeal  based  on  Convention
    rights in circumstances where the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (the "Secretary of State") or an immigration officer has not
    served  on  the  appellant  a  notice  under  section  120(2)  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The Secretary of State's Decision

2.   Franklin Obehi Atamewan, the Respondent to this appeal, is  a  national
    of Nigeria, aged 33 years.   By  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (hereinafter the  "Secretary
    of State") dated 16 August 2013, the  Respondent's  application  for  a
    residence card under the EEA Regulations 2006 was refused. The  essence
    of the Secretary of State's decision is discernible from the  following
    passages in the text:

         "Where someone applies on the grounds that  they  are  an  extended
         family member of an EEA  national,  they  must  meet  the  relevant
         criteria ....

         Extended family members encompass those who can show that they  are
         in a 'durable relationship' with an EEA national.   Currently,  our
         assessment of a durable relationship is  in  line  to  [sic]  those
         specific criteria as set out in Immigration Rules  .....  we  would
         expect you to demonstrate that you have been living  together  with
         your EEA national sponsor for at least two years.  Equally,  it  is
         reasonable  to  expect  that  you  both  intend  to  live  together
         permanently, that any previous relationship/marriage  each  of  you
         may have had has broken down and that the parties are  not  related
         by birth."

    The decision maker then adverted to a birth certificate confirming that
    the Respondent is the father of a  child  born  on  01  December  2011,
    continuing:

         "Whilst this [is] an indicator of a durable relationship, you  have
         submitted no other documents to confirm that your  relationship  is
         continuing. In relation to the documentation that you have supplied
         in the form of three birth certificates,  personal  cover  letters,
         Sky and BT utility bills for the period 25 January to 18 May  2012,
         this Department deems this evidence as insufficient as it does  not
         meet the above criteria and as stipulated  in  the  Regulations  as
         reasonable evidence of a durable and subsisting relationship."

    In brief compass, the Secretary of  State's  assessment  was  that  the
    Respondent had failed to  provide  sufficient  evidence  of  a  durable
    relationship with an EEA national and, thus, could not be considered an
    extended family member of such person. The application for a  residence
    card was refused accordingly.

3.   There is a self-contained passage in the decision which confirms  that,
    in his application for a residence card, the Respondent  had  made  the
    case that a refusal would infringe rights under Article  8  ECHR.  This
    was addressed by the decision maker in these terms:

         "You have stated that you also wish to rely on  private  or  family
         life established in the UK  under  article  8  of  the  ECHR.   The
         Immigration Rules now include provisions for applicants wishing  to
         remain in the United Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  their  family  or
         private  life  ...  [in]   Appendix   FM   and   paragraph   274ADE
         respectively.  If you wish the UK  Border  Agency  to  consider  an
         application  on  this  basis  you  must  make  a  separate  charged
         application using the appropriate specified application form ...

         Since  you  have  not  made  a  valid  application  for  Article  8
         consideration, consideration has not been  given  to  whether  your
         removal from the UK would breach Article 8 of the ECHR."

         [Emphasis added.]

    In the events  which  have  occurred,  this  discrete  refusal  by  the
    Secretary of State to consider the Respondent's Article  8  ECHR  claim
    and the treatment of this issue at first instance have evolved into  an
    issue of central importance.

The decision at first instance

 4. The Respondent appealed to the First tier Tribunal ("the FtT").  In the
    Notice of Appeal, the first ground  was  formulated  in  the  following
    terms:

         "UKBA have not given full consideration to the Appellant's  Article
         8 ECHR rights as the father of an EEA national child, as well as  a
         partner of his sponsor ...

         [Followed by] ...

         Furthermore, the UKBA decision that the Appellant's sponsor is  not
         a temporarily ceased worker is  arbitrary  and  not  based  on  the
         Appellant's submissions."

    There are, altogether, five members of the Respondent's family unit and
    thus, potentially, multiple Article 8 rights.  The person described  as
    the "sponsor" is the Respondent's EEA spouse.  It is not disputed  that
    they are a married couple. The Appellant is the  biological  father  of
    one of the three children (infra}.  The  second  issue  raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal related to the Secretary of State's response  to  the
    representation made in the Respondent's  application  that,  while  his
    wife was unemployed, she was desirous of  resuming  her  employment  as
    soon as possible. In the event, this ground was not pursued.

 5. The contours of the hearing before the  FtT  can  be  traced  from  the
    following passage, in [3] of the determination:

         "In this appeal no substantive challenge was made to the  Secretary
         of State's decision  under  the  Regulations.   The  basis  of  his
         challenge now is that his Article 8 ECHR family rights and those of
         his family members will be breached if his  status  in  the  United
         Kingdom is not secured and he is ultimately required to  return  to
         Nigeria."

    The Judge then rehearsed the basic particulars of the family unit.  The
    Respondent is married to the EEA national concerned, a local mother who
    had two children, aged 12 and nine years respectively, before  she  met
    the Respondent.  As noted above, they are the parents of  a  child  now
    aged almost three years.  The Judge also  summarised  certain  evidence
    bearing on the  family  circumstances,  relating  particularly  to  the
    social, emotional and behavioural difficulties pertaining to the oldest
    child.  Next, the Judge made reference to the Immigration Rules and the
    decisions in Izuazu [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC), Shahzad [2014] UKUT 85  (IAC)
    and Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).  The Judge made  no  finding  that
    the Respondent's case satisfied any of the routes available  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  It is tolerably  clear  by  implication,  that  the
    Judge found that the Rules were not satisfied, as the following passage
    indicates:

         "In  this  case,  it  is  apparent  that  sufficiently   compelling
         circumstances not recognised under the Rules arise ..."

    The Judge, having summarised certain factors relating to the Respondent
    and the other members of the family, continued:

         "... I am satisfied that the Appellant's right to respect  for  his
         family outweighs the Respondent's economic interest in  maintaining
         immigration control and find the decision to remove  him  which  in
         the first instance has taken the form of a request  that  he  leave
         the jurisdiction would be disproportionate."

         [Emphasis added.]

    The impugned decision of the Secretary of State was not, of  course,  a
    decision to remove the Respondent from the  United  Kingdom.   It  was,
    rather, a refusal of his application for a residence card under the EEA
    Regulations.

 6. The Secretary of State's application for permission to appeal  to  this
    Tribunal raised two issues.  The first was formulated thus:

         "The Secretary of State made it clear in the  refusal  letter  that
         any claim in respect of Article 8 should  be  made  in  a  separate
         application  and  the  appropriate  fee  should  be  paid.   It  is
         submitted that the Immigration Judge erred in law by making himself
         the primary decision maker in respect of what should  have  been  a
         fresh application under Appendix FM or outside the Rules."

    The second ground of appeal was couched in the form of an alternative:

         "Alternatively, it is submitted that the Immigration Judge erred in
         law by failing to give proper consideration and adequate reasons in
         respect of 'exceptional circumstances'.  It is submitted  that  the
         application of  this  test  was  also  confused  by  reference  and
         application of the case of Razgar."

    Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  both  grounds  were
    considered arguable.

The Legislative Framework

 7. It is  appropriate  to  begin  with  the  relevant  provisions  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (the  "2002  Act"),  in
    particular those arranged in Part V, wherein "the Tribunal" denotes the
    First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").  Section 82(1) provides that a person  may
    appeal to the FtT against an "immigration decision",  as  defined.  The
    definition of "immigration  decision"  does  not  embrace  any  of  the
    decisions made under the EEA Regulations.  Section 84(1) prescribes the
    permitted grounds of appeal:

         "An appeal under section 82(1) against an immigration decision must
         be brought on one or more of the following grounds -

          a. that the decision is not in accordance with immigration rules;



          b. that the decision is unlawful by virtue of ... Article 20A  of
             the Race Relations (NI) Order 1976;

          c. that the decision is unlawful under section  6  of  the  Human
             Rights Act 1998  ...

          d. that the Appellant is an EEA  national  or  a  member  of  the
             family of an  EEA  national  and  the  decision  breaches  the
             appellant's rights under the Community Treaties in respect  of
             entry or residence in the United Kingdom;

          e. that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with the law;



          f. that the person taking  the  decision  should  have  exercised
             differently a discretion conferred by immigration rules;

          g. that removal of the  Appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  in
             consequence of  the  immigration  decision  would  breach  the
             United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee  Convention  or
             would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998
             as being incompatible with the Appellant's Convention rights."

    Section 86, under the rubric "Determination of Appeal", provides:

         "(1) This section applies on an appeal under section 82(1),  83  or
             83A.

          2) The Tribunal must determine -

             (a)  any matter raised as a ground of appeal (whether  or  not
                  by virtue of section 85(1)) and

             (b)  any matter which section 85 requires it to consider."

 8. At this juncture, it is appropriate to interpose  section  120  of  the
    2002 Act:

         "(1) This section applies to a person if -

             (a)  he has made an application to  enter  or  remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom, or

             (b)  an immigration decision within the meaning of section  82
                  has been taken or may be taken in respect of him.

         (2)  The Secretary of State or an immigration officer may by notice
             in writing, require the person to state -

               a) his reasons for wishing to enter or remain in  the  United
                  Kingdom,

               b) any grounds on which he should be permitted  to  enter  or
                  remain in the United Kingdom, and

               c) any grounds on which he should  not  be  removed  from  or
                  required to leave the United Kingdom.

          3) A statement under subsection (2) need not  repeat  reasons  or
             grounds set out in -

             (a)  The application mentioned in subsection (1)(a), or

             (b)   An  application  to  which  the   immigration   decision
                  mentioned in subsection (1)(b) relates."

    Sections 85 and 120 of the 2002  Act  are  inter-related.   Section  85
    provides:

         "(1) An appeal under section 82(1)  against  a  decision  shall  be
             treated by the Tribunal as including  an  appeal  against  any
             decision in respect of which the  appellant  has  a  right  of
             appeal under section 82(1).

         (2)  If an appellant under section 82(1) makes  a  statement  under
             section 120, the Tribunal shall consider any matter raised  in
             the statement which constitutes a ground of appeal of  a  kind
             listed in section 84(1) against the decision appealed against.

         (3)  Subsection (2) applies to a statement made under  section  120
             whether the statement was made before or after the appeal  was
             commenced."

 9. Taking into account the central issue to be determined in this  appeal,
    it is also necessary to consider those provisions  of  the  Immigration
    Rules relating to specified forms and procedures for  applications  and
    claims.   The relevant provisions are contained  in  Part  1.   At  the
    material time, paragraph A34 provided:

         "An application for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  under
         these Rules must be made either by completing the  relevant  online
         application process in accordance with  paragraph  A34(iii)  or  by
         using the specified application form in accordance with  paragraphs
         34A to 34D."

    Thus there are two prescribed mechanisms for making an application  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  Whichever mechanism is selected
    by the applicant, any specified fee in connection with the  application
    must be paid in accordance with the method  prescribed:  per  paragraph
    A34(iii)(a) and paragraph 34A(ii). In short, these  two  paragraphs  of
    the Rules establish a series of requirements, formal and procedural  in
    nature, governing applications  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom under the Rules.  The consequences of non-compliance  with  any
    specified requirement are addressed, firstly, in paragraph A34(iv):

         "Where an application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  is
         made by completing the relevant  online  application  process,  the
         application will  be  invalid  if  it  does  not  comply  with  the
         requirements of paragraph A34(iii) and will not be considered."

    To like effect is paragraph 34C:

         "Where an application or claim in connection with  immigration  for
         which an application form is specified does  not  comply  with  the
         requirements in paragraph 34A, such application or  claim  will  be
         invalid and will not be considered.  Notice of invalidity  will  be
         given in writing and deemed to be received on the date it is given,
         except where it is sent by post, in which case it will be deemed to
         be received on the second day after it was posted excluding any day
         which is not a business day."

    While paragraph 34c survives, paragraph A34(iv) was deleted with effect
    from 06 November 2014, but continues to apply to preceding undetermined
    applications.

10. This survey of the legislative superstructure continues with section  6
    of the Human Rights Act 1998  (the  "1998  Act"),  which  provides,  in
    material part:

         "(1) It is unlawful for a public authority to act in a way which is
             incompatible with a Convention Right.

         (2)  Subsection (1) does not apply to an act if -

               a) as the  result  of  one  or  more  provisions  of  primary
                  legislation,  the   authority   could   not   have   acted
                  differently; or

               b) in the case of one or more provisions of, or  made  under,
                  primary legislation which cannot be read or  given  effect
                  in a way which is compatible with the  Convention  rights,
                  the authority was acting  so  as  to  give  effect  to  or
                  enforce those provisions.

               c) In this section 'public authority' includes -

                  (a)  a court or tribunal ..."

    There are associated provisions in sections 7 and 8  of  the  1998  Act
    governing the bringing of  a  human  rights  claim  and  the  grant  of
    judicial remedies.

11.  The  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  refuse   the   Respondent's
    application for  a  residence  card  was  made  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the "EEA  Regulations").  It
    is necessary to identify the underlying  purpose  of  this  measure  of
    domestic law.  The EEA Regulations implement Directive 2004/38/EC,  the
    so-called "Citizens  Directive",  which  regulates  the  rights  of  EU
    citizens and their family members to move and reside freely within  the
    territory of the Member States,  operative  from  30  April  2006.   It
    extended the scope of the pre-existing law which was based on a  series
    of Directives (which it  repealed)  and  decisions  of  the  CJEU.   It
    enlarged the pool of those previously able to assert, or benefit  from,
    the free movement provisions of EU law.

12. The framework of this statutory regime is such that a broad spectrum of
    decisions may be made thereunder.  By regulation 2(1),  "EEA  decision"
    is defined as:

         "A decision under these Regulations that concerns a person's -

          a) entitlement to be admitted to the United Kingdom;

          b) entitlement to be issued with or have renewed, or not to  have
             revoked, a registration certificate, residence card,  document
             certifying permanent residence or permanent residence card; or



          c) removal from the United Kingdom."

    This regime also establishes, via regulations 7  and  8,  the  separate
    categories of "family member" and "extended family member".  Regulation
    7 prescribes the conditions to be satisfied in order to qualify for the
    status of "family member".  Regulation 8 does likewise  in  respect  of
    the status of "extended family member".   Regulations  9  and  10  make
    further provision for  family  members.   Part  2  of  the  Regulations
    creates a series of "EEA rights": admission, residence and the right to
    an EEA family permit in certain circumstances.  In passing, as  appears
    from the terms of the Secretary of State's decision, rehearsed  in  [2]
    above, the Respondent's application for a residence card  failed  under
    the "durable relationship" requirement of regulation 8(5).

13. The subject matter of Part 6 of the 2006 Regulations is "Appeals  Under
    These Regulations".  Regulation 26 provides, in material part:

         "(1) Subject to the following  paragraphs  of  this  regulation,  a
             person may appeal  under  these  regulations  against  an  EEA
             decision ...

         (6)  Except where an appeal lies to the Commission, an appeal under
             these Regulations lies to the First-tier Tribunal.

         (7)  The provisions of or made under the 2006 Act  referred  to  in
             Schedule 1 shall have effect for the  purposes  of  an  appeal
             under  these  Regulations  to  the   First-tier  Tribunal   in
             accordance with that schedule."

    Paragraph [1] of Schedule 1 provides:

         "The following provisions of, or made  under,  the  2002  Act  have
         effect in relation to an appeal  under  these  Regulations  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal or Upper Tribunal  as  if  it  were  an  appeal
         against an immigration decision under section 82(1) of that Act:

         Section 84(1) except paragraphs (a) and (f);

         Sections 85 to 87."

    Thus  the  appeals  regime  of  the  EEA  Regulations  imports  certain
    provisions of the corresponding regime in Part V of the 2002  Act.   As
    regards section 84(1), five  of the seven specified grounds  of  appeal
    are imported in this way.  These are, in shorthand, breach of the  race
    relations legislation; breach of section 6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998; breach of certain appellants' rights of entry or residence  under
    the Community Treaties; otherwise not in accordance with the  law;  and
    breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations   under   the   Refugee
    Convention.

Discussion

14. The argument which this Tribunal received on behalf of the Secretary of
    State relating to what emerged as the central issue in the  appeal  was
    relatively limited.  There was no skeleton argument  and,  indeed,  the
    relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules (supra)  were  not  cited.
    Nor was reference made to any of the provisions of the 2002  Act,  with
    the exception of section 120.  In addition, no reference  was  made  to
    any of the provisions of the EEA Regulations.

15. Taking into account  the  foregoing,  my  understanding  of  the  basic
    argument advanced on behalf of the Secretary of State is based  on  the
    first of the two grounds of appeal rehearsed in [6] above.  It seems to
    me that the substance of this argument is that the  FtT  did  not  have
    jurisdiction to consider and determine the Respondent's appeal based on
    Article 8 ECHR and committed a fundamental error  of  law  accordingly.
    The grounds of appeal further indicate  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    relies on the decision in Lamichhane - v - Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 260 (to which  I  shall  refer  infra).
    When I drew attention to the relevant provisions of the 2002  Act,  the
    submission was formulated  that  section  120(1)(b)  of  the  2002  Act
    applies to the Respondent, since an immigration decision "may be  taken
    in respect of him".  It was further  submitted  that  since  no  notice
    under section 120(2) had been served on  the  Respondent,  he  was  not
    entitled to rely on Article 8 ECHR as a ground  of  appeal  before  the
    FtT.

16. The somewhat fuller  submissions  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  drew
    attention to the appeal provisions of  the  EEA  Regulations  mentioned
    above, together with sections 82, 84 and 86 of the 2002 Act and section
    6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  It was submitted in particular  by  Mr
    McTaggart that an appeal under regulation 26 of the EEA regulations  is
    limited only by Schedule 1 thereto, considered in tandem  with  section
    84 of the 2002 Act.  It was further argued that, by virtue  of  section
    86(2), the FtT was obliged to determine the Article 8 ground of appeal.
     The absence of any notice served under section 120 did not relieve the
    FtT of this duty.  Mr McTaggart also  relied  on  the  decision  in  JM
    Liberia - v - SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1402, which I shall consider  infra.



17. I turn to consider the  decision  in  Lamichhane  [supra].   The  issue
    considered by the Court of Appeal related to the  jurisdiction  of  the
    FtT to consider matters raised by an appellant not previously  advanced
    in circumstances where no notice had been served under section  120  of
    the 2002 Act. It was common ground that the notice  of  an  immigration
    decision need not include a section 120 notice,  which  may  be  served
    subsequently.  In his notice of appeal to the FtT, the Appellant raised
    an issue which had not formed part of his unsuccessful  application  to
    the Secretary of State, by asserting leave to remain on  a  new  basis.
    The FtT considered that it was both empowered and obliged  to  consider
    this further claim and determined the appeal by remitting this discrete
    claim for consideration by the Secretary of State.  The Court of Appeal
    disagreed, holding as follows:

          i) Under section 120, the Secretary of State  is  empowered,  but
             not obliged, to serve a notice on the person concerned.

         ii) There are no time  constraints  governing  the  service  of  a
             section 120 notice.

        iii) The failure by the Secretary of State to serve a  section  120
             notice does not render an immigration decision unlawful.

         iv) The word "matter", which appears in  sections  85,  96(1)  and
             96(2), has the same meaning.  It includes "a new matter". This
             construction,  the  Court  reasoned,  is   dictated   by   the
             imperative of giving practical effect to section 96.

          v) By virtue of section 85(2), in the absence of  a  section  120
             notice the FtT is not empowered to consider and determine  any
             "new" case advanced on behalf of an appellant.

    This latter conclusion, the key  one,  is  expressed  in  [41]  of  the
    judgment in the following terms:

         "... An appellant on whom no section 120 notice has been served may
         not raise before the Tribunal any ground for the grant of leave  to
         remain different from that which was the subject of the decision of
         the Secretary of State appealed against."

    Finally, in an illuminating formulation, Stanley Burnton  LJ  described
    section 85(2) as "a statutory extension  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the
    Tribunal in cases in which there has  been  a  statement  made  by  the
    appellant under section 120": see [43]. This was the unanimous decision
    of the Court.

18. The Appellant in Lamichhane was seeking to advance before the  FtT,  in
    an appeal against an immigration decision, a new  basis  for  leave  to
    remain which had not formed part of his application to the Secretary of
    State and, in consequence, was not addressed in the impugned  decision.
    The present case is quite different.   The Respondent,  in  making  his
    application the Secretary of State for a residence card under the  2006
    Regulations, explicitly made the case that a refusal would infringe his
    rights under Article  8  ECHR.   It  follows  that  the  parallel  with
    Lamichhane is misconceived. The second point of distinction between the
    two decisions is relatively obvious.  The statutory regimes for appeals
    against immigration decisions and appeals  against  EEA  decisions  are
    different.  The EEA regime provides that the grounds of appeal  to  the
    FtT against an EEA decision include a complaint of a breach of  one  of
    the protected Convention Rights.  The conferral of a right of appeal on
    this discrete ground is not qualified  or  limited  in  any  way.   The
    appeal regime in Part V of the 2002 Act includes section 120.  However,
    neither  this  provision  nor  anything  equivalent  thereto  has  been
    incorporated, by reference or otherwise, within the appeals  scheme  of
    the 2006 Regulations.

19. In JM - v - Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA  Civ
    1402, the decision under appeal was that of the Asylum and  Immigration
    Tribunal (the "AIT").  The Appellant was, initially, the beneficiary of
    a grant of six months leave to enter and remain in the  United  Kingdom
    as a visitor.  He applied subsequently for asylum and also asserted his
    rights under Article 8  ECHR.   The  Secretary  of  State  refused  his
    application for a  variation  of  his  leave.   There  was  no  removal
    decision  and  no  removal  directions  had  been  issued.   Laws   LJ,
    delivering the judgment of the Court of Appeal, formulated the question
    of law to be determined as follows, in [9]:

         "...  whether the ECHR claim could lawfully be  determined  by  the
         adjudicator in the absence of an imminent threat  of  removal  from
         the United Kingdom."

    The AIT had decided that a human rights claim was not justiciable on an
    appeal against a refusal of variation of leave on the ground  that  the
    Appellant's  removal  was  not  imminent,  with  the  result  that  the
    statutory ground of appeal enshrined in section 84(1)(g) ("that removal
    of the  appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  in  consequence  of  the
    immigration decision ...  would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998") was not engaged. The key words to be  construed
    by the court were "in consequence of". The Court held that these  words
    should be construed expansively and  should  not  be  confined  to  the
    concept of "immediate consequence": see [16].  It  concluded  that  the
    AIT had erred in law in its construction of section 84(1)(g).  In  thus
    concluding, it reasoned that once a person's appeal against  a  refusal
    to vary his leave is dismissed, he commits a  criminal  offence  if  he
    does not leave the United Kingdom, his entitlement to state benefits is
    affected and any employer of the appellant is guilty of a crime.   Laws
    LJ observed, at [18]:

         "It seems to me to be wrong in principle that the price of  getting
         before an independent tribunal for a judicial decision on  a  human
         rights claim should be the commission of  a  criminal  offence  and
         other associated legal prohibitions."

    The Court reasoned, secondly, that to conclude otherwise  would  be  to
    distort and stultify the Secretary of State's  power  of  certification
    under section 94 of the 2002 Act.  The third  consideration  supporting
    its conclusion was the "one  stop  appeals"  legislative  policy.   The
    fourth supporting factor concerned the  contrasting  terms  of  section
    84(1)(c) and section 84(1)(g), which supported a  construction  of  the
    latter contemplating "a broader or more remote contingency".

20. I have reflected on whether   the decisions in Lamichhane, and  JM  are
    in point, taking into account the quite different  statutory  contexts.
    In JM, the Court was concerned with the specific statutory  context  of
    section 84(1)(g) of the 2002 Act and its  task  was  to  construe  this
    discrete provision.  An orthodox  exercise  in  statutory  construction
    ensued and the outcome of the appeal was dictated accordingly.  JM  and
    the present case have in common the factor  of  a  statutory  right  of
    appeal.  The statutory provisions lying at the heart of this appeal are
    regulation 26 of and Schedule 1 to the  EEA  Regulations  and  sections
    84(1)(c) and 86 of the 2002 Act.

21. In my estimation there are no ambiguities or obscurities in any of  the
    statutory provisions under scrutiny.  Regulation 26 of and  Schedule  1
    to the EEA Regulations, in tandem, provide that one of the  grounds  of
    appeal to the FtT is that the EEA decision under challenge is  unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. I observe, firstly,  that
    this discrete ground of appeal is not diluted or  qualified  either  by
    the statutory language or by reference  to  anything  else.   Secondly,
    where an appeal is pursued on  this  ground,  the  FtT  is  obliged  by
    section  86(2)  of  the  2002  Act,  again  without  qualification,  to
    determine it. Section 120 of  the  2002  Act  is  not  engaged,  either
    expressly or by implication.  It follows in my  judgment  that  section
    85(2) and (3) have no application to such an appeal.

22. Furthermore, none of the statutory provisions under consideration makes
    any reference, express or implied, to the leave to  remain  application
    provisions enshrined in Part 1 of the Immigration Rules (considered  in
    [9] above).  I have also considered the elementary principle  that,  by
    virtue of their hierarchical inferiority, the Immigration Rules  cannot
    defeat, dilute or emasculate the operation of primary  legislation,  in
    this instance the relevant provisions of the 2002 Act,  or  subordinate
    legislation, in  this  context  the  relevant  provisions  of  the  EEA
    Regulations or supreme EU law, which is the genesis of the latter.   It
    is  also  appropriate  to  recall  that  the  instrument  of  the   EEA
    Regulations transposes a measure  of  supreme  European  Union  Law.  I
    remind myself of the  central  issue  raised  by  this  appeal,  namely
    whether the FtT had jurisdiction to entertain and determine the Article
    8 ground of appeal.

23. I do not doubt that the regime established by Part 1 of the Immigration
    Rules promotes the virtues of coherence,  structure  and  formality  in
    decision making processes determining applications for leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom.  This regime also has the not  important  effect
    of  swelling  the  Treasury  coffers,  as  every  application  must  be
    accompanied by the prescribed  fee.   However,  in  the  context  under
    consideration in the present appeal, namely a statutory appeal  to  the
    FtT against an EEA decision of the Secretary of State on the ground  of
    a human rights contravention, I consider that the  relevant  provisions
    of the Immigration Rules have no application.  They are confined  to  a
    separate compartment of the legal system which is not engaged in  these
    circumstances.

24. In my outline of the statutory  superstructure  in  [7]-[12]  above,  I
    included section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  Neither party devised
    any  argument  based  on  this  provision.   I  have  included  it  for
    completeness,  mainly  for  the  purpose  of  considering  whether  the
    Secretary of State's argument is flawed on the discrete ground that  it
    would involve the tribunal acting in a  manner  incompatible  with  its
    duty as a public authority under section 6.  However, I have  concluded
    that the answer to this rhetorical question is in  the  negative.   The
    first reason is that the tribunal does not owe any duty to an Appellant
    under Article 8 ECHR.  The  second  is  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    entitled to advance his Article 8 case via a different mechanism in any
    event and to do so vis-�-vis the relevant public authority.  To  accede
    to the Secretary of State's submission would not thwart the Appellant's
    rights under Article 8.  Rather, it would simply redirect, and confine,
    the  Appellant  to  a  specific  mechanism  for  the  prosecution   and
    determination of an Article 8 claim.  Thus I consider that, viewed from
    the perspective of the tribunal, section  6  does  not  illuminate  the
    correct  answer  to  the  jurisdictional  argument  canvassed  by   the
    Secretary of State.

25. Finally, it is of note that Article 8 ECHR featured in the decision  of
    the CJEU in Dereci (Case C-256/11).  There, the Grand  Chamber  decided
    as follows:

         "European  Union  law  and,  in  particular,  its   provisions   on
         citizenship of the Union, must be interpreted as  meaning  that  it
         does not preclude a Member State from refusing  to  allow  a  third
         country national to reside  on  its  territory,  where  that  third
         country national wishes to reside with a member of his  family  who
         is a citizen of the Union residing in the Member State of which  he
         has nationality, who has never exercised his right  to  freedom  of
         movement, provided that such refusal does not lead, for  the  Union
         citizen concerned, to the denial of the genuine  enjoyment  of  the
         substance of the rights conferred by virtue  of  his  status  as  a
         citizen of the Union ..."

    En route to this conclusion, the Court adverted to the right to respect
    for private and family life guaranteed by Article 7 of the  Charter  of
    Fundamental Rights and Article 8  ECHR.   If  the  dispute  before  the
    national court relates to the implementation of  EU  law,  per  Article
    51(1) of the Charter -

         "... [the court] must examine whether the refusal of the  right  of
         residence undermines the right to respect for  private  and  family
         life provided for in Article 7 of the Charter."

    Having noted that all EU Member States are parties  to  the  ECHR,  the
    Court added the following:

         "On the other hand, if [the national court] takes the view that the
         situation is not covered by European Union law, it  must  undertake
         that examination in the light of Article 8(1) of the ECHR."

    Taking into account the supremacy of  EU  law,  I  consider  that  this
    passage lends weight to the view that the Respondent  was  entitled  to
    invoke Article 8 ECHR in his appeal to the FtT and the latter, in turn,
    was obliged to determine this issue.

26. In R (Quintavalle) - v - Secretary of State for Health [2003] UKHL  13,
    Lord Bingham of Cornhill stated, at [8]:

         "The court's task, within the permissible bounds of interpretation,
         is to give effect to Parliament's purpose.   So  the  controversial
         provisions should be read in the context of the statute as a  whole
         and the statute as a whole should be read in the historical context
         of the situation which led to its enactment."

    This is orthodox dogma.  True it is that in some litigation contexts  a
    court or tribunal wrestling  with  the  task  of  construing  statutory
    provisions must pray in aid some of the  more  esoteric  principles  of
    statutory construction.  Neither party formulated any argument to  this
    effect.  I am satisfied that the exercise of statutory construction  to
    be performed in this appeal is a  relatively  straightforward  one,  as
    appears from the analysis above.

Conclusion

27. This decision  was  prepared,  incomplete  and  in  draft,  immediately
    following the hearing of the appeal herein (on  31  October  2014).   I
    refrained from completing the decision when  it  became  apparent  that
    steps were being taken to convene a senior panel of judges to  consider
    and determine the central issues raised in a series of other  conjoined
    appeals.  Regrettably, this resulted in some delay.  In due course, the
    Upper Tribunal promulgated its decision in Amirteymour and Others  (EEA
    Appeals: Human Rights) [2015] UKUT 00466  (IAC),  in  July  2015.   Its
    decision was that where no notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act has
    been served and where no EEA decision  to  remove  has  been  made,  an
    appellant cannot bring a human rights challenge to removal in an appeal
    under the EEA Regulations.  It was further held that the decision in JM
    does not apply to appeals of this nature.

28. Following promulgation of the aforementioned  decision,  a  notice  was
    served on the Respondent's representatives, inviting  them  to  provide
    such further submissions as they wished.  This elicited  the  following
    response (dated 28 August 2015):

         "The Appellant has no further submissions  to  make  following  the
         receipt of the promulgated decision of Amirteymour  ...  and  would
         rely on the submissions already made orally and in writing on  this
         point previously ...

         However, irrespective of the above, the Appellant  would  ask  that
         the factual finding in regard to Article 8 ECHR ... as set  out  at
         paragraphs  22  -  24  of  the  [FtT]  decision  of  29/05/2015  be
         maintained."

    There is no rule or principle of precedent whereby I am bound to follow
    the  decision  in  Amirteymour.   However,  I  observe  that  in  those
    conjoined appeals the Upper Tribunal had the benefit of  extensive  and
    considered argument from several representatives and  then  provided  a
    decision which was designed to apply to all comparable cases.   I  have
    concluded that, in the present appeal, no feature or argument has  been
    raised sufficient to  warrant  the  conclusion  that  the  decision  in
    Amirteymour should not be applied.

Decision

29. I decided as follows:

     a) The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.

     b) I consider that I have no jurisdiction to accede to the Appellant's
        request that certain findings be maintained. However, I  would  add
        that there is no apparent reason why effect should not be given  to
        these findings in  future  decision  making  contexts,  subject  of
        course to the usual provisos relating  to  new  circumstances,  new
        facts, new evidence and so forth.


                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                     Date: 10 September 2015
