
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35752/2013
                                                             & IA/40685/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House            |Notice sent                          |
|On: 11 May 2015                      |On: 13 May 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ANNA TOKAROVA
                                 JOZEF TOKAR
                                                                   Claimants


                          NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND

                   REASONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL GIVING CONSENT

 1. The Secretary of State was on 23 June 2014 granted permission to appeal
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  4  June
    2014, allowing the claimants appeals against the decision  made  on  17
    July 2013 to refused them residence  cards  as  confirmation  of  their
    derived right of residence under EU law. The appeals had  been  allowed
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, and on
    the basis that the refusal to issue  documentation  was  in  breach  of
    article 8 of the Human Rights convention.

 2. The Upper Tribunal found that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    involved the making of an error of law  and  set  it  aside.   It  then
    transpired that there was within the unchallenged facts  found  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal an unanswerable case that Jozef Tokar had  acquired
    a derived right to reside right in the United Kingdom  on  a  different
    basis, that is, that having entered  education  at  a  point  when  has
    father (previously an EEA worker) was present in  the  United  Kingdom.
    His mother, as his primary carer,  also  derived  such  a  right.   The
    Secretary of State has now issued documentation to that effect.

 3. The Secretary of State has by a letter dated 8 May 2015  accepted  that
    her  challenge  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  is  now
    academic and seeks to withdraw her case.

 4. Consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a party to  withdraw  its
    case. Having carefully considered the  facts  of  these  appeals  as  a
    whole, and observing that the  claimants  were  successful  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, I give such consent to the respondent to  withdraw
    her case.

 5. Accordingly with my consent, and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  this  appeal  is  recorded  as
    "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal". This  is  a  Notice
    pursuant to rule 17(5) to inform the  parties  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's case is withdrawn.

 6. The effect of the appellant's  case  being  withdrawn  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal is that the proceedings before the Upper Tribunal  are  at  an
    end. There is no appeal before the Upper Tribunal  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision shall stand.



Signed   Date:  11 May 2015
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

