
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/35078/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th February 2018                |On 21st March 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                     C M
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Byrne, Advocate, instructed by Drummond Miller,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


        1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the  First-tier
           Tribunal Handley dismissing an appeal under  Article  8  of  the
           Human Rights Convention.


        2. The appellant is forty-five years  old  and  is  a  national  of
           Zimbabwe.  She entered the UK in 2002 as  a  visitor.   She  had
           leave to remain as a student between 2003 and 2006.  In 2009 she
           claimed asylum unsuccessfully.  In December 2014 she applied for
           leave to remain on the grounds of private and family life.  This
           application  was  considered  under   paragraph   353   of   the
           Immigration Rules.  Its refusal gave rise to the present appeal.


        3. The appellant suffers  from  two  serious  and  chronic  medical
           conditions, Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis  (PSC)  and  Systemic
           Lupus Erythematosis (SLE).  As a consequence of PSC she  was  in
           2012 put on the  waiting  list  for  a  liver  transplant.   Her
           condition stabilised and she was taken off the waiting  list  in
           2014.  The medical expectation for her  condition  is  that  her
           liver may fail some time in the future and, if so, her  survival
           will depend upon having a liver transplant.


        4. The appellant's mother  and  brother  reside  in  the  UK.   The
           appellant lives in the same household  as  her  cousin  and  her
           cousin's wife and child, who was aged five at the  time  of  the
           hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appellant  helps
           with housework, cooking, shopping and childcare for  her  cousin
           and his wife.  She is supported by her family members.


        5. The judge  found  that  the  appellant's  dependency  on  family
           members in the UK did not extend beyond normal  emotional  ties.
           This finding was challenged in the application for permission to
           appeal.  It was contended that  the  judge  did  not  take  into
           account evidence that the stability in the  appellant's  medical
           condition  was  achieved  with  the  support  of   her   family.
           Alternatively, if the judge had taken  this  into  account,  the
           judge gave no rational reason  why  dependency  did  not  extend
           beyond normal emotional  ties.   The  Judge  of  the  First-tier
           Tribunal found  that  the  appellant's  health  did  not  engage
           Article 8.  It was contended that this was a further error.  The
           appellant's medical conditions constituted an interference  with
           her physical and moral integrity.  Her health was a factor which
           should   have   been   taken   into   account    in    assessing
           proportionality.


        6. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper  Tribunal  because
           it was arguable the judge failed to have regard to the  totality
           of the evidence and,  in  particular,  the  assertion  that  the
           appellant had achieved stability because of the support  of  her
           family members in the UK.


    Submissions


        7. At the hearing before me, Mr Byrne, for  the  appellant,  argued
           that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred in finding  that
           the appellant did not have family life in the UK and by  failing
           to recognise that her health conditions were relevant to Article
           8.  Mr Byrne relied, in particular, on MM (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA
           Civ 279 and Akhalu [2013] UKUT 400.  The appellant had  been  in
           the UK for 15 years by the time of the hearing before the First-
           tier Tribunal.   For  much  of  this  time  she  had  been  here
           lawfully, though she had periods of  overstaying,  and  she  had
           made an asylum claim.  There  were  significant  health  issues,
           which the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal left out  of  account
           when considering dependency.   In  relation  to  dependency  the
           judge  had  not  carried  out  an  adequate  analysis   of   the
           appellant's physical and emotional dependency arising  from  her
           ill health.  The judge did not have regard  to  the  appellant's
           vulnerability.  The judge went on to make  a  further  error  by
           finding Article 8 was not engaged on the grounds of health.  The
           appellant's medical condition  changed  the  complexion  of  her
           Article 8 claim.  It was wrong of  the  judge  to  consider  the
           appellant's health on  its  own  as  a  principal  ground  under
           Article 8.  The appellant's health should have been included  on
           a holistic basis in consideration under Article 8.


        8. For the respondent Mr Matthews drew attention to the submissions
           made  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  relation   to   the
           appellant's  health.   The  appellant's  medical  condition  was
           serious but the most recent medical evidence before  the  First-
           tier Tribunal was mainly from 2012 and 2013.   When  considering
           family life, at paragraph 26 of the  decision,  the  judge  took
           into account the appellant's health and found  as  a  matter  of
           fact that the appellant did not have family life in the UK.


        9. Turning to the significance of the appellant's health to Article
           8, Mr Matthews referred to MM(Zimbabwe) and GS India [2012] UKUT
           397.  It was recognised  in  MM  (Zimbabwe)  that  there  was  a
           possibility  that  medical  treatment  might  be   relevant   to
           proportionality but only where Article 8 was engaged.  The judge
           found that Article 8 was not engaged by the appellant's  health.
           This case was not exceptional.  The right to  private  life  was
           not be engaged  in  this  appeal  in  the  manner  envisaged  at
           paragraph 40 of Akhalu.


    Error of law


       10. Having heard the parties' submissions on the question of whether
           the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law,  I  was
           satisfied that the judge did so err, for the following  reasons.




       11. At paragraph 40  of  the  decision  the  judge  found  that  the
           appellant's dependency on her family members in the UK  did  not
           extend beyond normal emotional  ties.   The  appellant  did  not
           therefore have family life in the  UK  and  Article  8  was  not
           engaged.  In assessing dependency the judge stated that  he  had
           taken account of the appellant's "...medical condition which  is
           stable".  To make no more than a bald assertion that the medical
           condition had been taken into account is  wholly  inadequate  in
           the circumstances of this appeal.  The  judge  appears  to  have
           barely engaged with the detailed medical evidence  and  to  have
           made no attempt to analyse its possible impact on  the  question
           of  dependency.   In  respect  of  these  matters  the   judge's
           reasoning is deficient and this constitutes an error of law.


       12. The judge then compounded the error by returning to the issue of
           the appellant's health at paragraph 29, where  the  judge  found
           that Article 8 was not engaged on account of the appellant's ill
           health.  The judge observed that in MM (Zimbabwe) it  was  noted
           that while case law did not say that Article 8  could  never  be
           engaged by the health consequences  of  removal,  no  breach  of
           Article 8 had ever been found on this basis.   In  making  these
           observations, however, the judge failed to appreciate  that  the
           proper place for taking into account health  issues  in  a  case
           such as this was in examining all the private  and  family  life
           issues in the round.  Having rejected without adequate reasoning
           the appellant's claim to respect for family life, the judge then
           side-stepped the issues arising from the appellant's ill  health
           by stating that these would not found a stand alone claim  under
           Article 8.  This was, however,  beside  the  point.   The  judge
           ought to have carried out a  proper  analysis  when  considering
           whether the factors relating  to  the  appellant's  private  and
           family life in their entirety would engage Article 8.


       13. I indicated to the parties that the decision of  the  First-tier
           Tribunal would be set aside.  There were  no  conflicts  in  the
           evidence  of  primary  facts  and  I  proposed  to  re-make  the
           decision, having heard further submissions from the parties.


    Further submissions


       14. Mr Byrne requested that the appellant and her  family  be  given
           the opportunity of a further hearing at which  they  might  give
           evidence, and for  which  up-dated  medical  evidence  might  be
           provided.  I responded that the hearing  before  the  First-tier
           Tribunal had already provided an opportunity for  these  matters
           to be addressed.  The directions issued by  the  Upper  Tribunal
           set out a presumption that if the  decision  of  the  First-tier
           Tribunal were to be set aside the decision would be  re-made  at
           the same hearing.  If there had been a significant change in the
           appellant's medical condition, this might form the  basis  of  a
           further claim.  I would therefore hear submissions with  a  view
           to re-making the decision.


       15. In further submissions for the  appellant  Mr  Byrne  relied  on
           Article 8.  He referred to the medical evidence.   He  submitted
           there was dependency by the appellant on her family taking  into
           account her significant health issues.  He referred also to  the
           appellant's length of residence.   In  2012  the  appellant  was
           diagnosed with a life threatening illness.  There was a risk  of
           major deterioration.  The support the  appellant  received  from
           family members was  set  out  in  her  witness  statement.   The
           appellant provided support for her cousin and his child and  was
           supported  in  return  during  periods  of  illness.   Mr  Byrne
           observed how closely the appellant's case resembled the paradigm
           case envisaged by Moses LJ at paragraph 23 of MM (Zimbabwe).  He
           referred also to  Akhalu,  at  paragraph  40.   Looking  to  the
           Immigration Rules as a guide, although  the  appellant  did  not
           satisfy paragraph 276ADE, there was the additional factor of her
           health.  Her removal would be  a  disproportionate  interference
           with her right to private and family life.


       16. For the respondent Mr Matthews pointed out that the Secretary of
           State  had  considered  the  case  under  paragraph  276ADE,  as
           recorded in the reasons for refusal letter.  The  appellant  had
           been in the UK since 2002 and had briefly returned  to  Zimbabwe
           in 2006.  She had returned to the UK  with  leave  in  September
           2006.  This was the last occasion on  which  she  had  a  lawful
           basis to be in the UK.  She had been an overstayer for a decade.
            In 2009 the appellant was informed she was liable  to  removal.
           She then claimed asylum  and  her  appeal  against  refusal  was
           dismissed in 2009.  Further submissions were refused  and  there
           was a  subsequent  judicial  review.   Another  set  of  further
           submissions led to the present appeal.


       17. Mr Matthews continued by observing  that  any  family  life  the
           appellant might have in the UK did not engage Appendix FM of the
           Immigration Rules.  She could  still  show  on  the  balance  of
           probabilities that she had family life in the UK.   Her  history
           prior to 2011 was not indicative of family life.   She  was  not
           able to show family life at the time of her asylum claim.  Prior
           to 2011 the appellant had already been diagnosed with lupus  but
           she then had a serious medical event.  There was  no  doubt  she
           was given support at that time.  This did not  necessarily  show
           the existence of family life in the legal context,  nor  did  it
           show family life continuing forever.  Since her  ill  health  in
           2011 the appellant has had a significant medical condition  with
           a risk of further deterioration, though in  2014  the  appellant
           had been removed from the liver transplant  waiting  list.   The
           appellant was in fairly good health though predicting the future
           for her was not easy.  Her medical condition did not  appear  to
           be so severe as to prevent her from working.  Letters  from  the
           appellant's family showed that she had a desire to work if given
           leave  to  remain.   Meanwhile  the  appellant   was   supported
           financially by her family.  She attempted to repay her family by
           means other than money.  This did  not  show  the  existence  of
           family life.  Her relationships were part of  her  private  life
           and a claim based on private life would not succeed  because  of
           the authorities cited in the reasons for refusal letter.


       18. Mr Matthews  referred  to  the  issue  of  whether  removals  to
           Zimbabwe had  been  enforced  at  times  in  recent  years.   He
           submitted there was an onus on an individual  to  leave  the  UK
           when told to leave.  If the question of delay was to be  raised,
           the appellant should have clean hands.  Most of her residence in
           the UK had been unlawful.  There  were  strong  public  interest
           factors to be taken into  account.   Reliance  was  placed  upon
           Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 and Rhappiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803.   There
           was the possibility of the appellant being financially supported
           in Zimbabwe by her family in the UK.  Her family might even  pay
           for her medical treatment.  This was not  a  case  in  which  an
           Article 8 claim was made out on medical circumstances.


       19. Responding for the appellant Mr Byrne acknowledged the appellant
           had had a period of overstaying.  She had not arrived in the  UK
           with a pre-existing medical condition.  Her illness  arose  when
           she was already here.  Her reluctance to return to Zimbabwe  was
           explicable.  In 2013 she was on a waiting list for a  transplant
           which was not available in Zimbabwe.  This  was  different  from
           the position of a healthy person who refused to return.


    Discussion


       20. In this appeal it is not disputed that the  appellant  will  not
           succeed either under the Immigration Rules or under  Article  3.
           Under paragraph  276ADE  she  has  neither  completed  20  years
           residence  nor  is  it  contended  that  there  are  significant
           obstacles to her integration in Zimbabwe.   Her  condition  does
           not meet the high threshold for medical cases under  Article  3,
           in terms of D v UK (1997) 24 EHRR 423 and N v SSHD  [2005]  UKHL
           31.


       21. It is instructive to look at the medical evidence,  albeit  that
           it  dates  from  2014  at  the  latest.   The  condition   which
           manifested  itself  first,   in   2004,   was   systemic   lupus
           erythematosus (SLE).  In 2014 this was stable and was kept under
           control by an immune suppressant drug.  Her other condition  was
           primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC), which is a  liver  disease
           involving narrowing and inflammation of the bile  ducts.   After
           the symptoms of this condition manifested themselves in 2011 the
           appellant required prolonged hospitalisation, including a  spell
           in intensive care, and in 2012 she was put on the  waiting  list
           for a liver transplant.   In  2014  she  was  removed  from  the
           waiting list.  By November 2014 her  condition  was  stable  but
           subject  to  what  her  consultant  physician  described  as  an
           "ongoing risk of major deterioration in her health in the future
           on a timescale that cannot be determined."  The same  consultant
           previously gave his opinion that a liver transplant was probably
           the appellant's only  long  term  means  of  remaining  in  good
           health.  There was no liver transplant programme in Zimbabwe but
           there were programmes in South Africa.


       22. The starting point for an appeal relying on Article 8 is s  117B
           of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002   (as
           amended).   This  provision  states  that  the  maintenance   of
           effective immigration control is in the public interest.  It  is
           in the public interest that persons seeking to remain in the  UK
           are financially independent so that they are  not  a  burden  on
           taxpayers and are better able to integrate into society.  Little
           weight should be given to a  private  life  established  when  a
           person is in the UK unlawfully or when the person's  immigration
           status is precarious.


       23. In Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 the Supreme Court considered a  number
           of issues relating to the question of the  correct  approach  to
           the application of Article 8 to the  removal  of  a  non-settled
           migrant.  Lord Reed gave judgment on behalf of  the  Court.   At
           paragraph 57 he considered the approach  which  was  appropriate
           when a court or tribunal was considering whether  a  refusal  of
           leave to remain was compatible with Article 8 in the context  of
           precarious family life and observed:


                "Ultimately,  it  has  to  decide  whether  the  refusal  is
                proportionate in the particular case  before  it,  balancing
                the strength of the public interest in the  removal  of  the
                person in question against the impact on private and  family
                life.  In doing so, it should give appropriate weight to the
                Secretary of state' policy, expressed in the Rules  and  the
                Instructions,  that  the  public  interest  in   immigration
                control can be outweighed, when considering  an  application
                for leave to remain brought by a person in the UK in  breach
                of immigration laws, only where  there  are  "insurmountable
                obstacles" or "exceptional circumstances"  as  defined.   It
                must also consider all factors relevant to the specific case
                in question...The critical issue will generally be  whether,
                giving due weight to the strength of the public interest  in
                the removal of the person in the case before it, the article
                8 claim is sufficiently strong to outweigh it.  In  general,
                in cases concerned  with  precarious  family  life,  a  very
                strong or compelling  claim  is  required  to  outweigh  the
                public interest in immigration control."


       24. Shortly thereafter, at paragraph 60, Lord Reed stated:


                "It remains the position that the ultimate question is how a
                fair balance should be struck between the  competing  public
                and    individual    interests    involved,    applying    a
                proportionality  test...The  Secretary  of  State  has   not
                imposed a test of exceptionality, in the  sense  which  Lord
                Bingham had in mind: that is to say, a requirement that  the
                case should exhibit some highly unusual  feature,  over  and
                above the application of the test  of  proportionality.   On
                the contrary, she has defined  the  word  "exceptional",  as
                already  explained,  as  meaning  "circumstances  in   which
                refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for
                the individual such that  the  refusal  of  the  application
                would not be proportionate".  So understood,  the  provision
                in the Instructions that leave can be  granted  outside  the
                Rules where exceptional  circumstances  apply  involves  the
                application  of  the  test   of   proportionality   to   the
                circumstances  of  the  individual's  case,  and  cannot  be
                regarded as incompatible with article 8.  That conclusion is
                fortified by the express statement in the Instructions  that
                "exceptional" does not mean "unusual" or "unique"..."


       25. In the present appeal the Judge of the First-tier tribunal found
           the appellant had no  family  life  in  the  UK,  although  this
           conclusion was not supported by adequate reasoning.  Some of the
           factors on which the  appellant  relies  might  be  regarded  in
           general as constituting private life, rather than  family  life.
           In a case like this there may well  be  a  considerable  overlap
           between family and private life.  In the authorities on which Mr
           Byrne relies, notably MM (Zimbabwe) and  Akhalu,  reference  was
           made  to  private  life  and   family   life.    Of   particular
           significance from MM (Zimbabwe) is the view expressed  by  Moses
           LJ at paragraph 23, where he stated:


                "The only cases I can foresee where the absence of  adequate
                medical treatment in the country to which a person  will  be
                deported will be relevant to Article 8, is where  it  is  an
                additional factor to be weighed in the balance,  with  other
                factors which by themselves engage Article 8.   Suppose,  in
                this case, the appellant had established firm family ties in
                this country, then the availability  of  continuing  medical
                treatment here, coupled with his dependence  on  the  family
                here for support, together establish  'private  life'  under
                Article 8.  That conclusion would not involve  a  comparison
                between medical facilities here and those in Zimbabwe.  Such
                a finding would not offend  the  principle  expressed  above
                that the United Kingdom is under no Convention obligation to
                provide medical treatment here when it is not  available  in
                the country to which the appellant is to be deported."


       26. As Moses LJ pointed out in the course of his judgment, this  was
           sufficient to establish private life but the proportionality  of
           removal still had to be assessed. By  and  large,  however,  the
           same factors  will  be  taken  into  account  in  assessing  the
           appellant's interests to be balanced against the public interest
           as are used to establish the existence  of  private  and  family
           life.   In the present appeal, unlike in MM (Zimbabwe), there is
           no offending behaviour to be taken into account  on  the  public
           interest side of the equation, though the appellant remained  in
           the UK as an overstayer.


       27. Of course, the decision in  MM  (Zimbabwe)  pre-dates  both  the
           decision in Agyarko and the insertion of s 117B in the 2002 Act.
            Under s 117B little weight is  to  be  given  to  private  life
           established by a person whose status is unlawful or  precarious.
           In such cases, as Lord  Reed  pointed  out,  a  very  strong  or
           compelling claim is required to outweigh the public interest  in
           immigration control.  The appellant's  claim  is  not,  however,
           based wholly on private life.  She relies on the support of  her
           mother, her cousin and her cousin's wife.  She has been  helping
           with the care of her niece since the niece was  born.   She  has
           firm family ties here and since she became ill  the  support  of
           her  family,  together  with  the  medical  treatment  she   has
           received, have been crucial to her management of  her  condition
           and its continuing stability.  It should also be noted that  the
           appellant's ill health developed at intervals after her  arrival
           in the UK more than fifteen years ago.


       28. These factors constitute  a  very  strong  or  compelling  claim
           sufficient  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  immigration
           control.  On this basis the appeal should succeed under  Article
           8.


    Conclusions


       29. The making of the decision of the First-tier  tribunal  involved
           the making of an error of law.


       30. The decision is set aside.


       31. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal.


    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal did not make a  direction  for  anonymity.   In
    view of details of the appellant's medical conditions  being  disclosed
    in this decision, I  consider  it  appropriate  to  make  an  anonymity
    direction.  Unless or until a court or tribunal directs  otherwise,  no
    report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellant or any member of her family.  This direction applies  to  the
    appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction
    may lead to contempt of court proceedings.

    Fee award    (N.B. This is not part of the decision)

    The appeal is allowed but in view  of  the  complexity  of  the  issues
    involved I do not consider it appropriate to make a fee award.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Deans 19th March 2018
