
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35567/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Upper Tribunal            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th October 2015                           |On 11th December 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                   mr s p
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India born  on  2nd  May  1988.   On  4th
    October 2010 the Appellant  was  granted  leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student until 9th January 2012.   On  9th
    January 2012 the Appellant made a combined  application  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)  Migrant  under  the  points-based
    system and for a biometric  residence  permit.   That  application  was
    refused on 22nd August 2014 on the grounds that the Appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements of Appendix A in particular  that  the  Appellant
    had produced a qualification by way of a certificate of  membership  of
    Cranfield University and that that qualification was not recognised  as
    a bachelors/postgraduate degree and that as specified in the  published
    guidance and Appendix A of the Immigration  Rules  where  an  applicant
    under Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) is not awarded points  for  an  eligible
    qualification the Secretary of State is unable to award points  in  any
    of the other point scoring areas for Attributes.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Grimmett sitting at Birmingham on 8th January 2015.  In a
    determination promulgated on 19th January 2015 the  Appellant's  appeal
    was dismissed under the Immigration Rules and pursuant to Article 8  of
    the European Convention of Human Rights.

 3. On 2nd February 2015 the Appellant lodged  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Those Grounds of Appeal acknowledge  at  paragraph  10
    that the Appellant cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules as a Tier
    1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant as he is unable to show that  he  has  been
    awarded a UK recognised bachelors or postgraduate degree.  At paragraph
    11 of the Grounds of Appeal it is contended that the  decision  clearly
    failed to properly consider the Appellant's rights under Article 8  and
    the unique circumstances of his case and that it is contended that  his
    appeal should have been allowed  under  Article  8  in  order  for  the
    Appellant to register and complete  his  flying  exams.   It  was  also
    submitted this wish to qualify as a pilot is a part of his private life
    and it was the unlawful act of the Respondent in detaining  him  whilst
    he still had an outstanding appeal that has refrained  him  from  being
    qualified.  It is contended that  had  the  Respondent  not  unlawfully
    detained the Appellant he would have completed his studies by now.

 4. On 11th March 2015 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  PJM  Hollingworth
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Hollingworth  considered  that  an
    arguable error of law had  arisen  in  respect  of  the  weight  to  be
    attached to the inability of the Appellant to take his pilot's  licence
    at a time when an appeal was outstanding but he had been detained.   It
    was noted that the Appellant was without his passport and that  it  was
    arguable that greater weight should  be  attached  to  the  pursuit  of
    private life in the Appellant's circumstances given the actions of  the
    Respondent.

 5. On 23rd March 2015 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The Rule 24 response note that the grounds argue
    that greater weight should be attached to the private life argument  as
    the Secretary of State had detained the Appellant and thus he  was  not
    able to sit an examination.  However the Rule 24 response submits  that
    given that the Appellant was not in the UK to pursue a pilot's  licence
    and he only undertook this course whilst awaiting for the Secretary  of
    State's decision on another matter  it  is  argued  that  it  would  be
    irrational to find a material  error  in  the  determination  of  Judge
    Grimmett especially as the Appellant is pursuing damages  for  wrongful
    imprisonment.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office
    Presenting Officer Miss Johnstone.  The Appellant  appears  in  person.
    He has served a small bundle  of  documents  which  I  have  given  due
    consideration to.  This consists of  a  skeleton  argument,  a  witness
    statement dated 7th October 2015 and a copy of correspondence with  the
    government legal department  relating  to  the  Appellant's  claim  for
    unlawful detention being pursued in the Central London County Court.  I
    fully explained to the Appellant, who is an intelligent  man  that  the
    issues before me were purely to determine whether there was a  material
    error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Miss
    Johnstone generously indicated that she would have no objection  to  my
    taking into account documents provided by the Appellant even  though  I
    was not taking evidence by way of a rehearing of this matter.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. The Appellant's appeal is purely based on consideration of his  Article
    8 rights.  He considers that at a time when he was lawfully residing in
    this country he had to  wait  26  months  for  his  application  to  be
    processed.  He acknowledges that  had  the  Secretary  of  State  first
    refused his application and then detained him thus preventing him  from
    completing his exams the contentions of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    would have been  understandable  but  he  contends  that  the  unlawful
    interference took place prior to the applications being  refused  which
    was some two months later.  Further had his passport been  returned  he
    would have been well established in his career outside the UK  by  now.
    This was acknowledged by Judge  Grimmett  in  his  determination.   The
    Appellant states that he was due to take his final examinations on  7th
    July 2014 and a week prior to this he was arrested.   As  a  result  he
    will have to retake all his  examinations  and  he  will  need  another
    training organisation to enable him  to  go  through  his  course.   He
    advises there were fourteen examinations in all held twice a month  and
    that he had completed nine and had five left to take.  He  states  that
    realistically he needs a further six to eight months' leave in  the  UK
    in order to do so.

 8. In response Miss Johnstone states that none of these  facts  appear  to
    have been before the First-tier Tribunal so far as any submissions  are
    made with regard to his grant for a private life.   She  refers  me  to
    Judge Grimmett's determination in particular to  paragraph  6  pointing
    out that discretionary leave is a matter for  the  Secretary  of  State
    alone and not for the Tribunal and emphasising therein Judge Grimmett's
    comments at paragraph 7 that prior to removal the  Secretary  of  State
    should  take  such  steps  that  are  necessary   in   the   particular
    circumstances to allow the  Appellant  to  undertake  his  examinations
    which were prevented by what appears to have been unlawful means on the
    part of the Secretary of State.  It was because of the unlawful  arrest
    and the Appellant's understandable desire to ensure  his  detention  is
    not widely known as it may affect his future career that Judge Grimmett
    quite properly made an anonymity order.

Independent Submission by the Appellant

 9. I invited the Appellant as he was a litigant in person albeit  that  he
    had enjoined in the submissions/discussion if  there  was  anything  he
    specifically wished to state to  me  then  I  would  hear  him  without
    interruption.  He responded that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  ask
    for evidence of his study and he provided all the relevant evidence  at
    the hearing and evidence of  his  examinations  that  were  taken.   He
    states that if given leave he would be given back his passport and that
    he could therefore  take  his  exams.   He  does  not  wish  to  remain
    unnecessarily in this country.  He just wants to  qualify.   He  has  a
    girlfriend in Norway and he wishes to  be  able  to  get  on  with  his
    career.  He asked me to look sympathetically at his appeal.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

12. I start by reminding myself that the issue before me  is  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  From time to time in this Tribunal  cases  appear
    before judges where their sympathies  may  well  be  entirely  with  an
    Appellant but we are constrained by the Rules to apply the law even  if
    that means the result is disappointing for an  Appellant.   The  proper
    question for the Judge to apply was,  "Was  it  correct  to  apply  the
    Immigration Rules?"  Judge Grimmett found that it was correct  for  her
    to do so and I agree with that decision.  It is not open for the  Judge
    to go considering  the  matter  outside  the  Rules  unless  there  are
    compelling circumstances and there  were  no  compelling  circumstances
    before the Judge.  Consequently there is no material error  of  law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I  consequently  cannot
    overturn that decision.

13. However within this determination I would wish to  give  the  strongest
    direction so far as I am able to the Secretary of State.  Effectively I
    am repeating what has been said by Judge Grimmett at paragraphs 6 and 7
    of her determination.  I am aware  that  there  are  civil  proceedings
    pending in the Central London County Court and indeed  the  consequence
    of those proceedings may be far reaching.  Whilst I have only  had  the
    briefest of detail and  only  heard  one  side  of  the  story  if  the
    Appellant's contentions are sustained then the actions of the Secretary
    of State have effectively deprived him of his career or at least set it
    back for a considerable  period  of  time.   I  appreciate  that  these
    proceedings were not a matter that were before the First-tier  Tribunal
    and indeed I note that the Appellant was represented by Counsel  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Consequently  whilst  there  is  no  material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  that
    the Judge was correct to find that discretionary leave is a matter  for
    the  Secretary  of  State  alone,  bearing  in  mind   the   particular
    circumstances of this case there must be considerable merit in dialogue
    being entered into between the Appellant and his legal  representatives
    and the Secretary of State to try and ensure that a way forward can  be
    negotiated to enable him to take his examinations.   This  will  enable
    the Appellant to pursue his career and on his  own  oral  testimony  he
    does no wish to remain in the UK and that he wishes to work  either  in
    the Middle East or Asia.

14. Consequently for all the above reasons the determination of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge discloses no material error of law.   Whilst  I  am
    extremely sympathetic to the position  in  which  the  Appellant  finds
    himself, his appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  Secretary  of
    State is maintained.

15. For obvious reasons the anonymity  order  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge is maintained.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date: 30th November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris







TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date: 30th November 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

