
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/35017/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 28 July 2015                      |On 9 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MS DIANE ANGELA FINN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hoshi, Counsel instructed by Haq Hamilton
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    (hereafter "the respondent") against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) (Judge Shergill). On 28th January 2015 the  FtT  allowed
    the appeal of Ms Finn (hereafter "the  claimant")  against  a  decision
    dated 19th August 2014 giving directions for her removal under  section
    10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

2.    The claimant came to the UK on 30th January 2002 with entry  clearance
    as  a  visitor  conferring  leave  to  enter  until  30th  July   2002.
    Thereafter, she was granted successive periods of leave  as  a  student
    leading to an accumulation  of  leave  which  the  claimant  considered
    entitled her to apply for indefinite leave to remain on  the  basis  of
    ten years long residence on  19th  March  2012.  That  application  was
    refused. The claimant sought reconsideration of  that  refusal  on  two
    occasions. Those requests however  were  met  with  no  response.  That
    prompted the claimant to lodge a second application on the  same  basis
    on 25th March 2014. The second application was refused as there  was  a
    period of overstaying of 1 year  and  7  months.  Whilst  it  was  this
    refusal that was the subject matter  of  appeal  before  the  FtT,  the
    earlier refusal and the reasons for it, were paramount to the  decision
    reached by the FtT.

3.    Before the FtT the claimant argued the first refusal was wrong as  the
    gaps in periods of leave identified by the respondent were incorrect or
    capable of being discounted under the respondent's policy  through  the
    exercise of her discretion specified therein. Reliance  was  placed  on
    published Home Office guidance on  long  residence  date  17th  October
    2014, a copy of which was placed  before  the  FtT  by  the  claimant's
    representative.

4.    The FtT conducted a forensic analysis of the periods of leave  granted
    to the claimant. It is not necessary for us to rehearse  that  analysis
    in any detail as it is not contentious but, in summary, the  FtT  found
    that the respondent was wrong to refuse the first  application  on  the
    basis that the claimant had overstayed between 30/05/07 to 18/08/07 and
    between 16/11/09 to 15/03/2010. The FtT found that during the  currency
    of a ten year period the claimant had overstayed a total period  of  37
    days between 5th February 2010  and  14th  March  2010  (32).  The  FtT
    further  concluded  the  claimant  had  overstayed  from  21/08/12   to
    25/03/2014. Whilst this was out with  the  currency  of  the  ten  year
    period, the FtT  noted  the  claimant's  two  unanswered  requests  for
    reconsideration of  the  first  refusal.  The  FtT  was  satisfied  the
    respondent's failure caused the claimant to lodge a second  application
    and found the claimant was entitled to a decision as to whether or  not
    her case would be reconsidered in-line with the respondent's policy  of
    undertaking  reconsiderations.  The  FtT   was   satisfied   that   the
    respondent's failure to even acknowledge  the  claimant's  request  for
    reconsideration was "tantamount to  maladministration"  (39).  The  FtT
    took account of the policy and noted that had the respondent considered
    it, she may have taken a different view regarding the 37 day period  of
    overstay and viewed the period of overstay post 21/08/12 in a different
    light. The FtT  thus  concluded  that  the  respondent  had  failed  to
    discharge her public law duty and had acted unfairly.

5.    The FtT accepted the claimant could not now meet the  requirements  of
    the relevant Rule due to the period of time  since  leave  lapsed,  but
    found there were exceptional circumstances in that  the  first  refusal
    wrongly asserted that there was a significant period  of  time  without
    leave where in fact that period amounted to a much shorter period of 37
    days. That period had arisen on account of the respondent's conduct and
    accepted delay leaving the claimant with insufficient time to  make  an
    in-time application before the expiration of her leave to  remain.  The
    FtT was satisfied that the circumstances surrounding the 37 day  period
    were likely to amount to an exceptional circumstance and found that  it
    was analogous to the situations identified in the  policy  as  to  what
    could constitute exceptional circumstances [52].

6.    Thus the FtT allowed the appeal to a limited extent on the basis  that
    the respondent had failed to adequately consider the  exercise  of  her
    discretion in accordance with her policy in light  of  the  exceptional
    circumstances found to exist in this case.

7.    The matter came before us to determine whether the FtT erred in law.

Submissions

8.    On behalf of the respondent Mr Bramble submitted that the FtT  made  a
    material error of law. Whilst he was not the author of the grounds  and
    had some difficulty in formulating the essence  of  them  into  defined
    categories of errors, he submitted the FtT had failed to  set  out  its
    reasons for finding that the 37 day period of overstay  was  likely  to
    fall into the type of situation which could amount  to  an  exceptional
    circumstance in accordance with the respondent's policy.  He  submitted
    that the judge had identified the claimant as an overstayer at (32). He
    referred us to page 17 and 18 of the policy document and  the  examples
    pleaded therein as to the type of situations that could  amount  to  an
    exceptional circumstance. He submitted  the  judge  erred  at  [52]  in
    failing to set out his reasons  as  to  why  exceptional  circumstances
    existed in this case. He submitted that the judge failed to set out the
    factors that could have led the claimant to succeed if the guidance had
    been considered. He submitted  that  this  was  a  material  error.  He
    pointed out that the judge  found  the  claimant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules and the claimant's history did  not  disclose
    any factors that would show she could succeed.

9.    In response Mr Hoshi submitted  that  there  was  no  such  error.  He
    submitted that the grounds now argued  were  different  to  those  upon
    which permission was granted. He said that permission  was  granted  on
    the basis that the judge erred in applying a current  policy  and  took
    into  account  substantive  rather  than  procedural   unfairness.   He
    submitted the grounds were misconceived. He said that at [39]  to  [43]
    the judge was considering the period after the first refusal from  2012
    onwards. He directed us to [39] and  said  the  judge  was  considering
    procedural  unfairness  and   maladministration   of   the   claimant's
    application. He submitted that the judge set out at [44] to [48] why he
    considered the decision  was  infected  by  procedural  unfairness  and
    correctly found that the longer period of overstaying was caused by the
    respondent's  failure  to  consider   the   claimant's   requests   for
    reconsideration. He noted that at [49] to [58]  the  judge  looked  at
    other factors and his reasoning at [52] was not the basis on which  the
    appeal was allowed and thus not material. He submitted that  the  judge
    was entitled to find that the respondent's conduct leading to a 37  day
    period of overstay could amount to  an  exceptional  circumstance,  and
    that the longer period of overstay of 1 year and 7 months held  against
    the claimant was procedurally unfair as there was a failure to consider
    the reconsideration request. He referred us to the respondent's refusal
    letter which failed to deal with these issues. He  submitted  that  the
    respondent had a reconsideration policy in 2009 and that she had a duty
    to consider any applicable policy in force at the date of decision.

10.   In reply Mr Bramble  said  the  judge  considered  there  had  been  a
    failure by the respondent to reconsider the case. He submitted that the
    judge went beyond the parameters of the guidance at [52].

Conclusions

11.   We are satisfied that the decision of the  FtT  did  not  involve  the
    making of a material error of law.

12.   We agree with Mr Hoshi that the respondent's application has been  put
    to us on a different basis to that upon which permission to appeal  was
    granted. The respondent's grounds of appeal  sought  to  argue  firstly
    that, the judge erred in relying on the  respondent's  policy  on  long
    residency of 20th October 2014 concerning the  accumulation  of  lawful
    residence periods when it did not apply  to  the  claimant  and,  where
    there was no evidence of any equivalent policy  applying  during  2009,
    the relevant date when she was not lawfully in the UK. Secondly, it was
    contended  that  the  judge  erred  in  finding  that  there  had  been
    substantive unfairness which  had  not  been  shown  to  be  Wednesbury
    unreasonable.

13.   Turning to deal with the first point as to whether the  FtT  erred  in
    its consideration of the application of the  respondent's  policy,  the
    FtT had before it copies of the respondent's policy on  Long  Residence
    and Reconsiderations dated 17th October  2014  and  20th  October  2014
    respectively. Mr Hoshi helpfully  provided  us  with  copies  of  these
    polices in addition to the corresponding policies that were in force at
    the date of decision. Whilst it was incumbent on the parties to  ensure
    that copies of the relevant policies, as they  stood  at  the  date  of
    decision, were placed before the judge, there is no  dispute  that  the
    relevant sections of these respective polices are essentially the same.
    Thus, whilst we consider that the judge fell into error in  failing  to
    consider the relevant policy  at  the  date  of  decision,  we  do  not
    consider it was material to the outcome of his decision. We  note  that
    the respondent's refusal letter did not touch upon her policy  document
    regarding reconsiderations. The relevance of that policy must have been
    apparent to the decision-maker in light of the  claimant's  unequivocal
    requests for reconsideration in light of the respondent's  conduct  and
    delay in dealing with her first application on the mistaken belief that
    she had overstayed for a significant period. We are satisfied  that  it
    was open to the judge to conclude that the claimant was entitled  to  a
    decision in respect of her request and that the respondent's failure to
    answer that request and apply a relevant policy was  unlawful.  We  are
    satisfied that there was  no  error  in  the  judge's  approach  in  so
    finding.

14.   We are also satisfied that no error is  evinced  by  the  respondent's
    assertion that her policy on  Long  Residence  did  not  apply  to  the
    claimant because she could not benefit from its provisions  in  respect
    of the 37 day period of overstay. Mr Bramble took us to page 17 and  18
    of that policy document. Therein guidance is given to the caseworker as
    to how he should consider  breaks  in  lawful  residence  and  in  what
    circumstances discretion may be exercised for short  breaks  in  lawful
    residence where, inter alia, a single application was made more than 28
    days out of time. The guidance goes on to give examples of  what  could
    constitute  an  exceptional   reason   such   as   a   postal   strike,
    hospitalisation or an administrative error made by the Home Office.  Mr
    Bramble submitted that the judge had simply  found  at  [32]  that  the
    claimant was an overstayer and erred at [52] in failing  to  adequately
    reason why making an application and awaiting reconsideration could  be
    considered as exceptional circumstances in line with the guidance.

15.   We consider this challenge is formulated upon the basis  of  a  narrow
    reading of the decision. We are  of  the  view  that  upon  a  holistic
    reading of the decision it is abundantly clear why the judge considered
    the policy was applicable to the claimant and had not  been  adequately
    considered by the respondent. We note the guidance lists three examples
    of circumstances which may arise where the decision-maker may  consider
    whether to waive period of overstay in periods of excess  of  28  days.
    This is a non-exhaustive list and it was open to the judge to  consider
    the context in which the decisions to refuse were made and whether this
    could be considered as an exceptional circumstance. We  agree  with  Mr
    Hoshi that the judge at [52] was addressing one of several  factors  he
    considered may constitute an exceptional circumstance. Even if  we  are
    wrong about that, we consider that the judge at  [58]  made  clear  the
    basis upon which he considered the claimant's history and the  handling
    of her application by the respondent  was  sufficient  to  fall  to  be
    considered as exceptional. The judge took account of  the  respondent's
    delay in deciding the  first  application  leaving  the  claimant  with
    insufficient time to lodge an application before her leave expired thus
    depriving her of an opportunity to apply whilst she  had  extant  leave
    and thereby preserving the continuity of her leave pursuant to s.3C  of
    the Immigration Act 1971.

16.   We are satisfied that the judge gave clear and cogent reasons  why  he
    considered the policy applied to the  claimant  and  should  have  been
    properly considered within the context of  the  claimant's  immigration
    history. We are satisfied that this conclusion was properly open to the
    judge and that there was no error in his approach.

17.   As to the second issue, we are satisfied that there was a policy  that
    conferred discretion to be exercised by the decision maker. As a matter
    of law the claimant was entitled to benefit from its application to the
    circumstances of her case within the context identified by the FtT.  We
    consider that it is clear that the judge found that this  failure  gave
    rise to a procedural unfairness and he said as such at [39],  [42]  and
    [55] of his decision. We are satisfied that the conclusions reached  by
    the judge were open to him on the evidence.

18.   On the whole, we consider that the  judge's  decision  is  a  careful,
    well-reasoned and thoughtful decision. We are not  satisfied  that  the
    respondent properly and lawfully exercised discretion  and  that  there
    was no unfairness. We are satisfied the decision  of  the  FtT  is  not
    vitiated by an error of law. Accordingly, the decision of the FtT shall
    stand. The effect of this decision is  that  the  respondent  must  now
    reconsider the claimant's  application  which  remains  outstanding  in
    light of the findings made by the  FtT  and  taking  into  account  the
    applicable polices. In particular, the respondent must address  the  37
    day period of overstay and the claimant's request for reconsideration.

Notice of Decision:

19.   The making of the decision of the FtT did not involve  the  making  of
    an error on a point of law. The decision of the FtT shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:     Date:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral
