
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35583/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5th November 2014                            |On 8th December 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                    V A N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Aihe, Legal representative of Wisestep
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. On 30th September 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Cruthers  gave
    permission to the appellant to  appeal  against  the  determination  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal I  Howard  who  dismissed  the  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent  to  refuse  to  vary  leave  to
    remain applying the provisions of Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules  and  also  to  issue  removal  directions  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. In granting permission Judge Cruthers noted that the  grounds  did  not
    suggest that the appellant could succeed under  the  Immigration  Rules
    but that the matter was pursued on  the  basis  that  the  respondent's
    decision was a disproportionate breach of Article 8.  He noted that the
    grounds argued that the judge had placed insufficient emphasis  on  the
    best interests of his British citizen child and that  this  ground  was
    arguable even if the grant of permission to appeal should not have been
    taken as an indication that the appeal would ultimately be successful.

 3. At the hearing in the Upper Tribunal before  me  Mr  Aihe  acknowledged
    that the appellant could not come  within  the  Immigration  Rules  but
    confirmed that the issue related  to  the  judge's  alleged  inadequate
    handling of  the  Article  8  claim  outside  the  Rules,  taking  into
    consideration the best interests of not only  the  appellant's  British
    daughter as a result of  his  relationship  with  Ms  C  but  also  the
    latter's British son of whom the appellant is not the father.

 4. Mr Tufan relied upon the terms of the  brief  Rule  24  reply  of  10th
    October 2014 in which it is argued that the judge had directed  himself
    appropriately and was entitled to assess the weight to be given to  the
    British citizen child's interests.  However, he also  agreed  that  the
    judge did not appear to have given any detailed  consideration  to  the
    best interests of the children, particularly the  appellant's  daughter
    and what the effect would be on the children of the appellant's removal
    to Nigeria.  He thought that the only point  he  could  argue  was  the
    materiality of the error.  He added that if an error was found, bearing
    in mind that human rights was the basis  of  the  claim,  it  would  be
    appropriate for the matter to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a fresh hearing.

 5. After I had considered the matter for a few moments, I announced that I
    was satisfied that the determination showed an error on a point of  law
    in relation to the judge's handling of the human rights claim and  that
    it would be appropriate for the matter to be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal sitting at Hatton Cross.

 6.  I reached that conclusion because the determination does not show that
    the judge gave adequate consideration to  the  best  interests  of  the
    children involved in the appellant's relationship with Ms  C.   One  of
    those children is the appellant's daughter who is  a  British  citizen.
    Ms C, a British citizen, also has a son of whom the  appellant  is  not
    the father.  The parties had lived together until just before the First-
    tier hearing although they had then separated.  Whilst the judge refers
    to Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and then goes through the  five  stage  tests,
    there is no indication that the judge made the best  interests  of  the
    children a primary consideration.  In paragraph 28(1) the judge  states
    that it would be very much in the children's best interests  to  remain
    with their mother in UK as main carer but gives  no  reasons  for  that
    conclusion, or his finding that it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
    her to relocate to Nigeria with those  children.   Although  the  judge
    gives brief consideration to what he  perceived  was  the  poor  social
    behaviour of the appellant which had  given  rise  to  his  arrest  and
    associated difficulties with the relationship between the appellant and
    Ms C, those factors alone were not sufficient to enable him to conclude
    that the respondent's decision was proportionate without  consideration
    of the best interests of the children against  an  examination  of  the
    appellant's  relationship  with  his  British  daughter  following  the
    guidance set out in leading case law such as  E-A  (Article  8  -  best
    interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 315 (IAC).

 7. As the agreed issue in this appeal is human rights, it  is  appropriate
    that the matter should be re-heard before the First-tier Tribunal.   In
    reaching that conclusion I have regard to the provisions  of  paragraph
    7.2 of the Practice Statement for the  First-tier  and  Upper  Tribunal
    issued by the Senior President on 25th September 2012.

DIRECTIONS

 1. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

 2. The hearing will take place at Hatton Cross on 29th April 2015.

 3. The appeal should not be heard before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    I Howard.

 4. Representatives should file a consolidated bundle  of  evidence  to  be
    referred to at the hearing at least five days before the hearing date.

 5. No interpreter will be required.

 6. As this appeal concerns the interests of  young  children  I  make  the
    following direction:

    Direction Regarding  Anonymity  -  Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

    Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 7. No doubt the First-tier Tribunal will  make  a  further  direction  for
    anonymity when this matter is re-heard.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

