
[pic]
IAC-AH-co-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/35232/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 23rd October 2015                 |On 3rd November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               MR Umer Shahzad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Imran Hussain (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Asjad, promulgated on  22nd  December  2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 2nd December 2014.  In  the  determination,
    the judge dismissed the appeal of Mr  Umer  Shahzad,  who  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  18th
    August 1991.  He entered the UK on 26th May 2013 on a Tier 5  (Charity)
    Migrant visa that was valid to 13th June 2014.  He then had an  Islamic
    marriage ceremony on 1st September 2013 with Miss Summiyah Kousar,  and
    a civil marriage on 7th November 2013.  His current appeal arises  from
    his application for leave to remain in  the  UK  as  the  spouse  of  a
    settled person being made  on  7th  June  2014.   The  decision  letter
    challenged is dated 21st August 2014.

The Appellant's Claim

 3.  The  Appellant's  claim  is  that  he  satisfies  both  the  financial
    requirement's test and that his marriage  is  genuine  and  subsisting.
    Both matters were in contention as far as the Respondent authority  was
    concerned.

 4. First, the employment could not be substantiated with the  Hasrat  Bahu
    Trust  because  there  was  no  evidence  of  the  Sponsor's   previous
    employment with them and no letter of support from them  in  accordance
    with the Rules.

 5. Second, as far as the marriage was concerned, it was rejected that  the
    marriage was genuine and subsisting given the manner of the Appellant's
    entry and the subsequent marriage.

The Judge's Findings

 6. The judge, in her "My Findings" section, had a large  paragraph  10  in
    which she expressed  concerns  about  the  Sponsor's  employment.   She
    stated that,

         "I could not ignore the evidence that the Sponsor  gave  about  her
         employment.  From the oral evidence given I doubted that she was  a
         truthful witness and when I looked at the documentary evidence that
         had been provided I doubted whether they were in  fact  genuine..."
         (see paragraph 10(a)).

    Later on, the judge observes how the  sponsoring  wife,  Miss  Summiyah
    Kousar, alleged that  she  worked  under  the  title  of  "field  sales
    representative", but that "when I asked her what this phrase meant, Mrs
    Kousar said she had 'had no idea' and in fact laughed when she answered
    the question ..."  (see  paragraph  10(a)(ii)).   The  judge  ended  up
    concluding that "Mrs Kousar did not know the most important information
    about the Appellant which was the basis on which he  had  come  to  the
    UK".  The judge also  observed  that,  "her  ignorance  about  her  own
    employment also suggested that this was  not  a  genuine  application."
    Given these findings I could not find that the Appellant or Mrs  Kousar
    to be credible or truthful witnesses..." (see paragraph 10(c).

 7. The judge went on to consider Article 8 and rejected the  appeal  under
    this as well.





Grounds of Application

 8.  The  grounds  of  application  state  that  "the  genuineness  of  the
    relationship was not an issue raised by the Respondent in her notice of
    decision" (see paragraph 4).  The grounds go on to say that "this is an
    issue that had been accepted by the Respondent.  Therefore ... this was
    not an issue fairly put to the Appellant to address ..." (paragraph 4).

 9. On 22nd May 2015,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the judge erred in law in  not  putting  her
    concerns  to  the  parties   and   adjourning   for   the   Appellant's
    representative to take instructions.  The grant  of  permission  states
    that, "I do not seek to limit the challenges in any way".

Hearing

10. At the hearing before me, the Appellant was  represented  by  Mr  Imran
    Hussain and the Respondent was represented by Mr David Mills.  Mr Imran
    Hussain repeated his carefully constructed grounds of application.   He
    said that the parties  had  no  notice  that  the  genuineness  of  the
    marriage was going to be put in issue.  He also handed  up  an  extract
    from the Mental Capacity Act 2005, which he said applied  here  because
    if one looks at the supplementary bundle, there is at the end  of  that
    bundle a report from the school of the sponsoring wife,  when  she  was
    aged 13, which confirms that her mental capacity was just  7  years  of
    age.  In these circumstances matters needed to be proceeded  with  some
    considerable care.

11. For his part, Mr Mills accepted that the failure to put the genuineness
    of the relationship, which had not been raised as a material  issue  in
    the refusal letter, to the parties' representatives, to enable them  to
    take instructions, and if necessary to apply for an adjournment, was  a
    material error of law.  The appropriate course of action  now  was  for
    this matter to be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal because  the
    Appellant had been deprived of a fair hearing.  He also agreed that the
    letter from the school at the back  of  the  supplementary  bundle  did
    indicate  that  the  sponsoring  wife  had  limited  mental   capacity.
    However, he raised a concern that if this was  indeed  the  case,  then
    there may be an issue here about the mental capacity of  Miss  Summiyah
    Kousar, the wife, to actually consent to  the  marriage.   Without  her
    proper consent the marriage could not be a valid marriage.

12. Mr Imran Hussain replied to say that the sponsoring wife, Miss Summiyah
    Kousar, was presently pregnant with the Appellant's child, and  clearly
    therefore there had been an attempt to make a go of the  marriage.   He
    also submitted that upon its remittal back to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    the  issues  should  not  be  restricted  simply   to   the   financial
    considerations because given that credibility had been put in issue  by
    the judge below, the interpretation and valuation of  that  credibility
    in the light of the sponsoring wife's mental capacity,  would  have  an
    obvious impact upon the way  in  which  the  financial  and  employment
    details were to be considered.  In any event, the  Upper  Tribunal  had
    not restricted the grant of permission to any particular matter.



Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the making of an error on a point of law (see Section  12)(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  The judge  raised  an
    issue, that had not formed the basis of the  refusal  in  the  decision
    letter, and did not give the parties present  an  opportunity  to  deal
    with the issue in a fair  and  appropriate  manner.   On  the  Practice
    Statement at 7.2(a) the Appellant has been denied the right to  a  fair
    hearing.  The appropriate course of action  is  remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  This is  especially  so,  given  that  this  does
    appear to be a sponsoring relative who has a  mental  disability.   The
    judge's observation of this witness having "in fact  laughed  when  she
    answered the question", is arguable deserving of sympathy, .given  that
    we now know that she is of limited mental  capacity,  and  clearly  the
    evidence will have to be evaluated on this basis  by  the  fact-finding
    Tribunal below once again.

14. I give directions that this matter is to be listed not earlier than  60
    days from the date of this determination, to enable a  Social  Services
    report to be compiled and submitted on behalf of the  sponsoring  wife,
    Miss Summiyah Kousar.  There will  have  to  be  four  witnesses.   The
    matter is to be listed for two and a half hours.   There  is  to  be  a
    provision of  an  Urdu  interpreter.   All  fresh  evidence  is  to  be
    submitted not later than seven days before the hearing.  There  are  to
    be witness statements that will stand  in  as  evidence-in-chief,  with
    minimal need for examination-in-chief and cross-examination, especially
    bearing in mind the vulnerable  state  of  the  sponsoring  wife,  Miss
    Summiyah Kousar.  There is to be a timeous skeleton  argument  provided
    by Mr Imran Hussain.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it stands to be set aside.  I  satisfy  the
    decision of the original judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.
    This appeal is remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  Sheldon
    Court in Birmingham under Practice Statement 7.2(a) to be  heard  by  a
    judge other than Judge Asjad not before 60 days from the date  of  this
    determination.

16. No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    2nd November 2015

