
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35173/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22nd September 2017                 |On 29th September 2017              |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                               ms jona llaban
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kerr, Counsel instructed by Karis Solicitors
Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Philippines whose date  of  birth  is
    recorded as 3rd March 1974.  She first arrived in the United Kingdom on
    31st October 2010 with  entry  clearance  until  7th  June  2012.   She
    subsequently applied for leave to remain on 2nd April 2014 and that was
    refused.  However, on 10th February 2014 she had made  a  human  rights
    application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of a
    long-term relationship with a person living  but  not  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom.  On 16th December 2015, a decision was made  to  refuse
    the application. She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.   Her  appeal
    was heard on 2nd December 2016 by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ross
    sitting at Hatton Cross.

 2. The material facts in the case were not in dispute.  The Appellant  and
    her  partner,  Mr  Cala,  an  Albanian  national,  lived  together  and
    eventually had a child who at the time of the hearing was 3 years  old.
    Mr Cala had leave to remain in the United Kingdom but as  I  have  said
    not so the Appellant.

 3. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the Appellant, and Mr  Cala  sought  to
    persuade the judge that he being Albanian and she being Filipino  meant
    that it would not be reasonable for them as a family now with  a  child
    to return to either the Philippines or Albania.  The  issue  of  racial
    discrimination was raised before the judge with respect to  any  return
    to Albania.  Ultimately  the  judge  accepted  the  primary  facts  but
    dismissed the appeal finding:

         "In all the circumstances... it would not be unreasonable to expect
         the family to go and live in the Philippines."

 4. Not content with that decision by Notice dated 23rd  January  2017  the
    Appellant made application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 28th July 2017 permission was granted by  Judge  Brunnen.
    In granting permission, he said:

         "The grounds on which permission to appeal is  sought  submit  that
         although the Judge found that the best interests of the Appellant's
         child lay in remaining with both his parents, he failed to make any
         assessment of the impact on the child of  going  with  his  parents
         either to the Philippines or to Albania and that in the absence  of
         any such assessment his assessment of the  proportionality  of  the
         Respondent's  decision  was   necessarily   defective.    This   is
         arguable."

 5. Before me Mr Khan crystallised his grounds and drew my attention to the
    latter part of paragraph 16 of the decision in which the judge said:

         "I consider that it is in the best interests of the child  that  he
         remain with his parents..."

    which was in contrast to what appeared in the next paragraph which was:

         "I also consider that it will be very difficult for the parties  to
         return to either Albania or the Philippines as a family."

    There was in Mr Kerr's submission an element of irrationality there  to
    be found.

 6. The second ground is the one that was essentially the  one  upon  which
    permission was granted, that there  was  no  real  assessment  of  what
    weight was given to the family's interest with regard to  private  life
    because no real distinction was made between the parents and the  child
    and in particular here I was invited to have regard to paragraph 19  in
    which the judge said:

         "I consider that I can give little weight to the private or  family
         life which has been established by the parties at a time  when  the
         Appellant was an overstayer in the United Kingdom."

    When speaking of the parties there in the plural, the point is taken by
    Mr Kerr that the child should have been considered separately from  the
    parents.

 7. I remind myself of the guidance given by McCombe in the case of VW (Sri
    Lanka) [2013] EWCA Civ 522 in which at paragraph 12 he said:

         "Regrettably, there is an increasing tendency in immigration cases,
         when a First-tier Tribunal Judge has given  a  judgment  explaining
         why he has reached a particular decision, of seeking to burrow  out
         industriously errors of evidence that had  been  less  fully  dealt
         with than others and then to use this as a  basis  for  saying  the
         judge's decision is legally flawed because it did not deal  with  a
         particular matter more fully."

 8. I ought to mention one other matter which I raised in the course of the
    submissions in order to get some assistance from  both  representatives
    and that was that the Appellant's partner, Mr Cala, might  be  entitled
    in the early part of 2018 to make application for  British  nationality
    and at the same time, so too the child.  The question then was  whether
    that factor was so material that it should have been in the mind of the
    judge in considering the issue of proportionality given that any relief
    given to the Appellant would have been discretionary leave rather  that
    indefinite leave.

 9. Despite the submissions of Mr  Kerr,  I  come  to  the  view  that  the
    eventual finding of the judge was open to him.  The Reasons are  to  be
    read as a piece. It is clear that the judge  has  approached  the  case
    overall in the correct way.

10. The reasoning begins with recognition of the need to  assess  the  best
    interests of the child in the latter  part  of  pargraph  3.  But  more
    particularly dealt with at  paragraph  16.   Not  only  did  the  judge
    recognise that the best interests of the child were  to  be  a  primary
    consideration but recognised that they were  to  be  considered  first.
    That means the judge was aware that the interests of the child were  to
    be considered before considering the interest of the parents within the
    context of the family as a whole. In other words,  the  judge  met  the
    very objection  raised  in  the  grounds  because  the  judge  properly
    directed himself to deal with the interests of the child separate  from
    those of the parents.

11. The judge also recognised that a child does not produce a "trump  card"
    and reference was properly made to the case of Zoumbas [2013] UKSC  74.
    Mr Kerr drew my attention to the case of Kaur [2017] UKUT  00014  which
    adds a gloss to the  case  of  Zoumbas  and  reminds  judges  that  the
    balancing exercise in the proportionality assessment requires the  best
    interests of the child to be assessed in isolation from  other  factors
    such as parental misconduct.  It has become trite  law  that  generally
    speaking the best interest of the child is to be with both parents  and
    it was not suggested by the judge that that should not the case here.

12. It is of note, and I think it important, that the judge did not come to
    the conclusion that it would be reasonable for the child to return with
    both parents to either the Philippines  or  Albania  but  only  made  a
    finding in respect of the Philippines. I note that the Judge considered
    separately at paragraphs  8  and  9  prejudice  which  might  face  the
    Appellant and the child in Albania. That points to the  fact  that  the
    judge clearly took into account the evidence that was being laid before
    him with respect to the concerns of the Appellant with respect  to  the
    competing countries to which the child might be returned with whichever
    parent or parents the eventual decision was made following the  appeal.



13. In simple terms, what the judge was required to do was to look  to  the
    public interest, have regard to those factors in Section  117B  of  the
    Immigration Nationality and Asylum Act 2002 which though  not  referred
    to were clearly considered. In event, no point is taken about  that  in
    respect of this decision.  Once the public interest was considered  the
    question then was what are the competing factors?  Of course, the first
    place to start was with the child but the judge recognised that and  in
    my judgment did that sufficiently.

14. The judge then came to a view having regard  to  the  totality  of  the
    evidence that this Appellant was not entitled to succeed.  That  was  a
    finding of fact which was open to him.  I do not see that the fact that
    the judge recognised that it would be difficult, indeed very  difficult
    for the parties to return to either Albania or  the  Philippines  meant
    that the other factors which weighted in favour  of  the  Secretary  of
    State were not sufficient such that  the  Appellant  was  not  able  to
    demonstrate to the requisite standard that the particular circumstances
    which she advocated outweighed the public interest.

15. In stating at paragraph 18:

         "I do not consider that it would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
         family to go and live in the Philippines."

    and at paragraph 19:

         "I consider that I can give little weight to the private or  family
         life which has been established by the parties at a time  when  the
         appellant was an overstayer in the United Kingdom."

    I do not come to the view reading the Reasons as a whole that the judge
    was holding "the sins" of the parents upon the child.  When  using  the
    term "parties" the judge was speaking of the  parents.  That  is  clear
    from what follows in the paragraph. That was a  relevant  consideration
    in the overall assessment. However, the judge had  already  dealt  with
    the interests of the child. Each and every point did not need to be set
    out.

16. I would also observe that the witness statements of the parents,  which
    I have read, say very little about the child other than to say that his
    best interest would be to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  both
    parents where he had started socialising.

17. In respect of the nationality point that I raised, the fact that  there
    was the opportunity for the child to acquire, or at  least  apply  for,
    British  nationality  in  2018,  and  for  the  father  to   make   his
    application, was clearly in the mind of the judge because the matter is
    raised in the body of the decision. The point was not,  however  raised
    in the grounds, though if it had been, I would have come  to  the  same
    view overall in this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed. The decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal is affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 28 September 2017





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

