

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
IA/35100/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated on:           |
|On 17 March 2014                            |On 18 March 2014          |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                        Ahmed Eltayeb Suliman Eltayeb
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                         Secretary of State for the
                               Home Department
                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms G Mellon, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer

Background

   1.       This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission to
      the respondent by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever in  respect  of  the
      determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Walters who  dismissed  the
      appeal by way of a determination dated 29 January 2014.
   2.       The appellant is a citizen of  Sudan  born  on  18  August  1981
      although it is said that he has lived in Egypt for most of  his  life.
      He appeals the respondent's decision, on 9 August 2013, to curtail his
      spouse visa following the breakdown of his marriage  some  ten  months
      earlier. The appellant arrived in the UK on  1  May  2012  with  leave
      until 26 June 2014 and the appellant's wife informed the Secretary  of
      State that  the  marriage  had  broken  down  in  October  2012.   The
      Secretary of State noted that the appellant  had  taken  no  steps  to
      notify her of his changed circumstances.

   3.       The Secretary of State decided to curtail the appellant's extant
      leave under paragraph 323(ii) with reference to paragraph 281(iii)  of
      HC 395.  These rules respectively state:

      323. A person's leave to enter or remain may be curtailed:
      .....
      (ii) if he ceases to meet the requirements of the  Rules  under  which
      his leave to enter or remain was granted;....


      281. The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter the
      United Kingdom with a view  to  settlement  as  the  spouse  or  civil
      partner of a person present and settled in the United Kingdom  or  who
      is on the same occasion being admitted for settlement are that:
      ......
      (iii) each of the parties intends to live permanently with  the  other
      as his or her spouse or  civil  partner  and  the  marriage  or  civil
      partnership is subsisting;...

   4.       The judge found that  the  marriage  had  indeed  ended  but  he
      rejected the appellant's attempts to persuade him that he was a victim
      of domestic violence. He also considered Article 8 but found that  the
      appellant had no family life here and that his  private  life  was  of
      short duration  and  did  not  engage  the  human  rights  convention.
      Accordingly, he dismissed the appeal.

Appeal hearing

   5.       At the hearing I heard submissions from the parties  on  whether
      or not the judge made errors of law.  The appellant  was  present  and
      the proceedings were translated to him by the court interpreter.

   6.       For the appellant, Ms Mellon submitted that the judge  had  made
      four errors; he had wrongly stated that the respondent had  considered
      the amended rules when reaching her decision, he had  failed  to  deal
      with the amended rules himself, he had failed to deal with  the  issue
      of whether the appellant had ties to Sudan and he had  been  wrong  to
      raise the issue of removal to Egypt given that the Secretary of  State
      did not propose to return the appellant to that country.

   7.       Ms Pettersen submitted that the decision had been  made  in  the
      context of a curtailment of leave and had to  be  considered  in  that
      light. The Secretary of State had considered Article 8 but found  that
      the appellant had only been here for a short  time  and  that  removal
      would not interfere with the limited private life he had established.

   8.       In response, Ms  Mellon  submitted  that  there  had  to  be  an
      analysis of the appellant's ties  to  Sudan  and  that  had  not  been
      investigated at all.

   9.       At the conclusion of the hearing  I  reserved  my  determination
      which I now give.

Findings and Conclusions

  10.        I  have  taken  into  account  the  submissions  made  and  the
      determination of the First-tier Tribunal. I have also  considered  the
      rules under which the decision was made.

  11.       I would state at the outset that I do not consider that it makes
      any difference at all to the Article 8 assessment as  to  whether  the
      decision was made to curtail  leave  or  whether  there  had  been  an
      application by the appellant. The fact  remains  that  the  respondent
      decided to consider the appellant's Article 8 rights but  for  reasons
      which are not clear to me, given the respondent's  general  view  that
      the amended rules dealing with Article 8 are a complete code, this was
      done in isolation from the rules.

  12.       It is plain that, although the judge stated that the  respondent
      had considered the new rules (amended on 9 July 2012) in reaching  her
      decision, the refusal letter  makes  no  reference  to  them,  relying
      solely upon paragraphs 323 and 281. Given that the decision  was  made
      over a year after the amendment, they plainly apply to the  appellant.
      It is maintained in the grounds that it was specifically argued before
      the judge  that  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  applied,  i.e.  the  provision
      pertaining to an applicant aged over 18 who had lived in  the  UK  for
      less than 20 years but had no ties with the country to which he  would
      have to go if required to leave the UK. Although this is not  apparent
      from the determination or the Record of Proceedings and  there  is  no
      skeleton argument on file, I am of the view that it is a rule that the
      judge should have taken into account, especially as he himself  showed
      he was aware of the rule  change  (determination:  paragraph  57).  Ms
      Mellon is, therefore, right to argue that the judge erred  in  holding
      that the Secretary of State had looked at these provisions  (when  she
      had not) and also erred in failing to consider them himself.

  13.       The judge is also criticised for his remarks about Egypt and the
      lack of examination into the appellant's ties with Sudan. The  refusal
      letter makes a reference to the appellant being able to have a private
      life in Sudan so it may be that the Secretary of State was  minded  to
      return him there.  However,  it  is  right  that  there  has  been  no
      investigation into the nature of  the  ties  he  may  have  with  that
      country, either by the Secretary of State or the judge, and the  judge
      gives no reason for why he accepted the appellant had lived  in  Egypt
      most of his life, given his other adverse  credibility  findings.  His
      findings that the appellant could enjoy private life in Egypt are  odd
      given that there had been no decision to remove him to that country.

  14.       For all these reasons, I concur with Ms Mellon  that  the  judge
      erred and that the Secretary of State also  erred.  The  Secretary  of
      State should have made it clear whether  she  planned  to  remove  the
      appellant to Sudan or  to  Egypt.  If  the  former,  she  should  have
      investigated whether he had ties with that country, it being his claim
      (which will have to  be  assessed)  that  he  had  never  been  there,
      although it seems his mother and brother reside there. She should have
      considered whether the appellant fell to be considered under paragraph
      276ADE(iv) when assessing Article 8, rather than considering Article 8
      outside the rules. These shortcomings in her decision make it unlawful
      and necessitate a remittal to her for a lawful decision to be made.

Decision

  15.       The First-tier Tribunal Judge made errors of law.  His  decision
      is set aside. I re-make the decision and allow the appellant's  appeal
      to the limited extent  that  the  respondent's  decision  was  not  in
      accordance with the law. The appeal is remitted to  the  Secretary  of
      State for a lawful decision to be made.



      Signed:






      Dr R Keki?
      Judge           of            the            Upper            Tribunal






      17 March 2014





