
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35587/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13 May 2015                           |      On 27 May 2015              |
|Prepared on 14 May 2015                  |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                             ERNEST NJOKU UKPABI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Marfat, Newcastle Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria,  and  the  sister  of  the  EEA
      national sponsor (a citizen of Belgium and Nigeria).
   2. The sponsor left Nigeria for Belgium in 2002, and she remained  living
      there until 15 December 2013  when  she  entered  the  UK  as  an  EEA
      national seeking work. She  had  acquired  Belgian  citizenship  on  5
      September 2012.
   3. The Appellant left Nigeria on 26 September 2012, travelling to the  UK
      by air on his own passport, and with a valid grant of entry  clearance
      as a student.
   4. On 23 June 2013 the Appellant applied for a residence  card  asserting
      by reference to Regulation 8 of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
      Area) Regulations 2006 ["EEA Regulations"] that  he  was  an  extended
      family member of the sponsor ["EFM"]. That application was refused  on
      21 May 2014 because;
           i) the Respondent was not  satisfied  that  the  sponsor  was  a
              "qualified person";  there  was  no  evidence  that  she  had
              obtained employment in the UK, and thus it was concluded that
              she had been seeking work for more than six months.
          ii) the Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant had  been
              a member of the sponsor's household, or dependent  upon  her,
              either when he lived in Nigeria, or when living in the UK.
   5. The Appellant  appealed  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  against  that
      refusal, and his appeal was heard and dismissed by  Immigration  Judge
      Clough in a decision promulgated on 3 December 2014.
   6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision to  the  Upper
      Tribunal. Permission was refused by the First Tier Tribunal by way  of
      decision of Judge Foudy of 3 February 2015 on the basis that  although
      there had been an incorrect reference to regulation 4 in the course of
      the decision, the text  of  that  decision  showed  that  the  correct
      regulations had been under consideration. The findings of fact made by
      the Judge were open  to  her  on  the  evidence  and  were  adequately
      reasoned, albeit briefly. The application was therefore, at  best,  no
      more than a disagreement with the Judge's findings.
   7. Undeterred, the application for permission to appeal  was  renewed  by
      the Appellant to the Upper Tribunal on essentially the  same  grounds.
      Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor on 10 March 2015
      on the basis it was arguable that Judge Clough  had  not  applied  the
      relevant regulations, and, that she had failed to analyse  a  body  of
      evidence relied upon by the Appellant in  the  course  of  her  rather
      brief decision.
   8. The Respondent served a Rule 24 response  to  the  grounds  of  appeal
      dated 1 April 2015 in which she asserted that there  was  no  material
      error of law, and that the findings of fact made in paragraphs  9,  10
      and 14 of the decision were sufficient to dispose of the appeal.
   9. Thus the matter comes before me.

   The unchallenged findings
  10. There has been, and could be, no challenge to the Judge's finding upon
      her own evidence that the Appellant's  sister  had  left  Nigeria  for
      Belgium in 2002, and that she had only acquired Belgian citizenship on
      5 September 2012.


   Regulation 4
  11. Before me Mr Marfat  confirmed  that  he  accepted  that  the  Judge's
      reference to regulation 4 in the course  of  her  decision,  whilst  a
      regrettable slip, was an error of no consequence at all. It was  plain
      from the decision that her focus had been upon regulation 8.


   Regulation 8
  12. Given the date of acquisition of  Belgian  citizenship  the  Appellant
      could not hope to establish that he was ever a member of the sponsor's
      household outside the UK, at a time when she was an EEA national.  She
      had left Nigeria for Belgium in 2002. He  had  travelled  direct  from
      Nigeria to the UK in September 2012 a mere twenty days after  she  had
      acquired Belgian citizenship, and  he  did  not  assert  that  he  had
      travelled via Belgium to do so, or indeed that he had ever visited her
      in Belgium, or lived in Belgium with her prior to  travelling  to  the
      UK.
  13. Before there  needed  to  be  any  consideration  of  the  Appellant's
      position once he arrived in the UK, the Appellant's ability to satisfy
      the requirements of regulation 8(2) therefore rested upon his  ability
      to demonstrate that he had been dependent upon the sponsor, during the
      short period in which he had continued to live in  Nigeria  after  she
      had acquired Belgian citizenship; ie 5 September 2012 to 25  September
      2012; Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - Reg 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 79. He was  then
      twenty years old. He says he was not studying, and does not  admit  to
      working.
  14. The Judge was not satisfied that the Appellant had been dependent upon
      the sponsor whilst living in Nigeria during  this  short  period.  She
      found that even if monies  had  been  provided  to  the  Appellant  in
      Nigeria by the sponsor by way of gift to allow him to make payment  of
      visa application fees, or college fees in  advance,  that  these  were
      advances that had been provided to him before the sponsor had become a
      Belgian citizen.


   Evidence overlooked?
  15. The Judge was undoubtedly not assisted by the poor preparation of  the
      appeal by the Appellant's representative. She was faced with a  bundle
      of documents filed on 19 November 2014 that were in no apparent order,
      that was unindexed,  and  to  which  the  witness  statements  of  the
      Appellant and the sponsor made no reference. There was no schedule  of
      the payments, or advances of monies that were relied upon. No evidence
      was led by Mr Marfat in examination in chief; the  Appellant  and  his
      sister  were  simply  tendered  for  cross-examination.  Nor  was  any
      skeleton  argument  prepared  that  sought  to  identify  what   those
      documents were, or how their content was relevant  to  the  issues  in
      dispute.
  16. In the sense that  there  is  still  no  index,  no  schedule  of  the
      payments, or advances of monies that were relied upon, and no skeleton
      argument, the position is no different today.
  17. The grounds of appeal do not identify the  documents  or  the  entries
      therein that are said to be relevant, and to have been  overlooked  by
      the Judge.
  18. In the circumstances I required Mr Marfat to go  through  that  bundle
      with me in order that he might identify precisely what within  it  was
      the relevant evidence, that he had asserted when drafting the  grounds
      of appeal the Judge  had  failed  to  deal  with.  That  exercise  was
      illuminating, not least because it  became  perfectly  clear  that  Mr
      Marfat was not entirely familiar with the documents.  There  were  for
      example statements from four bank accounts within the bundle; not one.
      Some of those statements were duplicated.
  19. At the conclusion of this exercise Mr Marfat had drawn my attention to
      the following;
     p75, said to be a statement for a euro account with GT Bank held by the
              sponsor
     p72 (duplicate of p70), said to be a statement for a US$  account  with
              GT Bank held by the sponsor
     p61, said to be a statement for a euro account with KBC  Bank  held  by
              the sponsor
  20. Mr Marfat formally conceded that there was  no  express  reference  to
      either of these documents in the witness  statement,  and  no  express
      reference to any of the individual transactions recorded  therein.  He
      had led no evidence either in relation to the documents themselves, or
      to the entries they  contained,  from  either  the  Appellant  or  the
      sponsor.
  21. The high point of the evidence from the Appellant and the sponsor  was
      therefore;
           i) the claim that the Appellant and the  sponsor  had  a  "joint
              account in Nigeria where she has sent money from  Belgium.  I
              withdraw funds from there for  our  needs  according  to  her
              opinion and agreement." [Apt WS #7, SpWS #13]
          ii) the claim that the sponsor had supported  the  Appellant  and
              his  siblings  for  many  years  prior  to  becoming  an  EEA
              national, and that she had  continued  to  do  so  afterwards
              [SpWS #13 #17]
         iii) the claim that the sponsor had paid for all the  expenses  of
              the Appellant's study in Malaysia, including his flights  and
              his tuition fees
          iv) the claim that the  sponsor  had  paid  for  the  Appellant's
              tuition fees in the UK, and had placed funds  into  the  bank
              account in advance of that payment in  order  to  demonstrate
              that those  funds  were  available  for  the  28  day  period
              required by the Immigration Rules
  22. The Judge's approach to the issue of dependency prior to entry to  the
      UK was simply to find that she could  not  consider  any  support  the
      sponsor had given to the Appellant before she became an  EEA  national
      [9]. I am satisfied that this was too simplistic an approach.


   The decision remade
  23.  I heard oral evidence from the Appellant and  the  sponsor  upon  the
      issue of whether the Appellant was in truth dependent upon the sponsor
      prior to entry to the UK.
  24. With the benefit of that oral evidence I am not satisfied that I  have
      been told the truth about the financial circumstances  of  either  the
      Appellant, or the sponsor. It is quite clear that there has not been a
      full disclosure of the financial circumstances of either of them,  for
      any relevant period. I note that the sponsor claims  to  have  been  a
      student in Belgium throughout the period 2002 to February 2014. Whilst
      she says that she worked from time to time part time, and accepts that
      she was financially  supported  by  her  religious  community  in  her
      studies, she has entirely failed to  give  a  detailed  or  acceptable
      explanation of her income and how she supported herself, let alone how
      she could have supported both the Appellant and his siblings,  as  she
      claims  to  have  done.  There  is  no  evidence  from  the  religious
      institution that is said to have  supported  her,  and  none  from  Mr
      Okwuru to whom I will refer below.
  25. The bank statements produced for the "Compact Account" with  KBC  Bank
      that the sponsor says she maintained in Belgium cover only the  period
      3.9.12 - 29.9.12 [p58-62]. The credit balance on the account on 1.9.12
      is said to have been only Eu5,13, and on  29.9.12  only  Eu16,51.  The
      transactions  recorded  in  that  period  are  generally  modest  sums
      transferred between bank accounts that are not explained, and that are
      generally of less than Eu50. The clear exception  is  the  transaction
      recorded on p60, dated  19.9.12,  which  records  a  cash  deposit  of
      Eu6220,00 into her account by Christian Okwuru. I  note  that  in  her
      witness statement the sponsor had said that she  had  given  money  to
      Christian Okwuru in cash to take to Nigeria to give to  the  Appellant
      [WS #16]. The sponsor was asked for an explanation of  this,  and  her
      reply was in my judgement illuminating. She said that Okwuru had given
      her Eu6200,00 to send to the Appellant, and that this  money  belonged
      to Okwuru. I note that she went on to say that she had duly sent  this
      money to the Appellant, and indeed p60  records  a  debit  by  way  of
      European transfer of Eu3010,00 on 19.9.12 and p61 records a  debit  of
      Eu3210,00 on 26.9.12.
  26. Although the sponsor said that she only ever had one bank  account  in
      Belgium the bundle contains bank statements for a second bank  account
      held with KBC Bank, a  "Savings  Account".  Curiously  the  statements
      produced for this account cover only the period  4.7.07-29.9.08.  Thus
      there are no statements for the two KBC accounts for the  same  period
      in evidence. It is however plain that during both the period 3.9.12  -
      29.9.12 and the period 4.7.07 - 29.9.08 that the statements disclose a
      number  of  transactions  between  the  two  KBC  accounts.  They  are
      unexplained.
  27. Having heard the evidence of the sponsor it is now patently clear that
      the large sum that is relied upon by  the  Appellant  as  having  been
      given to him by the sponsor in September 2012 for the payment  of  his
      visa application fees, college tuition fees and flight to the UK,  was
      actually money that was provided to him by a third party,  Mr  Okwuru,
      which for whatever reason the Appellant  and  sponsor  decided  should
      pass through one of her Belgian bank accounts on its way to one of her
      Nigerian bank accounts.
  28. The statements said to have been issued by the GT Bank  disclose  five
      different accounts held by the sponsor with that bank, a Naira savings
      account, a Naira current account, a sterling account  a  US$  account,
      and a euro account. There was not one bank account as  Mr  Marfat  had
      initially asserted, or three accounts as the sponsor claimed.
  29. The GT Bank Naira current account is covered by  pages  63-4  for  the
      period 16.7.12 - 28.3.14. It records the receipt into that account  of
      2.6mNaira on 16.7.12 from the savings account, and then the  immediate
      transfer out of 2.58mNaira to a joint account held by the sponsor  and
      the Appellant on the same day. That is the only  transaction  on  this
      account that is relied upon. That sum appears as a credit to  a  First
      Bank account held in the sponsor's name on 17 July  2012  p  77,  when
      there is a further credit of 2.2mNaira on the same  day  from  "Halidu
      Sumalia". In the next couple of days nearly 2mNaira is withdrawn  from
      that First Bank account, with 1.2mNaira being  transferred  to  "Okoli
      Ugo Prince".
  30. The GT Bank Naira savings account is covered by pages  66-69  for  the
      period 27.6.12 - 31.3.14. This records a withdrawal by  the  Appellant
      of 200,000Naira on 19.7.12, and a deposit of 100,000Naira  by  him  on
      22.8.12. The other transactions are unexplained, although  on  30.7.12
      payments were being made  from  this  account  to  the  Canadian  High
      Commission. On whose behalf, and why, is unexplained, although  it  is
      not suggested that this was to the benefit of either the Appellant  or
      the sponsor.
  31. The GT Bank US$ account is covered by page  70  for  only  the  period
      5.9.12 - 18.9.12 (p72 is merely a duplicate). This records a series of
      four withdrawals by the sponsor in the intervening fortnight totalling
      $600. The purpose of these transactions is unexplained.
  32. The GT Bank sterling account is covered by p71  for  only  the  period
      19.7.12 - 23.7.12 (p73 is a duplicate). This records five  withdrawals
      by way of transfer in favour of the Newcastle Academy of Business  and
      Tech, totalling over �2,500.
  33. The GT Bank euro account is covered  by  p74-5  for  only  the  period
      20.7.12 - 14.9.12. Eu4,000 is deposited into that account on 2  August
      2012, which is recorded as having been withdrawn by the sponsor by way
      of five transactions over the following fortnight.
  34. The only statements disclosed for  the  sponsor's  own  Nigerian  bank
      account held with FirstBank cover the period 30.6.12 -  30.5.14  [p76-
      79]. The only deposits into that account recorded prior to 30.9.12  is
      the sum of 2.58mNaira noted above from the sponsor's account, the  sum
      of 2.2mNaira from Halidu Sumaila, and  the  sum  of  40,000Naira  from
      Felicia Okorie.
  35. In summary there is no adequate explanation or evidence of these money
      movements. I am not satisfied that the Appellant  has  demonstrated  a
      genuine dependency upon the sponsor at the relevant period of time  to
      any degree, nor that he was dependent upon her earlier in 2012.  I  am
      not satisfied that there has been a complete and  truthful  disclosure
      of  the  Appellant's   financial   circumstances.   The   overwhelming
      impression given  by  these  documents,  which  the  evidence  of  the
      Appellant and the sponsor did nothing to dispel, is that sums of money
      were being  deliberately  moved  around  between  bank  accounts,  and
      between third parties, in order to give  a  false  impression  of  the
      Appellant being financially reliant upon the sponsor.


   Conclusion
  36. Even if the Appellant had been dependent upon the sponsor when he  was
      studying in Malaysia, which I do not accept,  that  was  a  period  of
      study in September 2008.
  37. I accept that the Appellant may at some point have been dependent upon
      Mr Okwuru, or received advances of money from him, but that is not the
      same thing as financial dependency upon the  sponsor,  and  it  is  of
      course not his case.
  38. On the limited evidence produced I am not satisfied that the Appellant
      has demonstrated on the balance of probabilities that he was in  truth
      genuinely financially dependent upon the sponsor in September 2012, or
      indeed prior to that at any date during 2012. It is possible that  the
      Appellant may be able  to  demonstrate  the  financial  dependency  he
      asserts if he and the sponsor make a complete and truthful  disclosure
      of their financial circumstances for the relevant periods,  but  I  am
      not satisfied that this has yet occurred. I can only make  a  decision
      upon the evidence that has been produced to the Tribunal; Reyes [2013]
      UKUT 314.
  39. The Appellant has not demonstrated on the evidence a situation akin to
      that in the decision of Reyes [2014] QB 1140. The  Appellant  has  not
      demonstrated a longstanding  financial  dependency  upon  the  sponsor
      predating the acquisition by the sponsor of Belgian citizenship  on  5
      September 2012  that  would  allow  me  to  infer  that  it  continued
      thereafter until 26 September  2012,  and,  he  has  not  demonstrated
      actual financial dependency during the period that he lived in Nigeria
      between 5 September and 26 September 2012 when he entered the UK.
  40. The Appellant has not demonstrated that he is the EFM of  the  sponsor
      pursuant to regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations 2006 (as amended).



Decision

   The decision promulgated on 3 December 2014 did involve the making of  an
   error of law in the approach taken by the Judge to  the  evidence  relied
   upon by the Appellant.
   I set aside that decision and remake it so as to dismiss the appeal.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
   No anonymity direction is required, or  was  sought  in  the  First  Tier
   Tribunal. I decline to make such a direction of my own motion since there
   would appear to be no need for one, and it would serve no useful purpose.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 14 May 2015




