
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35009/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 January 2018                            |On 2 February 2018            |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     MK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R K Rai, Counsel, instructed by Gills Immigration
Law
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of India and her date of birth is [ ]  1983.
     She came to the UK on 16 March 2011 as a student with her partner with
    leave until 30 September 2012.  On 5 September  2012  she  applied  for
    leave to remain under Article 8, which was refused in a decision of  29
    August 2013. Her appeal against refusal was dismissed by the  FtT.   On
    20 February 2015 she applied for leave to remain on family and  private
    life grounds and this was refused on 19 May 2015 with an out of country
    right of appeal only.

2.   Following an  application  for  judicial  review  the  application  was
    reconsidered and  the  refusal  maintained  on  1  December  2015.  The
    Appellant had an in country right of  appeal.  The  Appellant  appealed
    against this decision. Her appeal was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Amin in a decision promulgated on  24  April  2017,  following  a
    hearing at Taylor House on 15 March 2017.  Permission  was  granted  to
    the Appellant by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal P J M Hollingworth on
    27 November 2017.

3.   The judge heard evidence from the Appellant and considered the  medical
    evidence, including a psychiatric report by Dr Dhar of  8  March  2017.
    The judge referred to a previous appeal in 2013 when a judge  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.  There was no  copy  of
    this before the judge and I have not seen it.

4.   The judge made findings at [15] to [42] of the decision. Those  can  be
    summarised.  The Appellant married her first husband, P, on [  ]  2010.
    His parents did not approve of the marriage.  They came together to the
    UK in 2011.  He was violent to her.  He left the Appellant  in  January
    2012. She issued divorce proceedings. (The judge was not provided  with
    a decree absolute but a certificate of entitlement to a  decree  nisi).
    Following the breakdown of the marriage the Appellant went to live with
    her friend BK, who supported her financially. She married S on [ ] 2015
    in a religious ceremony.  He was violent to her. She left him on 12 May
    2015.  She  contacted  Southall  Black  Sisters  for  assistance.   She
    reported S to the police. He was arrested for threats to  kill,  common
    assault and false imprisonment against her.  She is not aware  of  what
    happened. She did not  provide  evidence  in  the  form  of  a  witness
    statement to the police.

5.   The judge found that the Appellant suffered domestic  violence  at  the
    hands of both husbands.  He found that she had  narrated  a  reasonably
    consistent account of her  domestic  violence  to  Dr  Dhar  and  to  a
    Southall Black  Sisters.   The  judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant's
    parents are deceased and she has no family in India.  However, she  did
    not accept  that  she  has  no  friends  there.   The  judge  found  it
    "implausible" that the Appellant, having lived in India for  27  years,
    would not have friends there. The judge found that  the  Appellant  had
    been supported financially and accommodated by her friend  BK  and  her
    "uncle" in the UK.  The "uncle" is not related to  the  Appellant.   He
    lives in Kingston but did not attend  the  hearing  and  there  was  no
    evidence from him.

6.   The judge considered the appeal under paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  ("the  Rules").   The  judge  concluded  that   the
    Appellant's abusive relationships had now come to an end.  P  has  been
    deported and she was not aware of his  whereabouts.  Whilst  the  judge
    accepted that she has a "subjective fear" that if she  is  returned  he
    may trace her, she concluded that there was no evidence that  he  would
    know that she had been returned.  In relation to  her  second  husband,
    who was in the UK, the judge concluded that she  has  no  contact  with
    him.

7.   The judge made the following findings in respect of the evidence of  Dr
    Dhar:

         "30. I accept the Appellant is suffering from PTSD as evidenced  by
             Dr Dhar  and  the  NHS  hospital  evidence.   The  assessments
             carried out by the in-  house  counsellor  at  Southall  Black
             Sisters also supports this diagnosis.  The Appellant has  been
             assessed as someone who is at risk  of  suicide.   However,  I
             note from the consultant psychiatrist report [sic]  that  much
             of  her  anxiety  and  depression  has  been  caused  by   her
             immigration status although her breakdown in relationships has
             contributed to the PTSD symptomps [sic]."

8.   The judge stated as follows:

         "31. The Appellant has accepted that she only has Bhupinder as  her
             close friend in the UK and she goes to  the  local  temple  to
             volunteer once or twice a month.  The rest  of  the  time  she
             spends looking after Bhupinder's children whilst she works.
         ....

         34.  The Appellant has provided no evidence to show why as a single
             woman she would not be able to relocate elsewhere and  set  up
             her life.  The Appellant has worked in the UK previously in  a
             food factory (as noted in the GP records) and she will be able
             to utilise these skills on return.  The Appellant has spent 27
             years in India and she speaks Punjabi.  She is  aware  of  the
             culture in India and will be able to attend temples there.   I
             accept that there may be initial  hardships  in  settling  but
             this does not reach the level of very significant obstacles to
             reintegration.  The Appellant has a  supportive  close  friend
             Bhupinder and an 'uncle' in the UK who will be able to  assist
             her in the reintegration initially as the uncle and [BK]  have
             been assisting her financially in the UK.


         35.  I accept that the Appellant has PTSD and is receiving  limited
             treatment in the UK.  The Appellant has not shown, the  burden
             being on her, that she would not be able to  access  treatment
             in India.  The Appellant's Counsel in her  closing  submission
             has accepted that the Appellant was not relying on her  mental
             health (PTSD) as it did not reach the level of Article 3  case
             law.


         36.  The Appellant claims she is in fear of  her  first  ex-husband
             locating her but her fear is subjective.  There is no evidence
             to show that he has attempted to locate her in the intervening
             period.


         37.  For all these reasons I conclude that the Appellant has failed
             to show that there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
             returning to India.


         38.  The Appellant has sought to argue that  there  are  compelling
             reasons  for  her  appeal  to  be   considered   outside   the
             Immigration Rules and in particular her mental health.  I have
             dealt with these issues above.


         39.  Having regard to S.117B of the  2002  Act,  I  find  that  the
             Appellant  falls  far  short   of   demonstrating   that   her
             circumstances are  exceptional/and  or  compelling  such  that
             would  cause  me  to  consider  the  matter  outside  of   the
             Immigration Rules, namely under Article 8.


         40.  I note from the Appellant's immigration  history  that  rather
             than returning to India at the end of her dependant  leave  in
             2012, she continued to stay in the UK unlawfully  and  entered
             into a further relationship.  She now wishes to rely  on  that
             abusive relationship in support of her remaining  in  the  UK,
             one that she would never have started had she chosen to behave
             correctly by leaving the  UK.   That  kind  of  behaviour  can
             rarely,  if  at  all,  relate  to   a   finding   that   these
             circumstances are compelling and/or exceptional.  For the same
             reasons the Appellant's private life does not attract a  right
             to remain under the Immigration Rules and cannot be said to be
             exceptional and/or compelling in the circumstances.


         41.  The Appellant's immigration status has always been  precarious
             and her private life was established when his [sic] status was
             precarious.


         42.  In conclusion, I accept that the Appellant's return  to  India
             will  entail  hardships.   However,  taking  everything   into
             account,  I  am  confident  that  her  reintegration  will  be
             achieved and will not, in the language of the Rule, give  rise
             to very significant obstacles."

The Grounds of Appeal


9.   The thrust of the written grounds is  that  as  a  victim  of  domestic
    violence,  as  the  Appellant  was  found  to  be  by  the  judge,  the
    conclusions in respect of Article 8 were not open to the judge. Mr  Rai
    argued that the judge failed to have regard to the  Appellant's  mental
    health when considering Article 8.  She did not consider what was  said
    in the psychiatric evidence  or  by  the  counsellor,  Kinnari  Kansara
    (subcontracted by Southall Black Sisters to provide counselling to  the
    Appellant). She did not consider the letter of 28  February  2012  from
    Southall Black Sisters to Gills Immigration Law. The  judge  considered
    immaterial matters, namely that she would not have entered  the  second
    abusive relationship had she left the  UK  before  the  expiry  of  her
    leave.

10.  Mr Rai argued that the error goes to the  heart  of  the  determination
    with reference to GS (India) & Ors v The Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ  40.   He  confirmed  that  no  further
    evidence had been submitted by the Appellant.  He submitted that if one
    looks at the psychiatric report it shows that the  Appellant,  who  has
    been married twice, is a highly vulnerable person and that she  has  an
    untreated depressive disorder.

11.    Ms Pettersen relied on the Rule 24 response.

The Evidence Before the FtT

12.  The Appellant's own evidence at [43] of  her  witness  statement  of  6
    March 2017 is as follows:

         "43.  Thereafter  I  contact  [sic]  Southall  Black  Sisters   for
             assistance.   They  assisted  me  and  I  started  to  receive
             counselling.  I also contacted my GP and at last was  able  to
             openly tell them what I  had  been  through.   I  was  getting
             suicidal thoughts and just wanted to end my life.  I  had  two
             failed marriages and no family to turn to for help.  [BK]  was
             with me all the way through.  She went to the  police  station
             and the doctor's with me.  At this point [BK] took me  in.   I
             have been living with her since."

13.  The Appellant further stated that if she returns to India she  has  no-
    one there to depend upon and that "I may go back into depression".  Her
    evidence is that she has been able to "overcome myself" with  the  help
    and support that she has received here.

14.  BK's evidence is contained in  her  unsigned  witness  statement  of  6
    March 2017 and she stated that she  is  aware  that  the  Appellant  is
    receiving help from Southall Black Sisters and NHS  Mental  Health  and
    that she was suffering from depression and that it is very evident that
    she needed help.  She stated that there have been many  occasions  when
    the Appellant has started crying and told her that she  wishes  to  end
    her life.

15.      From the evidence before the judge, I have attempted to  present  a
    coherent account of events. An advocate from Southall Black Sisters met
    the Appellant on 22 May 2015 and carried out a detailed risk and  needs
    assessment.  She scored 14 on the CAADA DASH, which confirmed that  she
    was at high risk of  violence  and  harm.   When  they  first  met  the
    Appellant, she was visibly distraught when recounting  experiences  and
    she was tearful.  She was referred  to  the  organisation's  weekly  in
    house support group, counselling services and English language classes.
     She attended in  house  counselling  and  the  initial  assessment  of
    counselling needs on 17 September  2015,  which  showed  that  she  was
    undergoing a very high level of psychological stress.  It is  concluded
    in that letter that her account of domestic violence is consistent with
    the experiences of many South Asian women  in  the  UK  who  experience
    abuse from their husbands and who have an insecure immigration  status,
    rendering her vulnerable and completely at the mercy of her husband.

15.  There is a letter of 22 October 2015 from Kinnari Kansara (of  Woman  2
    Woman Counselling & Consultancy Services) to the  Appellant's  GP.   An
    initial assessment was undertaken on 17 September 2015 using a  CORE-10
    psychological wellbeing questionnaire and the Appellant scored  38  out
    of 40, indicating a very high level  of  psychological  distress.   She
    experienced extreme violence from  her  ex-husband  from  the  day  she
    married him on 27 February 2015.  The conclusion  is  that  Ms  Kansara
    believed that the Appellant was  suffering  from  posttraumatic  stress
    syndrome and she was offered a total of sixteen sessions.

16.      There is a letter from Ms Kansara of 28 January 2016  addressed  to
    the Appellant's GP, Dr Singh.  The Appellant's last  session  with  her
    was on 28 January 2016.  She felt the need  to  undertake  a  self-harm
    risk  assessment.   The  Appellant   told   her   that   her   personal
    circumstances were very difficult and she was living "on  a  day-to-day
    basis, feeling traumatised by this situation".   [MK] CORE score at the
    end of the therapy was 38/40, which indicated a "very high and constant
    level of stress".   Ms  Kansara  was  concerned  about  the  cumulative
    effects of the self-medication that the Appellant  is  taking  and  the
    self-harm issue.  The Appellant told her that she does not care if  she
    lives or dies and there was reference to an accidental  overdose.   The
    Appellant was worried about  the  counselling  coming  to  an  end.  Ms
    Kansara recommended mental health support and ongoing counselling.  The
    self-harm risk assessment referred to a previous accidental overdose.

17.  There is a letter  from  Annabel  Edwards,  a  psychological  wellbeing
    practitioner working on behalf of West London Mental Health NHS  Trust,
    of 13 December 2016 to the Appellant's GP,  Dr  G  Singh.   Ms  Edwards
    confirmed that the Appellant attended an initial screening  appointment
    on 13 December 2016. She stated  that  the  Home  Office  rejected  the
    Appellant's application and the Appellant felt depressed and  hopeless.
    She cannot return to India as both her parents and brother are dead and
    she has nowhere to stay and that life would be very difficult  for  her
    as a single woman.  The Appellant was taking antidepressants and has no
    appetite.  She thinks about ending her life every day and felt hopeless
    about her immigration situation.  Two months prior to this she tried to
    strangle herself with her scarf but her friend stopped  her.  She  said
    that "It feels better to die than to live".  She thought  about  ending
    her life, but she did not disclose any specific plans.  She stated that
    she thought  about  cutting  her  wrists  with  a  knife.   Because  of
    "suicidal thoughts" she was referred to SPA (my  understanding  is  the
    acronym stands for Single Point of Access and  it  provides  a  24-hour
    help line and other services for patients). There was no evidence  from
    the Appellant about this or evidence  of  SPA  involvement  before  the
    judge.

18.  There  was  a  letter  from  the  Appellant's  GP  to  the  Appellant's
    solicitors, Gills Immigration Law, of 14 February 2017 and it states as
    follows:

         "I have gone through  your  questionnaire  and  have  gone  through
         record after that.  For detailed reply  I  have  attached  all  her
         record which lists all her problems and  how  were  these  treated.
         She has been on depression medication and I have attached  copy  of
         her prescription issued by WLMH team with this.  She reports waxing
         and waning of her symptoms.  Under such circumstances  it  is  very
         difficult to say that how long it will take for her cure."

19.  There is a letter from Southall Black Sisters to Gills Immigration  Law
    of 28 February 2017 reporting that on 12 May 2015 they received a  call
    from the Appellant for advice.  She  described  the  domestic  violence
    that she accepted throughout her two marriages  and  according  to  the
    author of  the  letter  it  was  clear  that  she  was  frightened  and
    vulnerable.

20.  Dr Dhar, a consultant forensic psychiatrist, interviewed the  Appellant
    on 28 February 2017 and his report is dated  8  March  2017.   Dr  Dhar
    stated at paragraph 4.2 that there has been a significant deterioration
    in the Appellant's mental health since separation from her  husband  in
    2012.  Dr Dhar comments at 4.3 that she has been going to her GP  on  a
    regular basis and been prescribed antidepressants  but  she  could  not
    give any more details.   She  has  also  been  referred  to  the  local
    psychological services that operates out of primary care and was  found
    to have severe symptoms and so was referred to secondary care  services
    and that she has been seen by a consultant psychiatrist and  prescribed
    high doses of medication. She  could  not  give  Dr  Dhar  any  further
    information.  She described to Dr Dhar a total  sense  of  hopelessness
    and said that she would rather  die  than  return  to  India.  Dr  Dhar
    confirmed that the Appellant has been  depressed  for  at  least  three
    years but that is recently getting worse.  She has  physical  symptoms.
    An increase in antidepressants did not help.

21.  Dr Dhar's opinion and recommendations are recorded at section 6 of  the
    report and can be summarised.  The Appellant  suffers  from  depressive
    disorder which is to a severe level.  She appears dejected, pessimistic
    in outlook and with low self-worth and is  currently  a  suicide  risk.
    She has tried to harm herself recently  and  has  ongoing  thoughts  of
    cutting herself. In his view it  is  particularly  important  that  the
    domestic violence is considered because her first husband was  deported
    to India and he believed that she was behind  the  decision  to  deport
    him. He may  become  threatening  towards  her  parents,  who  are  now
    deceased. Dr Dhar stated that there is a  need  for  the  Appellant  to
    continue to receive treatment and  support  whilst  here  and  that  he
    understood   that   she   has   been   referred   to   secondary   care
    services/specialist services as the local psychological  services  felt
    that the symptoms were too severe.  In Dr Dhar's view she has untreated
    PTSD connected to domestic abuse.

22.  It is unlikely, should she be returned,  that  she  would  receive  any
    kind of psychological support in India and her symptoms are most likely
    to deteriorate as she has no  resources  that  she  can  rely  upon  to
    maintain a healthy existence there.   Having  been  married  twice  and
    suffering  victimisation  from  these  marriages  she  will  be  highly
    vulnerable and exploitable on return to India.  There is a genuine link
    between these risks and her current mental state  and  that  she  fears
    that her life would be at risk  should  she  be  returned  without  any
    support  in  place.   The  Appellant  needs   ongoing   treatment   and
    psychological support at the very least to make her feel more confident
    and positive about the future.  It is unlikely she  would  be  able  to
    access any type of support in India even if it were available to her.

The Law

23.  The Strasbourg court in Bensaid v UK [2001] 33 EHRR  205  at  paragraph
    47 stated as follows:

         "'Private life' is a  broad  term  not  susceptible  to  exhaustive
         definition.  The court has  already  held  that  elements  such  as
         gender identification, name and sexual orientation and sexual  life
         are important elements of the personal sphere protected by  Article
         8.  ...  Mental health must also be regarded as a crucial  part  of
         private  life  associated  with  the  aspect  of  moral  integrity.
         Article 8 protects a right to identity  and  personal  development,
         and the right to establish and  develop  relationships  with  other
         human beings and the outside  world.  The  preservation  of  mental
         stability is in  that  context  an  indispensable  precondition  to
         effective enjoyment of the right to respect for private life."

24.  Paragraph 61 in Pretty v UK [2002] 35 EHRR 1 states:

         "As the court has had previous occasion to remark, the  concept  of
         'private life' is  a  broad  term  not  susceptible  to  exhaustive
         definition.  It covers the physical and psychological integrity  of
         a person.  It can sometimes  embrace  aspects  of  an  individual's
         physical and social  identity.   Elements  such  as,  for  example,
         gender identification, name and sexual orientation and sexual  life
         fall within the personal sphere protected by Article 8.  Article  8
         also protects a right to personal development,  and  the  right  to
         establish and develop relationships with other human beings and the
         outside world. Although no previous case has  established  as  such
         any right to self-determination as being contained in Article 8  of
         the Convention, the court considers that  the  notion  of  personal
         autonomy is an important principle underlying the interpretation of
         its guarantees."

25.  At 65 the court stated:

         "The very essence of the Convention is respect  for  human  dignity
         and human freedom.  Without in any way negating  the  principle  of
         sanctity  of  life  protected  under  the  Convention,  the   court
         considers that it is under Article 8 that notions of the quality of
         life take on significance."

    The core value protected by Article 8 is the quality of life,  not  its
    continuance.


26.  The Appellant does not rely on Article 3 health grounds but  this  does
    not necessarily entail failure under Article 8.  I  consider  what  the
    Court of Appeal stated in GS:

         "86. If the Article 3 claim fails (as I would hold it  does  here),
             Article 8 cannot prosper without some separate  or  additional
             factual element which brings the case  within  the  Article  8
             paradigm - the capacity to form and enjoy relationships - or a
             state of affairs having some affinity with the paradigm.  That
             approach was, as it seems to me, applied  by  Moses  LJ  (with
             whom McFarlane LJ and the Master of the Rolls  agreed)  in  MM
             (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ 279 at paragraph 23:


                  'The only  cases  I  can  foresee  where  the  absence  of
                  adequate medical treatment  in  the  country  to  which  a
                  person is to be deported will be relevant to Article 8, is
                  where it is an additional factor  to  be  weighed  in  the
                  balance, with other factors  which  by  themselves  engage
                  Article 8.  Suppose,  in  this  case,  the  Appellant  had
                  established firm family ties in  this  country,  then  the
                  availability of continuing medical treatment here, coupled
                  with his  dependence  on  the  family  here  for  support,
                  together establish 'private life' under Article  8.   That
                  conclusion would not involve a comparison between  medical
                  facilities here and those in  Zimbabwe.   Such  a  finding
                  would not offend the principle expressed  above  that  the
                  United  Kingdom  is  under  no  Convention  obligation  to
                  provide medical treatment here when it is not available in
                  the country to which the Appellant is to be deported.'


         87.  With great respect this seems to me to be entirely right.   It
             means that a specific case has to be made under Article 8.  It
             is to be noted that MM (Zimbabwe) also shows that  the  rigour
             of the D exception for the purpose of Article 3 in such  cases
             as these applies with no less force  when  the  claim  is  put
             under Article 8:


                  '17. The essential principle is that  the  ECHR  does  not
                      impose any obligation on the  contracting  states  to
                      provide those  liable  to  deportation  with  medical
                      treatment lacking in their  'home  countries'.   This
                      principle applies even where the consequence will  be
                      that  the  deportee's  life  will  be   significantly
                      shortened (see Lord Nicholls in N  v  Home  Secretary
                      [2005] 2 AC 296, 304 [15] and N v UK [2008]  47  EHRR
                      885 (paragraph 44)).


                  18.  Although that principle was expressed in those  cases
                      in relation to Article 3, it  is  a  principle  which
                      must apply to Article 8.  It makes no sense to refuse
                      to recognise a 'medical care' obligation in  relation
                      to Article 3, but to acknowledge it  in  relation  to
                      Article 8.'"

27.    The court in Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 considered  very  significant
    obstacles albeit in the context of deportation and stated;


         14.  In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's  "integration"
         into the country to which it is proposed that he  be  deported,  as
         set out in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a  broad  one.
         It is not confined to the mere ability to find a job or to  sustain
         life while living in the other country. It is  not  appropriate  to
         treat the statutory language as subject to some gloss and  it  will
         usually be sufficient for a court  or  tribunal  simply  to  direct
         itself in the terms that Parliament has chosen to use. The idea  of
         "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be  made  as
         to whether the individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of
         understanding how life in the society  in  that  other  country  is
         carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a
         reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to  operate
         on a day-to-day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
         reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give  substance
         to the individual's private or family.


Conclusions

28.  The judge did not err. She considered  the  evidence  of  Dr  Dhar  and
    attached weight to it. At [35] of her decision she  is  concerned  with
    Art 3, on which the Appellant did not rely. It is clear from  a  proper
    reading of the decision  that  the  judge  considered  the  Appellant's
    mental health in the context of Article 8 under the Rules  and  outside
    of the Rules. She was not assisted by the failure  of  the  Appellant's
    representatives to set out a comprehensive and  sequential  account  of
    treatment and medical opinion  to  date.  I  have  attempted  to  piece
    together the evidence that was before the judge relating to this as  no
    doubt the judge did.

29.    The judge concluded that  the  Appellant  had  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder, accepting the opinion of Dr  Dhar.   Having  read  Dr  Dhar's
    report it is difficult  to  see  how  he  came  to  such  a  conclusion
    independently. He seems to have adopted the conclusions of  Ms  Kansara
    (a counsellor) who believed  the  Appellant  was  suffering  from  Post
    traumatic stress syndrome (in 2015) and that she had (in 2016) felt the
    need for the Appellant to undertake a self-harm risk assessment. In  my
    view, Dr Dhar also attached significance in forming his opinion on  the
    evidence of Annabel Edwards (a psychological  well-being  practitioner)
    in 2016 who referred found that Appellant to have suicidal thoughts and
    had referred her to SPA. There is  no  evidence  of  independent  tests
    undertaken by Dr Dhar. He also relied heavily on what he  was  told  by
    the Appellant.  In any event, the judge accepted the diagnosis  and  in
    the light of the unchallenged evidence of previous domestic abuse  this
    is reasonable.

30.    Dr Dhar  stated  that  the  Appellant  was  suicidal  and  the  judge
    attached weight to this. However, it is unclear from his report how  he
    arrived at this conclusion independently from  the  opinions  of  other
    lesser qualified professionals. It is also unclear  to  me  whether  Dr
    Dhar was aware of the details of the previous attempt by the  Appellant
    to take her life (on her account she had tried to strangle herself with
    a scarf and was prevented from doing so  by  a  friend.  There  was  no
    medical intervention). Before this the Appellant took an overdose,  but
    scrutiny of the paperwork before  me  makes  it  clear  that  this  was
    accidental.  Dr Dhar does not attempt to  explain  his  conclusions  in
    detail or quantify the risk or attempt to explain  how  risk  could  be
    reduced. The judge was entitled to conclude that risk  of  suicide  and
    the Appellant's poor mental health are in  part  as  a  result  of  her
    immigration status and a subjective  fear  on  return  from  her  first
    husband. The judge found that there would be no risk to  the  Appellant
    from either  husband  on  return.  There  is  no  properly  articulated
    challenge to this in the grounds. The challenge is a disagreement  with
    the findings and an attempt to re-argue the point. She also found  that
    there would be support for the Appellant in India having  rejected  her
    evidence to have no friends there. There is no cogent challenge to this
    finding. In any event, she found that those supporting her  here  could
    help her there.

31.      From the evidence it appears  that  counselling  sessions  with  Ms
    Kansara had come to an end in January  2016.  Dr  Dhar  stated  in  his
    report that there was a need for the Appellant to receive treatment and
    support but there was no evidence  of  ongoing  treatment.    The  most
    recent piece of medical evidence was that of 14 February 2017 from  the
    Appellant's GP (see [18] above).  It is unhelpful.   Whilst it is clear
    from Annabel Edward's letter that the Appellant has  been  referred  to
    SPA. There is no further evidence relating to ongoing treatment at  the
    date of the decision before the First-tier Tribunal or at the  time  of
    the hearing before me.  There was no evidence from the Appellant  about
    ongoing treatment.

32.      The Appellant did not rely on Article 3. There  was  no  persuasive
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that treatment in  India  would
    not be available and accessible to her. There are bare assertions  made
    by Dr Dhar. The Appellant has been here since 2011. She spent the first
    27 years of her life in India.

33.  The Appellant does not have a family life here capable of engaging  the
    Convention.  She has a relative here whom she refers to as "uncle"  but
    he did not attend the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  to  give
    evidence and he did not provide a witness statement.  She has been here
    lawfully in 2011.  She became an overstayer in 2013.  She has  remained
    in the UK without leave.  As found by the judge she  has  posttraumatic
    stress disorder but there was no evidence before the judge of treatment
    at the time of the hearing in March 2017.  The Appellant's own evidence
    in her witness statement is not that she was seeking treatment  at  the
    time or that she was unwell at the time of the  hearing.  Her  evidence
    was that she would become unwell again should she return.

34.  Whilst the judge  accepted  that  return  would  entail  hardship  (see
    [42]). No doubt taking judicial notice of the stigma the Appellant  may
    face  in  India  as  a  divorced/separated  single   female   and   her
    vulnerabilities generally as a victim of domestic violence with  mental
    health issues, she was entitled to conclude that  there  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to integration.

35.    It was not argued that the Appellant meets the Rules  for  leave  for
    victims of domestic violence. She does not for a number of reasons, the
    most obvious, that she did not come to the UK as a spouse of  a  person
    present and settled  her,  but  as  a  dependent  student  and  has  no
    legitimate expectation that she could stay here  independently  of  the
    relationship.

36.    The judge did not end the assessment of Art 8  having  determine  the
    appeal under the Rules. She  properly  considered  whether  there  were
    compelling circumstances to allow the appeal outside of the Rules.  The
    Appellant's claim rested on private  life.  The  judge  considered  all
    material matters, including the medical evidence. She did  not  mention
    the Appellant's mental health at [40], but  a  proper  reading  of  the
    decision makes it clear that she understood that this  was  a  material
    matter (see [38]) and mental  health  is  a  part  of  an  individual's
    private life. She had already made findings about the medical  evidence
    and the Appellant's mental health. There was no need for her to  repeat
    them. The point is she factored the findings  into  the  assessment  of
    proportionality.  She was entitled  to  conclude,  particularly  having
    proper regard to section 117B of the 2002 Act (there  was  no  evidence
    that the Appellant was financially independent and as a matter of  fact
    she is an overstayer) that the decision was proportionate.   The  judge
    did not consider immaterial matters at [40]. What the judge referred to
    is the Appellant's unlawful status and  the  applicability  of  section
    117B (4) (b) of the 2002 Act.  The assessment of Article  8  is  lawful
    and sustainable.

Notice of Decision

There is no error of law in the decision of the  FtT  and  the  decision  to
dismiss the appeal is maintained.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date February 1 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
