
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35141/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 December 2017                          |On 23 January 2018            |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                     M M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Kumudusena of Liyon Legal
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Coll  promulgated  on  3  February  2017.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert on  4  September
    2017 but subsequently granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Pitt  on  11
    October 2017.


2.   I am grateful to the helpful manner in which Ms  Fijiwala  has  brought
    to my attention concerns in respect of the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to an extent that she concedes that there was a material
    error of  law,  and,  moreover,  that  in  remaking  the  decision  the
    Respondent concedes the substance of the appeal.


3.   In the circumstances I do not propose to rehearse in any  great  detail
    the background of this case  -  which  is  helpfully  set  out  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  In brief summary however  I  note
    the following.


     (i) The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  born  on  [  ]  1984.   He
    entered the United Kingdom in  September  2009  as  a  Tier  4  Student
    migrant with leave valid until 20 January 2011.  He was  successful  in
    applying for further leave in this capacity until 31 May 2014.  By  way
    of form FLR(FP) signed on 27 May 2014 he applied for further  leave  to
    remain on the basis of family life / private life pursuant to Article 8
    of the ECHR.  His application was based on his  relationship  with  his
    son, C, born on [ ] 2013.  The circumstances were slightly  unusual  in
    that the Appellant's child lived with his mother, TJ, a British citizen
    born on [ ] 1991, and her same-sex partner.   It  was  the  Appellant's
    case that he enjoyed contact with his son and was actively involved  in
    C's life and was making significant financial contributions.

     (ii) The Respondent refused the  Appellant's  application  for  reasons
    set out in a 'reasons for refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')  dated  20  August
    2015.  The application was  refused  with  reference  to  paragraph  S-
    LTR.1.7 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules on the  basis  that  it
    was considered that the Appellant had not cooperated with requests  for
    information in respect of his application.  The  application  was  also
    refused with reference to certain  of  the  'eligibility'  requirements
    under Appendix FM.  It was noted that the Appellant had not provided  a
    birth certificate for C and so the Respondent was not satisfied that he
    was indeed the father. Nor had evidence been provided to establish that
    the child was living in the United Kingdom.  It was considered that  in
    such circumstances the Appellant did not satisfy  the  requirements  of
    paragraph E-LTRPT.2.2.  Further the requirements  of  E-LTRPT.2.3  were
    considered not to be satisfied because the Appellant did not have  sole
    parental responsibility for the child.  Further the Respondent was  not
    satisfied with regard to E-LTRPT.2.4(b) of Appendix FM by reference  to
    not being satisfied that the Appellant was taking an active role in C's
    upbringing.  The Respondent nonetheless gave consideration to paragraph
    EX.1 and declared herself satisfied that the Appellant  had  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship  with  a  child,  but  noted  that
    because the Appellant had not satisfied  the  eligibility  requirements
    paragraph EX.1 could not avail him.  The application was  also  refused
    with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules. It  was
    also considered that there were no exceptional circumstances to warrant
    a grant of leave to remain outside the Rules.


4.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge  manifestly  conducted  a  very  thorough
    review of all of the evidence before her, and made detailed  and  well-
    reasoned findings of fact.  Whilst I note  that  there  has  been  some
    challenge to the Judge's findings, in my judgement there is nothing  in
    any of those challenges that identifies an error of law.  It  seems  to
    me that the findings were entirely  open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.


5.   In substance, the Judge accepted the Appellant was the father of C  and
    that the child was residing with his mother and her same-sex partner in
    the United Kingdom.  The  Judge  also  accepted  that  there  was  some
    contact, albeit not as frequent or as extensive as  the  Appellant  had
    claimed.  It  was  also  accepted  that  there  had  been  some  recent
    financial contributions - but the Judge considered that these had  only
    been made recently perhaps with a view  to  the  fact  of  the  ongoing
    appeal.  The Judge did not consider that the Appellant was as  actively
    involved in C's upbringing as he had claimed, and also made  a  finding
    to the effect that  C's  mother's  non-attendance  at  the  appeal  was
    suggestive of the fact that she did not consider that her son would  be
    affected adversely if the Appellant were  required  to  leave  for  Sri
    Lanka.


6.   Notwithstanding these findings the Judge concluded that "the  Appellant
    has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with"  C  (paragraph
    53).  On that basis the Judge found that the  family  life  element  of
    Article 8 was engaged.  This is curious because  the  Judge  had  found
    that paragraph EX.1 did not apply (paragraph 52), yet the  premise  for
    paragraph EX.1(a) is indeed the existence of a genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship. (It is to be recalled from the rehearsal of  the
    background above  that  the  Respondent  had  accepted  that  EX.1  was
    satisfied by virtue of a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
    with C - see paragraph 3(ii) above.)


7.   Be that as it may, Ms Fijiwala now concedes that the  Judge  fell  into
    error when considering section 117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.


8.    At  paragraph  60(iv)  of  the  Decision  the  Judge   set   out   her
    considerations under section 117B(6). She stated "First, the  Appellant
    does not have parental responsibility and nor does he have a  residence
    order".  With reference to the case of R (on the application of  RK)  v
    Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (s.117B(6);  "parental
    relationship") IJR [2016] UKUT 00031 (IAC) Ms Fijiwala points out -  as
    is set out in the headnote of that decision - "It is not necessary  for
    an individual to have parental responsibility in law for there to exist
    a parental relationship".  In the circumstances  Ms  Fijiwala  concedes
    that the Judge fell into error in her assessment of  the  applicability
    of section 117B(6), and her factoring into the overall consideration of
    the case the public interest considerations pursuant to Part 5A of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Ms Fijiwala acknowledges
    that this was a material error of law in respect of the proportionality
    assessment that it was incumbent upon the Judge to conduct.


9.   Moreover Ms Fijiwala draws to my attention the Respondent's  policy  in
    respect  of  applicants  with  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship with a British citizen child, in particular  by  reference
    to matters set out at paragraph 7 of the  decision  in  SF  and  others
    (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC).  In essence,
    absent criminal behaviour or a serious adverse immigration history,  it
    is the Respondent's position  that  it  would  be  disproportionate  to
    remove such an applicant and thereby disrupt the  relationship  between
    the applicant and the British citizen child.  On that basis  -  bearing
    in mind this is an Appellant against whom there is no suggestion  of  a
    criminal record and  who  has  an  immigration  record  that  indicates
    compliance  with  the  terms  and  conditions  of  his  leave  and   an
    application made at or about the time of the expiry of his last leave -
    there is no relevant adverse feature.  In  consequence  the  Respondent
    now concedes that it would indeed be  disproportionate  to  remove  the
    Appellant from the United Kingdom - such removal necessarily having  an
    adverse  impact  upon  the  family  life  enjoyed  between  him  and  C
    notwithstanding  the  Judge's  conclusions  that  the  extent  of  that
    relationship was more limited than the Appellant had  asserted  in  his
    application and evidence on appeal.


10.  I am content that the concessions made by the  Secretary  of  State  in
    respect of both 'error of law' and the  substance  of  the  appeal  are
    entirely appropriate and  well  made.   In  the  circumstances  I  find
    material error of law and set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It falls to me to remake the decision, and on the  basis  of
    the concession of the Respondent I remake the decision by allowing  the
    appeal on human rights grounds.


Notice of Decision

11.  The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.


12.  I remake the decision in the appeal. The appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 21 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and in all of the circumstances make  a  full  fee
award of any fee which has been paid.

Signed:                                 Date: 21 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
(qua a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal)
