
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/35940/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 30 March 2015                     |On 15 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                           CHARLES IKECHIKWU ODUME
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE )
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Timson counsel instructed by Maya Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this  appeal  but
    in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in
    the First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judges Cruthers and  Shergill
    promulgated on 11 December 2014 which allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on  17  November  1978  and  is  a  national  of
    Nigeria. The Appellant had leave to enter the UK  as  a  student  on  3
    October 2013 and his visa was valid until 16 January 2015. .  In  order
    to prove certain of the requirements necessary to obtain such leave  he
    supplied an ETS TOEIC certificate which purported to show that  he  had
    taken an exam on 16 July 2013

 4. On 31 August 2014 the Appellant arrived at Manchester Airport  after  a
    trip to Nigeria. He sought re entry to resume his studies at Manchester
    Ideal College where he was studying for a Diploma in  management  which
    was due to finish on 16 December 2014. Home Office  enquiries  revealed
    that applicant's test score had been cancelled as invalid on the  basis
    of fraud and they therefore refused the Appellant leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom and this is set out in a Notice of Leave to Enter  dated
    9 September 2014.

The Judge's Decision

 5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on 26 November  2014.
    First-tier Tribunal Judges Cruthers and Shergill heard the  appeal  the
    decision being written by Judge Shergill ("the Judge") He  allowed  the
    appeal.

 6.  As a preliminary issue the Judge heard  an  application  by  the  Home
    Office  Presenting  Officer  for  an  adjournment  to  allow  them   an
    opportunity to obtain further evidence which would support  their  case
    in conjunction with the two 'generic' statements in  the  bundle.  They
    heard evidence from the Appellant and submissions from  both  the  HOPO
    and the Appellant's representative. They refused the application.

 7. At paragraph 30 the Judge set out that the burden of proof was  on  the
    Respondent to establish a precedent fact that false representations had
    been made by cogent evidence.

 8. The Judge found that the Respondent had failed to provide case specific
    evidence. There were statements from two witnesses who set out how  the
    fraud alleged had occurred but these did not refer to this Appellant.

 9. The Judge found that there was a lack of clarity on key issues which is
    set out at paragraphs 33-40.

10. The Judge heard evidence from the Appellant which he  gave  in  English
    and found him to be a credible witness which supported the view that he
    spoke English and therefore found there was no reason for him  to  have
    someone else take an English examination on his behalf.

11. The Judge found that the evidence did not  show  the  Appellant's  test
    results were invalidated at all or for good reason; whether he was  the
    subject of bulk or individual invalidation and how the  possibility  of
    false positive results were dealt with.

12. The conclusion was that the Respondent  did  not  meet  the  evidential
    burden of establishing that the Appellant  was  involved  in  dishonest
    activity or deceived the Respondent in respect of his English  Language
    Certificate

13. Grounds of appeal were lodged on the  basis  that  the  refusal  of  an
    adjournment amounted to a procedural irregularity and  the  Judge  gave
    inadequate reasons on material matters.

14. On 29 January 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew gave permission  to
    appeal on both grounds.

15. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Mc Vitie on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that :

      a) He relied on the grounds of appeal.

      b) In relation to the refusal to grant  an  adjournment  the  tribunal
         should have considered whether the refusal deprived the  Respondent
         of a  right  to   fair  hearing  relying  on  Nwaigwe  (adjournment
         :fairness) [2014] 00418 (IAC).

      c) He conceded that ground  1  in  relation  to  the  refusal  of  the
         adjournment was stronger than the argument that the Judge had given
         inadequate reasons for the decision reached.

16. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Timson submitted that :

      a) He relied on the  Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  1  of  2014  in
         relation to the interpretation of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
         tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014  in
         relation  to  adjournment  requests.  He  said   that   while   not
         specifically referred to by the Judges it was  evident  from  their
         consideration of the application to adjourn and those matters  they
         took into account that they had  considered  all  relevant  factors
         before refusing the adjournment.

      b) It was clear in this appeal that given the  central  issue  in  the
         case was that the language test had been obtained by fraud that the
         Respondent had been aware of the need for  fact  specific  evidence
         for some time: the fact that it was in a float list was irrelevant.

      c) The application to adjourn  had  not  been  made  at  the  earliest
         opportunity and was speculative and the  Respondent  did  not  show
         what would be achieved by the adjournment.

      d) The Respondent had had adequate time to prepare the case.

The Law

17. An application to adjourn proceedings at the time of  this  appeal  was
    governed by Rule 21 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)
    Rules 2005 (the "2005 Rules")

         "(1)     Where a party applies for an adjournment of a  hearing  of
             an appeal, he must-

               a)  if  practicable,  notify  all  other   parties   of   the
                  application;

               b) show good reason why an adjournment is necessary;  and

               c) provide evidence of any fact  or  matter  relied  upon  in
                  support of the application.

         (2)      The Tribunal must not adjourn a hearing of  an  appeal  on
             the application of a party, unless satisfied that  the  appeal
             cannot otherwise be justly determined."

18. This provision of  the  Rules  was  to  be  construed  and  applied  by
    reference to the  overriding  objective  enshrined  in  Rule  4,  which
    provides:

         "The  overriding  objective  of  these  Rules  is  to  secure  that
         proceedings before the Tribunal are handled as fairly, quickly  and
         efficiently as possible; and, where appropriate,  that  members  of
         the  Tribunal  have  responsibility  for  ensuring  this,  in   the
         interests of the parties to the proceedings and in the wider public
         interest."

Finding on Material Error

19. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

20. There is no automatic right to an adjournment and the  Procedure  Rules
    and the Presidential Guidance referred to by Mr Timson refer to factors
    which weigh in favour of and against an adjournment application.

21. In this case the chronology was of some importance: at a hearing on  26
    November 2014 the Judge was faced  with  a  refusal  decision  dated  9
    September 2014 underpinned by a claim that  an  English  Language  test
    taken on 16 July 2013 was invalidated by fraud.

22. The so called generic statements on which the claim of fraud were based
    were dated 23 June 2014 and set out how the fraud the fraud  was  drawn
    to the Respondent's attention in January 2014, how it  was  alleged  to
    have been carried out  and  detected  in  general  terms  but  made  no
    reference to specific applicants.  It was conceded by the Respondent at
    the hearing that the requirement for case specific  evidence  had  been
    recognised by the Respondent since September 2014.

23. The application made to the Judge was  for  an  adjournment  to  obtain
    evidence that showed that the Appellant's test certificate by reference
    to his test number was invalid.

24. I am satisfied that the Judge took into account all relevant factors at
    paragraphs 16-23 in  determining  whether  the  case  could  be  justly
    determined without adjourning the case. They made specific reference in
    paragraph 23 to the Procedure Rules.

25. The Judge had an opportunity as part of the adjournment request to hear
    the Appellant give evidence in English about  the  background  to  this
    appeal and they recorded this evidence at paragraph 19.

26. The factual  background  against  which  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    adjournment was made but which may  have  resulted  in  an  adjournment
    being granted was that it was conceded by the Respondent that they  had
    been  aware  of  the  requirement  for  case  specific  evidence  since
    September 2014 so this was not an issue were the Respondent  was  taken
    by surprise by something occurring unexpectedly at the date of hearing.
    The nature of the case had not changed: the Respondent was  aware  that
    the case rested on establishing by cogent evidence not only that  there
    was a fraud perpetrated but that this Appellant had carried out such  a
    fraud. There was no suggestion that this evidence was in the  hands  of
    someone beyond the control of the Respondent.

27. The factors set out in the Presidential Guidance that weigh against  an
    adjournment which although not specifically referred to  by  the  Judge
    were part  of  the  factual  matrix  of  the  decision  were  that  the
    adjournment request was not made  at  the  earliest  opportunity.  They
    recorded that they heard submissions from Mr Islam  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that they mere fact that the Appellant's test certificate had
    been invalidated would take the matter no further and  there  was  some
    force in that argument: the Judge was concerned that the  fact that the
    Appellant's test certificate had been invalidated would not have  shown
    in what way it had been determined that he personally  had  obtained  a
    test certificate by fraud rather  than  being  the  victim  of  a  bulk
    invalidation (paragraph 22).

28. Finally the Judge considered the  application  against  the  chronology
    given and decided that they had been given adequate time to prepare the
    case. They concluded that they could properly consider  the  issues  in
    the case  and  dispose  of  the  case  justly  and  fairly  without  an
    adjournment. I am satisfied that  in  the  circumstances  of  the  case
    before this was a conclusion that was open to him.

29. The second ground argues that the Judge  failed  to  adequately  engage
    with the evidence adduced by the Respondent. I am  satisfied  that  the
    findings made by the Judge were well reasoned,  rational  and  detailed
    and clearly demonstrated why the  Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Respondent had met the  evidential  burden  in  this  case.  The  Judge
    started by identifying again at paragraph 32 and 39 that  the  evidence
    was not case specific to this Appellant although the case was at  least
    10 weeks old. He then made a finding that the  evidence  was  'somewhat
    unclear' on key issues at paragraphs 33-39 and gave clear  examples  in
    relation to a lack of clarity as to whether an individual had been  the
    subject of a bulk invalidation or an individual invalidation. The Judge
    identified contradictions in the Respondent's evidence at paragraph 35.



30. The Judge then set what  they  described  as  the  'confused  evidence'
    against the fact that they found the Appellant to  be  a  credible  and
    reliable witness and that English was his first  language  in  Nigeria.
    After being told that his 2013 test certificate had been invalidated he
    had undertaken more recent ESOL  tests  whose  validity  had  not  been
    challenged (paragraph 40). The oral and documentary evidence  led  them
    to conclude that there would be no reason for this Appellant to  secure
    a test certificate by fraud as he clearly spoke English (42) and  I  am
    satisfied that  they  were  entitled  to  take  this  into  account  in
    determining whether the Respondent had met  the  evidential  burden  in
    this case.

31.  I remind myself of what was said in Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:
    set aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC) about the  requirement  for
    sufficient reasons to be given in a  decision  in  headnote:  "Although
    there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the conclusions on
    the central issue on which an appeal is determined, those reasons  need
    not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having  regard
    to the material accepted by  the  judge."  I  was  satisfied  that  the
    Judge's determination when read as a whole set out findings  that  were
    sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

32. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

33. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date 7.4.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
