
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35583/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 December 2015                   |On 21 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                    V A N
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Ahie of Wisestep
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 20  January  1990.   The
    Appellant's immigration history  is  usefully  and  fully  set  out  in
    paragraphs 2-6 of the decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Hodgkinson promulgated on 8 May 2015 dismissing the Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent on 5 April 2013 to  curtail  his
    leave as a student so as to expire on 8 July 2013 and  his  claim  that
    his removal would place the United Kingdom in breach of its  obligation
    to respect his private and family life in the United Kingdom  protected
    by Article 8 of the European Convention.

 3. On 16 July 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal R A  Cox  refused  the
    Appellant permission to appeal stating that:-

         "The grounds in essence prove to be simply a disagreement with  the
         Judge's findings thinly disguised as  an  error  of  law  argument.
         They  are  also  inaccurate  in  suggesting  he  characterised  the
         Appellant  as  a  persistent  offender.   The  main  thrust  is   a
         suggestion that he did not properly  assess  the  Section  55  best
         interests of the children involved (with  whom  the  Appellant  has
         contact) but that seems to me unsustainable on a careful  and  fair
         reading of the decision as a whole."

 4. The Appellant renewed his  application  for  permission  to  appeal  on
    similar grounds adding a  specific  reference  to  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  and  the  need  to  take
    account of the best interests of any children and added  the  following
    ground:-

         "The decisions  are  grossly  unfair  and  continue  to  cause  the
         Appellant and his family great protracted distress and  anxiety  as
         their case has gone back and forth through the First-tier and Upper
         Tribunal.  This is the second time this case is  being  brought  to
         the Upper Tribunal.  A previous error was also  identified  by  the
         Upper Tribunal earlier that resulted in  the  case  being  remitted
         back to the First-tier Tribunal for a Re-hearing that unfortunately
         has yet again become the subject of the instant application."

 5. On 3 September 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Finch  granted  permission  to
    appeal on the basis that the Judge -

         "... failed to explain what factors  indicated  that  it  would  be
         proportionate to remove the Appellant when he  had  a  genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship with his daughter."

    She also stated he had erred in the manner  in  which  he  had  applied
    s.117B(6) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.   He
    had acknowledged the Appellant's daughter could not  realistically  re-
    locate to Nigeria but at  the  same  time  had  found  the  Appellant's
    daughter was a qualifying child.  He had not gone on to remind  himself
    that in these circumstances the public  interest  does  not  require  a
    person's removal.





The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 6. The Appellant attended the hearing and stated his daughter was  outside
    the hearing  room  being  looked  after  by  his  current  partner.   I
    explained to him the purpose of and the procedure to be adopted  during
    the hearing.

Submissions for the Appellant

 7. Mr Ahie submitted the Judge had failed to address the position  of  the
    Appellant's daughter and that he would not  be  able  to  maintain  any
    relationship  with  her  subsequent  to  removal.   At  this  point   I
    intervened to request that Mr Ahie refer to specific parts of the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision under appeal.  I took the opportunity to point
    out to him that the grounds for permission to appeal  from  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's determination promulgated on 21 August  2014  and  from
    the decision promulgated on 8 May 2015 both to the First-tier  Tribunal
    and the latter as renewed to the Upper Tribunal had  been  in  more  or
    less identical form.

 8. He continued that Judge Hodgkinson at paragraph 36 of his decision  had
    found the Appellant had contact several times a week with his  daughter
    and  that  this  amounted  to  parental  responsibility,  even  if  the
    Appellant was not making any financial contribution to her maintenance.
     I enquired if there  was  any  guidance  or  jurisprudence  about  the
    meaning of "parental relationship".  Mr Ahie replied the Appellant  had
    established a family life with his daughter and he relied on  that.   I
    indicated the Judge had found that there was family life but the  issue
    remained whether the Respondent's decision  would  be  an  interference
    with that family life sufficient  to  engage  the  State's  obligations
    under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  and  that  he  needed  to
    explain with reference to the wording of the Judge's decision where and
    why the Judge had made a material error of law.  If the submission  was
    that the Judge's findings were perverse in the light of the facts, then
    he needed directly to address that, bearing  in  mind  that  it  was  a
    serious allegation to make.  Mr Ahie retired to take  instructions  and
    on return confirmed he had no further submissions to make.

Submissions for the Respondent

 9. Mr Kotas submitted the Judge had carefully set out the evidence of  the
    Appellant at para.25 of his decision and had accepted his claimed level
    of contact. He had gone on to find the Respondent's decision did engage
    the third question outlined in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 and  at
    para.30 to consider the best interests  of  not  only  the  Appellant's
    daughter but also her half-brother. The Judge had concluded that whilst
    the Appellant had regular and qualitative contact with both of them  he
    did not live in the same household as the children and was satisfied he
    did not have any material responsibility for their upbringing or day-to-
    day welfare.  At para.31 the Judge had concluded on the  basis  of  the
    evidence before him, noting the lack of evidence that  the  Appellant's
    removal from the United Kingdom and lack of  evidence  from  any  third
    party such as the mother of the Appellant's daughter or  her  or  half-
    brother's school which might show that the  removal  of  the  Appellant
    would have any  particularly  adverse  consequence  for  the  children.
    There was no suggestion for the Appellant that the Judge had not  taken
    anything into account which he should have done.

10. The Judge at paras.33-35 of his  decision  had  dealt  fully  with  the
    factors to be taken into account with regard  to  the  public  interest
    laid out in Sections 117A-B of the 2002 Act.  At para.35  he  had  also
    accepted that the Appellant might arguably have a parental relationship
    with his  daughter  and  directed  himself  that  the  public  interest
    referred to in s.117D of the 2002 Act did not require  an  individual's
    removal in the circumstances  where  that  individual  has  a  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child which his daughter was.

11. Given the evidence before the Judge and the facts found he was entitled
    to  reach  the  conclusion  at  para.36  of  his  decision   that   the
    relationship the Appellant had with his daughter and  her  half-brother
    did not amount to a "parental relationship".

12. He concluded the Upper Tribunal's grant of permission failed adequately
    to address the points in  issue  and  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision should be upheld.

Response for the Appellant

13. Mr Ahie confirmed there was no suggestion the Judge had  been  perverse
    in his findings and conclusions.  At para.35 of his decision the  Judge
    had accepted there was arguably a  parental  relationship  between  the
    Appellant  and  his  daughter  and  this  was  inconsistent  with   his
    conclusion that  their  relationship  did  not  in  fact  amount  to  a
    "parental relationship" at para.36 of his decision.

14. The Appellant had legally entered the United Kingdom and had throughout
    had leave to enter.  It would not be in the public interest  to  remove
    him and his removal would be disproportionate to the need  to  maintain
    immigration control because his stay in the  United  Kingdom  had  been
    entirely lawful.

Findings and Consideration

15. The Judge took into account the Appellant's  evidence  and  indeed  the
    decision contains no adverse finding on  the  Appellant's  credibility.
    The Judge made  findings  of  fact  based  on  the  evidence  which  he
    accepted.  He took into account the best interests of  the  Appellant's
    daughter and her half-brother.  He referred to Section 55 of  the  2009
    Act as well as the judgment in ZH (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4.
    Tellingly, at para.31 he noted the lack of evidence  about  the  likely
    impact on the Appellant's daughter and her half-brother  in  the  event
    the Appellant was removed.

16. There is no inconsistency in the Judge's findings  at  para.35  of  his
    decision that it is arguable the Appellant has a parental  relationship
    with his daughter and his conclusion at para.36 that on examination the
    nature of the relationship between the Appellant and  his  daughter  is
    not such as to qualify as a "parental" relationship for the purposes of
    s.117D of the 2002 Act or having regard to what was said in AM (S.117B)
    Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) promulgated on 17 April  2015  only  some
    twelve days before  the  hearing  of  this  appeal  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Of particular note  is  what  the  Upper  Tribunal  said  at
    paragraphs 14 and 15:-

         "14.     Whilst we heard extensive argument upon  the  purpose  and
             effect  of  s117B(2)  and  s117B(3),  we  are  satisfied  that
             ultimately the matter is quite  straightforward.   Upon  their
             proper construction neither s117B(2), nor s117B(3), grants any
             form of immigration status  to  an  individual  who  does  not
             otherwise qualify for that status, because they have failed to
             meet the requirements set out in the Immigration Rules for the
             grant of that status.  If it was the intention  of  Parliament
             that the requirements of the Immigration Rules should be over-
             ridden, merely because an individual could establish that they
             were able to speak English, or were  financially  independent,
             to some degree, then we are satisfied  that  Parliament  would
             have said so in the clearest terms.  In addition  we  consider
             that Parliament would have considered it necessary to set  out
             what degree of fluency, or, level  of  financial  independence
             was required of the individual,  and  the  immigration  status
             that the individual would be entitled  to  once  it  had  been
             demonstrated.  Plainly these statutory provisions do  no  such
             thing. One must continue to look to the Immigration  Rules  to
             discern what Parliament considers are the requirements  to  be
             met by a claimant, and the length of the period of leave to be
             granted to them if those requirements are met.

         15.  What then is their purpose?  We are satisfied  that  s117B(2),
             and s117B(3), were intended by  Parliament  to  meet,  and  to
             finally dispose of, the arguments that have from time to  time
             been advanced to the  effect  that  the  language  and/or  the
             financial requirements of the Immigration Rules should  either
             be ignored altogether, or, should carry  little  weight,  when
             the Tribunal is weighing the proportionality of a decision  to
             remove in the context of the consideration of an  individual's
             Article 8 rights; Bibi [2013] EWCA Civ 322, and  MM  (Lebanon)
             [2013] EWCA Civ 985. That view is strengthened  by  the  Human
             Rights Memorandum that was published by the Respondent  as  an
             accompaniment to the  2014  Act  [71-73].   In  short  we  are
             satisfied that s117B(2) and s117B(3) can only properly be read
             as reinforcing the statement of principle that is set  out  in
             s117B(1), as indeed the Appellant  accepts  both  s117(4)  and
             s117(5) should be read."

17. The Judge was entitled  to  his  conclusion  that  the  nature  of  the
    Appellant's  relationship  with  his  daughter  did  not  amount  to  a
    "parental relationship" within the meaning of the Immigration Rules. He
    summarised the reasons why he reached this conclusion  at  para.30  and
    again at  para.36.  Crucially,  the  Judge  accepting  the  Appellant's
    evidence about contact noted at para.30 the Appellant had  no  material
    responsibility for the upbringing or day-to-day welfare of his daughter
    and her half-brother and  at  para.36  that  he  did  not  provide  any
    maintenance funds for their upkeep.

18. He noted there were no compelling circumstances making the Respondent's
    decision disproportionate to the need to have regard  to  the  economic
    well-being of the State which includes the maintenance  of  immigration
    control.

19. I conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  does  not
    contain a material error of law such that it should be  set  aside  and
    the decision shall stand.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law and shall stand.   The  effect  is  that  the  Appellant's
    appeal is dismissed.


Signed/Official Crest  Date: 14. xii. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

