
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration Asylum Chamber) Appeal Number: IA/35229/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On the 21st December 2015            |On the 11th January 2016              |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                  Between:

                             MRS HURRIYAT JOSEPH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Grigg (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Webb promulgated on the 28th April 2015, in  which  he
       dismissed the Appellant's appeal on Human Rights grounds  both  under
       and outside of the Immigration Rules. Permission to appeal  has  been
       granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker on the 21st September 2015,  on
       the basis that it was arguable  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
       failed to properly apply the correct test to the  assessment  of  the
       evidence before him and searched for compelling factors,  as  opposed
       to considering the factors in the round  and  cumulatively  and  that
       further it was arguable that the Judge  failed  to  factor  into  his
       assessment the violence allegedly sustained by the Appellant from her
       sister in  Pakistan  and  the  relevance  of  the  son's  occupation.
       Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.

    2. Within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued that the  evidence  in  the
       case is largely undisputed and it is argued that the First-tier Judge
       accepted that the Appellant is dependent on her son, Dr Shaun Joseph,
       a British national, for support  and  that  Dr  Joseph  is  a  Senior
       Registrar at the Royal Derby Hospital. It is  argued  his  profession
       falls within the Home Office's list of Shortage Occupations and  that
       it was accepted that the Appellant's husband Prof Donald  Joseph  had
       died unexpectedly, in the Appellant's presence, from a heart  attack,
       and that the following day their local church All Saints in  Peshawar
       was attacked by  two  suicide  bombers  killing  81  worshippers  and
       injuring many others and that the  psychiatric  evidence  from  a  Dr
       Pourgourids identified trauma arising  from  these  events  and  this
       evidence was accepted by the First-tier Judge. It is argued that  the
       Judge failed to consider the psychiatric evidence and  dependency  of
       the Appellant on her son under the Rules  and  Article  8,  that  the
       Judge failed to consider the evidence cumulatively; that he failed to
       consider the evidence  of  physical  violence  from  the  Appellant's
       sister against her when they  lived  together  following  the  sudden
       death of the Appellant's husband; that the Judge failed to take  into
       account the Article 8 rights of the Appellant's son as a  UK  citizen
       and also failed to take account of the son's profession as  being  on
       the Home Office's national shortage list.

    3. Mr Grigg on behalf  of  the  Appellant  argued  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge had  failed  to  apply  a  cumulative  approach,  when
       undertaking the balancing exercise required for Article  8  and  that
       the Judge had not properly  weighed  the  evidence  and  had  ignored
       relevant evidence in reaching his assessment on  proportionality  and
       considering the appeal under paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi). However,  he
       accepted that if the approach taken was correct for  the  purpose  of
       Article 8, then he  would  not  succeed  in  this  ground  under  the
       Immigration Rules. He said that the question as  to  whether  or  not
       there are compelling  circumstances  in  the  case  often  distracted
       Judges from considering the overall picture and looking at all of the
       factors in favour of the Appellant in considering proportionality and
       considering the factors in favour of the Appellant  compared  to  the
       public interest in  carrying  out  the  balancing  exercise  for  the
       purpose of Article 8. He  argued  that  here  the  Appellant  was  an
       elderly lady who was in ill health and who had suffered trauma  after
       losing her life partner,  her  church  had  been  bombed  and  fellow
       Christians killed the day  after,  her  sister  had  been  physically
       abusive of her and  there  would  be  difficulties  for  an  isolated
       elderly lady returning to Pakistan and that the Judge had also failed
       to take into account her son's job in determining that he simply  had
       a choice as to whether or not to return with her and that he  was  in
       effect imposing a decision on the UK national.  He  argued  that  the
       Judge had simply dissected each of the factors, rather  than  looking
       at them in the round for the purpose of Article 8 proportionality and
       that the Judge had looked  for  one  single  compelling  circumstance
       rather  than  considering  whether  the  circumstances  overall  were
       compelling. He argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  failed
       to consider the violence against the Appellant from  her  sister  and
       the relevance of her son's job.

    4. Mr Grigg further argued that although the Judge  had  considered  the
       Appellant's mental health, but had not  considered  this  fully  when
       balancing the evidence in the round for the purpose of Article 8.

    5. He further argued that in respect of ground 3, the physical  violence
       from the Appellant's sister to the Appellant, Mr Grigg said  that  he
       been conceded by the Respondent that evidence had been given  at  the
       First-tier Tribunal that the  Appellant's  sister  had  been  violent
       towards the Appellant, but this was not dealt  with  at  all  in  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge. He argued that this was  a
       relevant fact given that care by the sister was  being  suggested  by
       the Judge as a potential source of care for her in Pakistan and  that
       it covered the proportionality issue.

    6. Mr Kandola on behalf of the Respondent did  concede  that  there  had
       been evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  Appellant's
       sister had been violent towards the Appellant, and this was not dealt
       with within the decision. He argued that although this was  an  error
       of law, he argued that it was not material, given that the Judge  had
       said  that  the  Appellant's  children  could  arrange  for  suitable
       accommodation in Pakistan for the Appellant and for suitable domestic
       staff from within the Christian community to assist the Appellant  in
       that new household or to assist her with shopping, should she  choose
       to or be unable to live with her  sister  and  or  brother-in-law  at
       [48].

    7. In respect of ground 4 of the Grounds of Appeal, Mr Grigg argued that
       although the First-tier Tribunal Judge did mention the case of Beoku-
       Betts (FC) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2008]  UKHL
       38 at [58] of his decision, the judge did not properly then go on  to
       consider the effect of the Appellant's removal on the family life  of
       her son Dr Joseph and that the Judge put the "cart before the  horse"
       in simply finding that the Appellant could regularly visit her son in
       the UK and that they can visit her in  Pakistan  and  that  they  can
       speak on a daily basis by means of modern forms of communication.  He
       further argued that the Judge was wrong in  simply  finding  at  [58]
       that "on the evidence before me, I simply do not see  that  Dr  Shawn
       Joseph's permanent departure from  the  UK  as  being  an  inevitable
       result of his mother's appeal being dismissed. Ultimately, it is  his
       choice as to his place of residence". He argued this was a failure to
       properly consider the effect of removal on the son's human rights.

    8. In respect of ground 5 Mr Grigg argued that the Appellant's son's job
       was on the National Shortage List and that the Judge  had  failed  to
       take account of the effect on the NHS, if Dr Joseph  were  forced  to
       leave. He argued that if there was a material error  of  law  in  the
       case the case should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  for
       a hearing de novo.

    9. In his submissions on behalf of the Respondent Mr Kandola argued that
       the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  properly  identified  the  factors
       weighing in the Appellant's favour and set them  out  throughout  his
       decision and that the Judge had not applied any intermediate test. He
       argued the Judge had not used any  test  of  compelling  features  to
       determine proportionality but had looked at the circumstances in  the
       round. He argued that it was a very thorough decision and  the  Judge
       had dealt with all of the issues raised by  the  Appellant  as  being
       factors  which  were  said  to  mean  that  the  decision   was   not
       proportionate. He argued that although the Judge  had  not  mentioned
       the violence from the Appellant's sister on her, given that the Judge
       had found that alternative arrangements  could  be  made  other  than
       living with the sister and brother-in-law, that  any  error  in  this
       regard was not material.

   10. Mr Kandola also argued that the Judge had correctly directed  himself
       regarding the effect on the family life of the  Appellant's  son  and
       the fact that they could still speak on a daily basis and visit  each
       other. He further argued that the Judge had taken account of the fact
       that the Appellant's son was in a socially useful job at [58] and the
       public interest in that regard had been properly considered and given
       proper weight.

   11. I reserve my decision on error of law and materiality.

Error of Law and Materiality

   12. In respect of  the  first  ground  of  appeal,  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge failed to consider the  psychiatric  evidence  and  or
       dependency of the Appellant on her  son  under  Section  E-ECDR  2.4,
       paragraph 276 ADE (1) (6) or Article 8, and the  arguments  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to identify within his decision  the
       trauma caused to  the  Appellant  by  the  suicide  bombing  and  the
       emotional dependency on her son mirroring the previous dependency  on
       her late husband and that the Judge had failed to consider the  cause
       of her mental illness, the mitigating effects of being with  her  son
       and the likely exacerbating the effects of removal, and the fact that
       her mental state in the UK was  benefited  by  living  with  her  son
       rather than her sister in Pakistan who had physically abused her  and
       that her son was a vital source  of  emotional  support  for  her,  I
       reject this argument. It is clear having read the judgement of First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Webb as a whole, that  he  fully  considered  the
       report of Dr Pourgourids between [43] and [45]  of  his  decision  in
       great detail and gave adequate and sufficient reasons at [45] for his
       findings that towards the end of her report when she dealt  with  the
       consequences of the Appellant being  removed  to  Pakistan,  that  Dr
       Pourgourids had strayed outside of her role as an expert,  in  giving
       evidence that despite the fact that she had no detailed knowledge  of
       psychiatric provision within Pakistan that she  would  have  concerns
       that the treatment necessary for the Appellant would not be available
       in Pakistan,  had  given  evidence  about  how  she  read  about  the
       marginalisation of Christians in Pakistan and this could  hinder  any
       therapeutic treatment and that in commenting on whether the Appellant
       could return to Pakistan Dr Pourgourids had stated that the Appellant
       had never worked or supported herself and would be living alone in  a
       possible climate of fear and insecurity,  which  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Webb found was inconsistent with the evidence  given  that  the
       Appellant had two degrees including a Masters in psychology  and  had
       worked as schoolteacher for many years  in  a  country  with  not  an
       insignificant Christian minority. He therefore gave  clear,  adequate
       and sufficient reasons for  his  finding  that  as  a  result  of  Dr
       Pourgourids having strayed  beyond  her  remit  this  undermined  her
       conclusion that "in light of the above, I am of the view that removal
       to Pakistan would have a seriously detrimental effect on Mrs Joseph's
       mental health".  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  reaching  this
       conclusion came to the  conclusion  that  was  open  to  him  on  the
       evidence.  The  Judge  had  fully  analysed  the   evidence   of   Dr
       Pourgourids, the availability of medication and treatment in Pakistan
       and the quality of her evidence regarding the effect of removal  upon
       the Appellant if she were to be removed.

   13. The Judge further properly considered the evidence of  Dr  Burton  at
       [46] and again gave adequate and sufficient reasons for finding  that
       the expert strayed beyond his remit. The Judge  quite  properly  then
       went on to consider the effect of the Appellant's depressive  episode
       of moderate severity as found by Dr Pourgourids,  which  evidence  he
       accepted, for the purpose of paragraph E-ECDR at  [47]  and  came  to
       conclusions which were open to him on  the  evidence,  especially  in
       light of his finding that there was no medical  evidence  before  him
       that the Appellant currently  required  long-term  personal  care  to
       perform everyday tasks, and that on his own evidence Dr Joseph worked
       up to 50 hours per week.

   14. The First-tier Tribunal Judge went on  to  consider  the  Appellant's
       health including her mental health, under Articles 3  and  8  between
       [49] and [57] in a very thorough analysis of the  evidence  and  case
       law in this regard including the evidence of Dr  Pourgouridis  it  is
       perfectly clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has fully had  the
       psychiatric evidence and  the  question  of  the  dependency  of  the
       Appellant on her son fully in  mind,  throughout  his  decision.  The
       first ground of appeal therefore does not disclose any arguable error
       of law. Although it is suggested that the Tribunal had been asked  in
       this regard to follow the approach in an  unreported  case  by  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Grub in the case of Nimiro Nour Osman v  ECO  (Riyadh)
       (OA/18244/2012), given that this is an unreported case, the Judge was
       under no obligation to follow the approach adopted by Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Grub in that case, as the case is not binding, or to detail the
       contents of that case within his decision.

   15. In respect of the second Ground of Appeal that the  Judge  failed  to
       consider the evidence cumulatively,  and  the  submissions  that  the
       Judge had simply singled out  factors  which  were  said  not  to  be
       compelling, I again reject that argument in its entirety. Mr Grigg of
       Counsel for the Appellant before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  advanced
       arguments as set out by First-tier Tribunal Judge Webb at [33] as  to
       why it would be disproportionate and therefore unlawful to remove the
       Appellant from the United Kingdom in terms of an  argument  that  the
       Appellant would be likely to succeed  in  an  application  for  Entry
       Clearance to return to this country as an  adult  dependent  relative
       and it was therefore not just or proportionate to remove relying upon
       the case of  Chikwamba  (FC)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department  [2008]  UKHL  40;  that  the  Appellant's   psychological
       condition would worsen if she was in Pakistan; that if the  Appellant
       had to leave the UK  her  son  would  have  to  leave  with  her  and
       consideration should be given to the value of her son's  contribution
       to the UK as indicated in the letter from Dr Lemon  relied  upon  the
       case of UAE (Nigeria) and Others v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
       Department [2010] EWCA Civ 975 and that pursuant to Section 117B,  of
       the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, not only  would  it
       not be in the public interest for the NHS to lose  specialist  staff,
       the Appellant is able to speak English and would not be a  burden  on
       UK taxpayers. The fact that these four specific  arguments  had  been
       raised before the FTTJ as  to  why  the  removal  decision  would  be
       disproportionate and it would therefore be  unlawful  to  remove  the
       Appellant from the UK, I do not consider that the First-tier Tribunal
       Judge can be criticised for having dealt with those arguments  raised
       by Mr Grigg in the First-tier Tribunal as to why it would be unlawful
       for the Appellant to be removed.  He  could  be  criticised,  had  he
       failed to do so. I do not consider that he should be  criticised  for
       having considered each of these arguments in turn, and then, at  [61]
       having considered as he states the evidence in the round, whether  or
       not the decision to remove the  Appellant  is  proportionate  to  the
       legitimate public aim sought to be achieved by the Respondent.

   16. I find that throughout his decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge has
       properly analysed the evidence which was said to be in favour of  the
       Appellant in terms of proportionality, and then gone on  at  [61]  to
       detail the factors counting against the Appellant  in  terms  of  the
       public interest, before weighing the same at the end of [61].  It  is
       clear from his decision that the Judge has considered the evidence in
       the round as he states looking at both the  factors  said  to  be  in
       favour the Appellant and those counting against, before reaching  his
       decision.

   17. In respect of ground 3 of the decision, although it is conceded by Mr
       Kandola on behalf of the Respondent that the Judge has failed to take
       account of the evidence that was given  by  Dr  Joseph  of  a  single
       occasion in which it was said that the Appellant's  sister  had  been
       violent towards the Appellant, although this does amount to an  error
       of law, I do not find that this error is  material.  Although  it  is
       argued by Mr Grigg on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  it  is  very
       significant that violence has been exercised against the Appellant by
       the person to whom it is said that she could return  at  [48]  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Webb stated  specifically  that  "in  any  event,
       should the Appellant be unable or unwilling to live with  her  sister
       in Pakistan, there is no objective evidence available as  to  why  it
       would not be possible for  the  Appellant's  children  to  arrange  a
       alternative suitable accommodation in Pakistan for the Appellant  and
       for suitable domestic  staff  from  within  the  Christian  community
       either to assist the Appellant in that new household and/or to assist
       her with shopping. I reject the oral evidence of Dr Shawn Joseph that
       it would be impossible to employ  a  suitable  domestic  employee  or
       carer/companion in Pakistan to assist his mother. There was simply no
       independent or objective evidence that the Appellant is unable,  even
       with the practical and financial help from the sponsor, to obtain the
       required level of care in Pakistan".

   18. Given this finding, I consider that the Judge would have reached  the
       same  ultimate  conclusion  in  any  event,  when   considering   the
       Appellant's application both under the Immigration Rules and  outside
       of the Immigration Rules for the purpose of Article 8.

   19. In respect of the 4 ground of appeal that the Judge  failed  to  take
       account of the Appellant's son's  right  as  a  UK  citizen  for  the
       purposes of Article 8  following  the  case  of  Beoku-Betts  (FC)  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL  38,  again  I
       find that the Judge fully and properly considered this issue at  [15]
       of his decision. The Judge fully noted in this regard, how,  although
       born in Pakistan, Dr Shawn Joseph migrated to the  UK  in  2003  when
       aged 26 and that he was now a British citizen who holds a responsible
       and socially useful position as a Senior Registrar  in  Accident  and
       Emergency at the Royal Derby Hospital. He found that Dr Joseph  would
       prefer not to return to Pakistan on a permanent basis and that he was
       nationalised  British  citizen  who  enjoys  life  in  the   UK   and
       understandably that he has better economic and social opportunity  in
       this country rather than his country  of  birth.  The  Judge  further
       considered that if Dr Joseph left the UK an important position at the
       Royal Derby Hospital would become vacant which would possibly not  be
       easy to fill from within the domestic resident labour force and might
       require entry of a suitably qualified Tier 2 migrant.

   20. The FTTJ also fully noted that he had to have  consideration  of  the
       impact of the Appellant's removal on a third party such as  an  adult
       son following the House of Lord's decision in Beoku-Betts,  and  went
       on to find specifically that alternative arrangements could  be  made
       for the Appellant in Pakistan, as he outlined at [48] of his decision
       and the Appellant and his mother could visit each other regularly and
       speak on a daily basis by modern means of communication. He  went  on
       to find that Dr  Joseph  permanent  departure  from  the  UK  was  an
       inevitable result of his mother's appeal  being  dismissed  and  that
       ultimately it was his choice as to the place  of  residence.  I  find
       that these findings were perfectly open to the Judge on the  evidence
       available to him and  that  the  Judge  has  in  these  circumstances
       considered the effect of the decision to  remove  his  mother  on  Dr
       Joseph. The Appellant may disagree with the Judge's decision in  that
       regard, but the decision was open to him on the evidence. He has  not
       "put the cart before the horse"  as  argued  by  Mr  Grigg,  but  has
       properly considered what the effect of removal would be on Dr Joseph.

   21. In respect of the fifth ground of appeal that  the  Judge  failed  to
       give any weight to the Appellant's son's profession being on the Home
       Office's National Shortage List, again within that same paragraph  at
       [58] the Judge has fully considered the Appellant's son's  profession
       and the fact that it is an important  position  at  the  Royal  Derby
       Hospital which would become vacant and which would  not  be  easy  to
       fill from within the domestic resident labour force and might require
       entry of  a  suitably  qualified  Tier  2  migrant.  Given  that  the
       Appellant's son was a naturalised UK national, the fact that the  job
       might be on  the  Home  Office's  National  shortage  List,  did  not
       fundamentally alter the considerations given to this issue by  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge  Webb.  He  has  considered  the  fact  that  the
       position would not be easy to fill from within the domestic  resident
       labour force and that therefore it  was  a  shortage  occupation.  No
       material error of law was disclosed in this regard and the Judge  has
       properly and adequately dealt with this issue  and  his  reasons  are
       adequate and sufficient.

   22. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Webb does not disclose  any
       material error of law and the decision is maintained.

   23. The Appellant's appeal is therefore dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Webb  does  not  disclose  any
material error of law and is maintained and the decision shall stand;

No order is made in respect of anonymity, no such order having  been  sought
before the First-tier Tribunal, and no such order having been sought  before
me.


Signed      Dated 24th December 2015

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
