
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/35662/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 August 2015                    |On 20 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                  NAZIM ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Iqbal, counsel instructed by Denning
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse  to
    grant leave  to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Camp in a  decision  promulgated
    on 18 December 2014.  The appellant was granted  permission  to  appeal
    against the decision to the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that  the  appellant  had  applied
    for an adjournment the day before the hearing on the ground that he was
    suffering from an unspecified "severe medical  condition".   The  judge
    also  noted  that  there  was  no  medical  evidence  to  support   the
    adjournment application and that  as  such  the  application  had  been
    refused. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that reasonable steps  had
    been taken to notify the appellant of the  hearing  and  was  satisfied
    that the hearing could proceed in the  absence  of  any  appearance  on
    behalf of the appellant.

3.    In a brief decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of the  immigration  rules  for
    leave to remain on the grounds of his private life in the  UK  for  the
    same reasons given by the respondent in the reasons for refusal  letter
    dated 14 May 2014.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge went on  to  consider
    whether there were any exceptional  or  compelling  circumstances  that
    were not sufficiently recognised under the  rules  that  might  warrant
    consideration of Article 8 outside of the rules but concluded that  the
    appellant had failed to show the existence of any such circumstances.

4.    The First-tier Tribunal Judge  noted  that  he  claimed  to  be  in  a
    relationship with a  British  citizen  but  found  that  there  was  no
    evidence to support the assertion.  Indeed the judge found  that  there
    was a lack of credible evidence to support any  aspect  of  his  claim.
    The First-tier Tribunal Judge adopted the contents of the  reasons  for
    refusal letter and was satisfied that it was not necessary to go on  to
    consider the appellant's claim that he would be at risk of  persecution
    in Pakistan because if he had a fear of return he should claim asylum.

5.    The appellant did not attend the hearing before the Upper Tribunal.  I
    heard submissions from both parties at the hearing. I have  noted  them
    in my record of proceedings and will refer to them where relevant.

Decision and reasons

6.    After having considered the grounds of appeal and the other  documents
    before the Tribunal, and after having  heard  submissions,  I  conclude
    that the First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of  an
    error on a point of law.

7.    The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 12 June  2012  with  leave
    to enter as a student that was valid until 30 September 2014.  On 9 May
    2014 he submitted a further application for leave to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds after having been informed that his leave to remain as a
    student would be curtailed to 1 June 2014.  The application was made by
    way of a letter from Queens Park Solicitors dated 3  March  2014.   The
    solicitors outlined the  basis  of  the  appellant's  claimed  fear  of
    persecution in Pakistan.  In summary, the basis of his claim  was  that
    he had been in a relationship with  an  Ahmadi  woman  and  experienced
    problems as a result of that relationship.

8.    The grounds of appeal as argued by Mr Iqbal were narrowed to two  main
    issues. First, whether the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  unfair  to
    proceed with the  appeal  in  light  of  the  adjournment  application.
    Second, whether the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  failing  to
    consider the substance of the  protection  issues  raised.  The  second
    ground related to comments made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane when
    he granted permission to appeal.

9.    I find that neither  ground  discloses  an  error  of  law.  The  full
    hearing was on 28 November 2014. The appellant was  sent  a  notice  of
    hearing on 6 October 2014. He had several weeks notice of the  hearing.
    The adjournment application was made by fax the day before the hearing.
    The appellant  made  the  application  himself.  The  letter  dated  27
    November 2014 merely states that he was unable to attend the hearing on
    account of a "severe medical  condition"  but  no  further  detail  was
    provided as to what the medical condition was or why it was  so  severe
    that it might prevent him from attending court. The adjournment request
    was not supported by evidence.

10.   The application was made the day before  the  hearing  so  the  notice
    refusing the application was unlikely to have reached the appellant  in
    time. There is a note on the  court  file  to  say  that  the  Tribunal
    attempted to telephone the appellant to inform him of the decision  but
    no telephone number had been  provided.   However,  the  appellant  was
    aware that he had made an adjournment application  for  a  hearing  the
    next day. If he had not received a response he should  have  telephoned
    the Tribunal to find out whether the application had been  granted.  If
    he did not know the outcome of the application he should have  attended
    the hearing the next day, or if he really was too unwell to attend,  he
    should have sent another person to attend on his behalf. He did none of
    those things.

11.   There was no indication that the appellant had prepared his  case  for
    the appeal. No appellant's bundle had been served  in  advance  of  the
    hearing. There was no  detailed  witness  statement  by  the  appellant
    outlining any of the circumstances  of  his  claim  for  protection  or
    relating to the human rights claim. No  background  evidence  had  been
    produced or any other supporting evidence. All of this  indicated  that
    the appellant had not prepared for  the  appeal  and  perhaps  did  not
    intend to attend the hearing. In light of  the  circumstances  outlined
    above I find that no material unfairness was caused to the appellant by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge deciding to proceed with the appeal.

12.   The second  ground  of  appeal  relates  to  the  way  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge dealt with protection issues  under  Article  3  of  the
    European Convention. It is true that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did
    not consider the Article 3 issues in any detail and merely adopted  the
    same approach the Secretary of  State  had  done  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter, which said that if he wished to raise protection issues
    he should claim asylum.  Although a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  a
    duty under section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998  to  consider  human
    rights issues, in the circumstances of this particular appeal,  I  find
    that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  failure  to  engage  with  the
    substance of Article 3 was not material.

13.   Firstly, the claim had only been set out in rather general terms in  a
    cover letter from the appellant's legal representatives. The  appellant
    had not prepared  a  detailed  witness  statement  nor  was  the  claim
    supported by any background or other evidence. There  was  very  little
    evidence for the judge to consider.  The  appellant  made  a  weak  and
    unsupported adjournment application and then chose not  to  attend  the
    hearing. Therefore it was not possible for  the  judge  to  assess  the
    credibility of the general statements made in the original application.

14.   Secondly, even if the appellant's protection claim was  taken  at  its
    highest it is difficult to see how it could succeed.  He claims he  was
    in a relationship with an Ahmadi woman in Pakistan. He is  not  Ahmadi.
    Although he says that he had some problems  in  his  local  area  as  a
    result of his association with the woman it is difficult to see how  he
    could have succeeded in a protection claim when his fear emanates  from
    members of their respective families. He now claims to  be  in  another
    relationship and the relationship with Jabeen is no longer  subsisting.
    There is no evidence to suggest that the appellant would  currently  be
    at risk. Nor is there any evidence to show that he would be  unable  to
    relocate to another area of Pakistan where he could live in safety.

15.   For the reasons given  above  I  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's failure to deal with the substance of the Article 3 claim  does
    not amount to a material error of  law  because  there  was  so  little
    evidence before the  Tribunal  that  the  appeal,  even  taken  at  its
    highest, was bound to fail. In the absence of any  meaningful  evidence
    to support the protection claim it was  sufficient  for  the  judge  to
    adopt the approach contained in the reasons for refusal letter.

16.   I conclude that the decision did not involve the making  of  an  error
    on a point of law and that the decision shall stand.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand


Signed       [pic]     Date 18 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
