
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35011/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 July 2015                      |On 11 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mrs Feiping Zhou
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Robinson, Counsel instructed by John Street
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is  an  appeal  brought  against  a  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Meates which was promulgated  on  16  April  2015.   The
    matter before  Judge  Meates  on  that  occasion  concerned  a  Chinese
    national (to whom I shall refer hereafter as the applicant) born on  20
    April of 1989 who appealed the respondent's decision to refuse to  vary
    spousal leave.

2.   The chronology is significant. On 22 January 2014  the  applicant  made
    an application to the respondent to vary her leave.  On 25 February the
    applicant was informed that her case fell to be refused because she did
    not meet the minimum income threshold but she  was  informed  that  her
    application would be placed on hold pending a challenge that was  being
    heard in the case of MM.  Following the  decision  in  that  case,  her
    application was refused on the basis that she had failed to demonstrate
    that she had been employed for six months prior  to  the  date  of  her
    application.

3.   At the hearing this point was argued and the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    determined that  he  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  additional
    evidence which had been submitted by the applicant. That evidence, so I
    am informed, indicated that she was  able  to  show  employment  for  a
    period exceeding six months but that the six month period did  not  all
    come prior to the date of her application.  It is unfortunate that  the
    judge did not deal  expressly  with  the  particular  point  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

4.   In Appendix FM-SE, paragraph 13, it is  stated  that  to  qualify,  the
    person must be in salaried employment in the United Kingdom at the date
    of application, and to have been paid  throughout  the  period  of  six
    months prior to the date of application.

5.   It is very fairly  and  very  properly  accepted  by  Ms  Robinson  who
    appears for the applicant that this requirement was not met.  What  she
    urges upon me, however, is that there was an implied variation  of  the
    application and that time did not begin to  run  until  the  additional
    documentation was submitted. In all those circumstances, she says,  the
    applicant came within the requirement stipulated at paragraph 13.

6.   To make good that submission she seeks  to  rely  on  the  decision  of
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v Qureshi  [2011]  UKUT  412
    (IAC).  That case concerned a different  situation,  namely  a  student
    application. Subsequent to making the application, the student  decided
    to embark upon a course different from that specified in  the  original
    application and accordingly it was treated  as  a  variation.  For  the
    purposes of the Immigration Rule, the material date  was  taken  to  be
    that variation.

7.   Whilst I can see the logic of that decision, it has no  application  in
    this case because there was no variation in relation to the application
    pursued by the applicant.  She  was  invited  to  plug  a  gap  in  the
    financial documentation and rather than turning her  mind  to  the  six
    months antecedent to the date of her application, she instead  produced
    documentation referring to a later period which was not caught  by  the
    strict provisions of paragraph 13.  Put shortly, she sought to plug the
    wrong gap.

8.   I am asked to consider this appeal on the basis that this error of  law
    in the First-tier determination (which is clearly established) was  not
    material and that I can consider the matter  in  relation  to  a  later
    point of time.  I cannot  accept  that  submission  because  the  Upper
    Tribunal is similarly bound  by  the  provisions  of  paragraph  13  of
    Appendix FM-SE. In examining this matter, I can only look  at  the  six
    months immediately antecedent to the date of application.

9.   It is said that if this were a 'near miss'  for  the  purposes  of  the
    Immigration Rules, it is appropriate to look at Article 8. That was not
    explored before the First-tier Tribunal Judge nor is it something which
    can be opened at this stage.

10.  The applicant is entitled to make  a  further  application  should  she
    wish, and that would be determined on the merits based on the  material
    placed before the Secretary of State. But this appeal must  be  allowed
    for the reasons I  have  already  given.  The  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Meates promulgated on 16 April 2015 will accordingly  be
    set aside and the decision of the Secretary of State reinstated.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Meates  promulgated  on  16  April
2015 is set aside and the decision of the Secretary of State reinstated.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Mark Hill         Date 4 August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
