
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35861/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th March 2015                    |On 18th March 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mohamed Amine Ouhaddou
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Secretary of State:     Miss A Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance and no representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Clapham) who, in a  determination  promulgated  on
    3rd December 2014 allowed the appeal  of  the  Respondent  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  his  application  for  a
    residence card as a confirmation of a right to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Whilst this is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State, I
    shall refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a national of  Morocco  born  on  1st  May  1987.   He
    applied for  a  residence  card  on  the  basis  that  his  spouse  was
    exercising her treaty rights in the UK as defined under Regulation 6 of
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  In the application  he  stated
    that his EEA family member was employed and had provided wage slips for
    30th November 2013 to 28th February 2014 and a contract  of  employment
    dated 1st October 2013 from Marjan (UK) Ltd.

 3. The application was refused in a decision made  on  26th  August  2014.
    The basis for that refusal was two fold; firstly that  on  25th  August
    2014 a visit was undertaken by Immigration Officers to the  Appellant's
    claimed address and during the visit  a  lady  answered  the  door  and
    advised officers that the Appellant did not live there and she did  not
    know of the Appellant.   It  was  further  stated  that  there  was  no
    evidence that the Appellant or his EEA Sponsor resided at that address.
     The second issue related to  the  Appellant's  wife  and  Sponsor  and
    whether she was a worker exercising treaty rights.  In this respect  it
    was noted that the officials had made several telephone  calls  to  the
    named employer but could not contact him and the company which  the  EA
    family member claimed to work for could not be located on the Companies
    House website.  Thus the application was refused on two grounds.

 4. The Appellant issued grounds of appeal and  provided  with  it  further
    documentation and evidence in relation to  the  visit  that  had  taken
    place on 25th August 2014.

 5. This was a case that was heard on the papers and  therefore  the  judge
    was required to consider the evidence that was before her.   The  judge
    set out her findings at paragraphs 6 to 9 of the determination and  for
    the reasons given, having considered the evidence, allowed the appeal.

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and
    permission was granted on 20th January 2015.

 7. Before the Upper Tribunal there was no  appearance  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  The case file indicated that he had been  served  with  the
    proceedings and the Home Office file contained the  same  address.   In
    those circumstances, I resolved that the hearing should continue in his
    absence.

 8.   Miss Holmes on behalf of the Secretary of State did not seek to  rely
    on paragraphs 1 and 7 of the Grounds in which  it  was  said  that  the
    judge should have had regard to the decision in  Shen  (paper  appeals:
    proving  dishonesty)  [2014]  UKUT  236.   She   explained   that   the
    circumstances in Shen could not apply to the particular facts  of  this
    case.  She submitted that in respect of Ground 2, the way in which  the
    Ground was worded was unfortunate and was rather  difficult  to  follow
    but that what it appeared to be saying was that the  explanation  given
    by the Appellant was speculative.  As to Ground 3 it did not appear  to
    take the position further as that Ground submitted that at the time  of
    the visit they were not told by that person she was  the  landlady  and
    therefore there was no need to doubt what  she  had  said  or  for  the
    officials to carry out any further checks.  With regards to  Grounds  4
    and 5 she did not consider that it could be said that the  decision  of
    the judge was perverse.  Her submissions, in  essence,  were  that  the
    judge should have exercised more caution  in  the  circumstances  where
    there had been no appearance on behalf of the Appellant and  it  was  a
    case heard on the papers.  Given what was in the report of the visit of
    24th August she should have been more cautious.  In effect  she  relied
    upon the grant of permission at [3] where it was  stated  that  it  was
    arguable that a bare assertion had been accepted as fact and that  this
    amounted to an arguable error of law.

 9. I have considered the Grounds that are now relied upon rather than  the
    way that they have  been  drafted  in  the  written  Grounds.   I  have
    considered those Grounds in the light of  the  determination  of  Judge
    Clapham.  The reasons for refusing the application are set out  in  the
    letter of 26th August 2014.  Firstly, as a result of the visit made  on
    25th August 2014 it was stated that there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant or the EEA Sponsor resided at the property and secondly, that
    the Appellant had failed to provide sufficient evidence to  demonstrate
    that the EEA family member was a qualified person as a worker. This was
    because telephone calls were made to  the  claimed  employer  but  they
    could not be contacted and that the company that the Appellant's family
    member claimed to work at could not be located on the  Companies  House
    Register.

10.   Thus the judge was duty bound to consider those two  issues.   It  is
    plain from reading the determination that the judge  properly  reminded
    herself that this was a case heard on the papers but importantly at [6]
    it was for the Appellant to  establish  the  case  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities or as the judge stated, "or else it fails".

11. In relation to the first  issue,  the  judge  considered  the  evidence
    before her.  The Secretary of State had relied upon the visit  made  by
    an Immigration Official to the  property  at  the  Appellant's  claimed
    address.  The judge recorded the contents of the minutes at [3] as  set
    out in the bundle at G.  It reads as follows:-

         "Monday 25th August 2014 Central  London.    Conducted  a  pastoral
         visit to the address  ...  12.50  arrived  at  the  address  and  a
         Lithuanian woman answered the door and said the  subject  does  not
         live there and does not know of him.  She stated that she had lived
         at this address for two years and has never heard of  the  subject.
         She also stated that she is married to a Moroccan called Nabil  who
         was not present at the time.  If you  have  any  further  questions
         please do not hesitate to contact me."

12. The judge considered the evidence in a reply from the Appellant who had
    stated that he and his wife had had an argument with the  landlady  and
    since they did not leave the accommodation on good terms, the  landlady
    misled the officials (see paragraph 7 of  the  determination).   Whilst
    the Grounds appear to state that this was a bare assertion and that the
    judge simply accepted this, that is not the position. The judge did not
    simply accept that explanation but considered it in the  light  of  the
    evidence that was before her.   She  considered  the  contents  of  the
    minute of the visit and concluded that "It does  not  look  as  if  the
    officials carried out any checks on the landlady  and  the  information
    given in the report is scant to say the least".  That  is  an  accurate
    analysis of that evidence; there was no information  before  the  judge
    that the Immigration Officer  either  identified  the  person  who  had
    answered the door or asked any further questions or sought any  further
    information.  Nor was any follow up visit made  after  the  information
    provided by the Appellant in the Grounds  of  Appeal.   However  it  is
    plain from reading the determination that  the  judge  did  not  simply
    decide the first issue in favour of the  Appellant  simply  relying  on
    what the Grounds describe as a  "bare  assertion"  but  considered  the
    other documents that had been provided in the light of the Secretary of
    State's position within the refusal letter  that  in  addition  to  the
    visit made, there was no evidence that the Appellant or his EEA Sponsor
    had ever resided at the address.  The  judge  considered  the  evidence
    that had been provided in the form of copy  bank  statements  and  copy
    utility bills (see [7]).  Those documents showed a joint Barclays  Bank
    account in their joint names with the  address  as  relied  upon,  such
    statements  from  December  2013  to  January  2014.   They  were  bank
    statements in the Appellant's sole name at  the  same  address,  mobile
    phone bills for the EEA national member at that address plus a contract
    of employment and payslips all giving the same address.   There  was  a
    further bank statement from 10th June to  9th  July  2014  showing  the
    relevant address and showing residence shortly  before  the  visit  was
    made.  In those circumstances it was open to the judge on that evidence
    to reach the conclusion that contrary to the  refusal  letter,  he  had
    provided evidence that established that both he and  the  EEA  national
    Sponsor had been residing at that address and therefore considered  the
    circumstances of the visit in  the  light  of  that  evidence  and  the
    explanation provided.  That was a course entirely open to the judge  to
    adopt.

13. At paragraph 8 of the determination, the judge went on to consider  the
    second issue.  Whilst the officials doubted that the EEA  national  was
    employed as claimed on the basis that the business was  not  registered
    at Companies House, she considered the evidence  of  the  printout  for
    Companies House with the  copy  letter  from  the  company  dated  10th
    September 2014.  She concluded that the printout and  the  letter  both
    contained the same company registration number and the company appeared
    live.  Thus contrary to the grounds, the judge  approached  the  appeal
    properly by giving anxious scrutiny to the documents.  This was a  case
    heard on the papers and she was required to consider the documents that
    were before her in the light of the  reasons  given  for  refusing  the
    application.  Whilst the Grounds at paragraph 6 submit that the  doubts
    having been raised that  should  have  been  considered  and  that  the
    Appellant had produced further evidence which the  Respondent  was  not
    aware of, that is not the position.  The Secretary of  State  had  been
    served with the grounds of appeal and therefore  that  explanation  was
    not new evidence and there had been  no  further  follow  up  visit  or
    further check made.  Therefore on the evidence before the judge she was
    entitled to consider the issue on the basis of that evidence  which  is
    what she did.  It is difficult to see what else she should  have  done.
    Miss Holmes in her submissions did not seek to rely on the Grounds at 1
    or 7 that the decision of Shen applied and that she should have ordered
    an oral hearing.  Furthermore, she did not seek to rely on the  Grounds
    where it was stated the decision of the judge was  perverse.   She  was
    right to do so, perversity is a high hurdle and in  the  light  of  the
    evidence before the judge and her assessment, it could not properly  be
    said that the decision was a perverse one but one that was open to her.
     The Grounds therefore are not made out and any disagreement  with  the
    findings made of the judge based on the evidence that was  before  her.
    The Grounds do not demonstrate  any  arguable  error  of  law  and  the
    decision shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve the  making  of  an
error on a point of law; the decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 18/3/2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

