
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35430/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated |
|On 29TH July 2014                             |On 5th August 2014        |



                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                           CONOR MICHAEL O'MALLEY
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Richard Clarke, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Erwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a male citizen of Canada born 7  November  1985.   He
      appealed  against  the  decision  by  the  respondent  to  refuse  his
      application for leave to remain as the partner of a British citizen.
   2. The appellant appealed that decision and his appeal was  heard  before
      Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Woolley  sitting  at  Newport  on  13
      March 2014.  Each  party  was  represented  at  that  hearing.   Judge
      Woolley dismissed the appellant's appeal under  the  Rules  and  under
      Article 8 ECHR in a determination dated 15 March 2014.

   3. In summary the judge found (via a concession made by  the  appellant's
      counsel) that the appellant could not succeed under  the  Rules.   The
      judge went on to consider Article 8 and  in  particular  the  case  of
      Chickwamba v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2008]  UKHL
      40, but came to the view  that  would  not  be  unreasonable  for  the
      appellant to return to Canada to reapply for leave to enter.

   4. The appellant sought leave to appeal that decision.  In granting leave
      to appeal a Designated Judge said this:

         "1.  First-Tier Tribunal Judge CJ Woolley dismissed the appellant's
      appeal brought on grounds including human rights grounds  against  the
      decision of the respondent to refuse to vary his leave  to  remain  in
      the United Kingdom.

     2.  The grounds submit that the judge's approach to Article 8 ECHR  was
      flawed.  In particular it is submitted that the judge mis-applied  the
      guidance in Chickwamba.  Whilst the judge appears to  have  been  very
      thorough in the analysis of the law, the determination arguably  reads
      as if the judge accepted that by the date of the hearing the appellant
      met all the requirements of the rules.  IN those circumstances  it  is
      arguable that the judge erred, though insofar as it may be relevant to
      consider whether any application made from overseas  would  inevitably
      have succeeded, the concession made by the appellant's  solicitors  in
      their covering letter of 1 April 2014 to the effect that the appellant
      would no longer meet the financial requirements may also be a relevant
      consideration".

   5. Hence the matter came before me sitting in the Upper Tribunal.

   6. Mr Clarke referred to a  skeleton  argument  that  he  had  lodged  in
      advance of the hearing.  He adopted  that  document.   This  submitted
      that Judge Woolley had materially erred in his  determination  in  the
      way that the "Chickwamba principle" had been applied.  It had been the
      contention of the appellant at the hearing before Judge  Woolley  that
      "if another application was to be made tomorrow that application would
      be bound to succeed assuming the evidence is satisfied of the 2  years
      living together".  Whilst not commenting on that contention the  judge
      had made findings  that  indirectly  supported  that  contention.   In
      failing to accept that overall position the judge had erred in law.

   7. Mr Clarke's skeleton argument refers in particular to paragraph 31  of
      Judge  Woolley's  determination,  wherein  he   apparently   separates
      consideration  of  Chickwamba  from  a   substantive   proportionality
      analysis conducted under Article 8  ECHR,  thus  effectively  treating
      Chickwamba as a preliminary issue to that analysis.  Mr Clarke  argued
      that such an approach is erroneous, especially in the light  of  Judge
      Woolley's findings which should have meant that the earlier submission
      made that a repeat application was bound to succeed should  have  been
      accepted.  The judge had  failed  to  take  these  findings  into  the
      question of proportionality.

   8. Mr Clarke's oral submissions to me sought to amplify  certain  of  the
      points set out in the skeleton argument.  The judge had  been  clearly
      aware of Chickwamba and the judge was wrong to find that the appellant
      could return to Canada to make a fresh application and this would only
      result in "limited interruption" of his relationship with his partner,
      but in fact it would be more than a limited interference.

   9. Mr Richards referred to paragraph 25 of Judge Woolley's determination.
       He pointed out that the  judge  had  correctly  applied  Gulshan  and
      Nagre.  He had found  that  there  were  compelling  circumstances  to
      consider the appellant's situation outside the Immigration  Rules  and
      he quite  properly  agreed  with  Mr  Clarke  that  the  judge's  then
      treatment of Chickwamba was flawed.  Mr Richards accepted  a  material
      error and conceded that clearly at the  date  of  the  hearing  before
      Judge Woolley the findings he made indicated that the  appellant  then
      satisfied the Immigration Rules and that any fresh  application  would
      be successful.

Decision

  10. Having considered those matters set out  above  and  having  noted  in
      particular the skeleton argument and submission of Mr Clarke, together
      with Mr Richards comment, I conclude that there was a  material  error
      of law  contained  within  Judge  Woolley's  determination.   For  the
      reasons advanced by Mr  Clarke  (and  accepted  by  Mr  Richards)  the
      judge's treatment of what  Mr  Clarke  describes  as  the  "Chickwamba
      principle" was flawed.

  11. The judge had properly come to the  conclusion  that  via  Gulshan  he
      could look at the Article 8 considerations outside the Rules.  He made
      findings that indicated a successful further application and  that  if
      he had properly considered Chickwamba  the  appeal  should  have  been
      allowed under Article 8.

  12. For these reasons I set aside the decision of Judge Woolley in respect
      of Article 8 ECHR and remake that decision  allowing  the  appellant's
      appeal.

  13. No application was made for an anonymity direction and  accordingly  I
      do not make one.




Signed                                  Date  4/8/14


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole

