

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Numbers: IA/35360/2013
                                                               IA/35378/2013
                                                               IA/35365/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                               |Determination           |
|                                                   |Promulgated             |
|On 8th October 2014                                |On 16th October 2014    |
|                                                   |                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                  Between:

                                     NMS
                                    FMMS
                                    AMMS
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:          Ms K Cronin, instructed by Gherson & Co
For the Respondent:          Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellants are citizens of Sudan born on 8th  October  1966,  21st
      June 1994 and 30th September 1997 respectively. Their appeals  against
      the Respondent's decisions, dated 12th August 2013, to refuse leave to
      remain and to remove them to Sudan  were  allowed  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal on 29th July 2014 under paragraph 276ADE in relation  to  the
      Second Appellant, and on Article 8 grounds in relation  to  the  other
      Appellants. The Secretary of State appealed and the Appellants  cross-
      appealed.


2.    I shall refer to the First Appellant as the Appellant and  the  Second
      and Third Appellants as  F  and  A  respectively.  The  Appellant  was
      granted leave to enter the UK as a student from 14th October  2006  to
      31st January 2008. F  and  A  were  granted  leave  to  enter  as  her
      dependants. The Appellants arrived in the UK on 2nd July 2007 and were
      granted leave to remain until 28th February 2009, which  was  extended
      to 30th June 2013. On 6th July 2012, the Appellants  applied  to  vary
      their leave to remain. Their applications were refused under  Appendix
      FM, 276ADE and Article 8 on 12th August 2013.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Samimi found the Appellant to be a  credible
      witness. She found that the Appellant had not lived in Sudan for  most
      of her life and she had no family connections there. Her  parents  and
      ex-husband lived in Saudi Arabia. The Judge found that the  Appellants
      had strong family ties in the UK and they were  financially  supported
      by the Appellant's brothers. She found that although F  was  over  the
      age of 18 the family bond between her, her mother, her brother and her
      uncle, went beyond normal family ties. F and A were not born in  Sudan
      and had no social or cultural  ties  there,  having  only  visited  on
      several occasions. The Judge found that F would not be at risk of  FGM
      if returned to Sudan.

4.    The Judge found  that  F  satisfied  paragraph  276ADE  (vi)  and  the
      Respondent's decision to remove the Appellants to  Sudan,  where  they
      would be socially and culturally isolated and effectively deprived  of
      the benefit  of  family  life,  would  amount  to  a  disproportionate
      interference with their family life. The Judge went on to consider the
      five stage test set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 24. She found  that  the
      Appellants had established family and private life over the past seven
      years and they had developed roots and  connections  to  the  UK.  The
      Judge took into account the expert evidence of societal discrimination
      against divorced women and the prospect of the Appellant and  F  being
      subjected to abuse and harm on account of their westernised behaviour.
      She found that the Respondent  failed  to  have  regard  to  the  best
      interests of  A  and  found  that  the  Appellants  removal  would  be
      unjustifiably harsh following Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct
      approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).

5.    The Respondent applied for permission to appeal on  the  grounds  that
      the Judge had failed to consider whether or not it would be reasonable
      to expect the Third Appellant to leave the UK under  paragraph  276ADE
      (iv) [Ground 1] and the Judge had failed to  follow  the  approach  in
      Gulshan:
      "After applying the requirements of the Rules, only if  there  may  be
      arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside them was it
      necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on and consider  whether  there
      are compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under  them."
      [Ground 2]
      Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mc  Dade
      on 19th August 2014.

6.    The Appellants cross-appealed on the grounds that the Judge had  erred
      in law in failing to allow F's appeal under Article 3 and  in  failing
      to allow the Appellant's and A's appeals under  paragraph  276ADE  and
      section 117A and 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
      2002 [NIA] (as amended).

7.    Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett  on  25th
      September 2014 on the grounds that it  was  arguable  that  the  Judge
      should have considered Article 3 and it was not clear why  A  did  not
      meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE (iv); sections 117A and 117B
      NIA Act 2002 did not apply.

8.    Mr Tarlow submitted  that  the  Judge  erred  in  law  in  failing  to
      consider whether there were  exceptional  and  compelling  reasons  to
      consider Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules. The Judge had failed
      to properly apply Gulshan and the only reference to it was at the  end
      of the determination.

9.    I indicated that I was not persuaded by this  submission  because  the
      Judge had clearly identified compelling circumstances  that  justified
      considering the case outside the Immigration  Rules.  The  failure  to
      state that this was the case was not a material error of law.

10.   Ms Cronin submitted that Ground  1  of  the  Respondent's  grounds  of
      appeal was misconceived because at the time of the  application  there
      was no requirement to show that it would not be reasonable  to  expect
      the applicant to leave the UK under paragraph 276ADE (iv). The  change
      in the Immigration Rules did not apply  to  applications  before  12th
      December 2012.

11.   There was no challenge to the Judge's decision  to  allow  F's  appeal
      under the Immigration Rules. I indicated that I was of the  view  that
      there was no error of law  in  allowing  F's  appeal  under  paragraph
      276ADE(vi). However, the Judge had erred in law in  failing  to  allow
      A's appeal under paragraph 276ADE (iv) having found that  he  came  to
      the UK when he was nine years old and had been living in the UK for  a
      continuous period of seven years at the date of the hearing.

12.   Ms Cronin submitted that F's appeal  should  also  have  been  allowed
      under Article 3. She referred to the expert report of Peter Verney and
      relied on FM (FGM) Sudan CG [2007] UKAIT 00060. F's case  was  similar
      to that of FM and in fact stronger on the basis that there was a  risk
      F would be married into a religious conservative family.  The  Judge's
      finding that F's father  would  exercise  legal  custodial  rights  in
      Sudan, depriving F of her maternal family, which would be  detrimental
      to her psychological and emotional well being, was  unchallenged.  F's
      father and her extended paternal family would have influence over  her
      marriage that would result in F being subjected to FGM. F's Article  3
      case  was  compelling.  The  Appellant  would  be  able  to  meet  the
      requirements of Appendix FM in due course.

Discussion and conclusions

13.   F was born in Saudi Arabia and has  never  lived  in  Sudan.  She  has
      visited Sudan on a few occasions to see her now deceased  grandmother.
      The Judge's finding that F had so little connection  with  Sudan  that
      the  consequences  of  establishing  private  life  there   would   be
      unjustifiably harsh was open to her on the evidence. I find that there
      was no error of law in the Judge's decision to allow F's appeal  under
      paragraph 276ADE (vi).

14.   For the reasons set out at paragraph 11 above, I find that  the  Judge
      erred in law in failing to find that A satisfied the  requirements  of
      paragraph 276(iv) of the Immigration Rules. I allow A's  appeal  under
      the Immigration Rules.

15.   I find that there was no error of law in the Judge's consideration  of
      Article 8. The application was made on 6th July  2012  and  the  Judge
      properly directed herself following Razgar. In any  event,  the  Judge
      identified compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised  under
      the Immigration Rules. I find  that  the  Judge's  finding,  that  the
      Appellants' removal would be disproportionate in all the circumstances
      of the case, was open to her on the evidence before her and  she  gave
      cogent reasons for her conclusions. There was no error of law  in  the
      Judge's decision to allow the appeal under Article 8.

16.   For the sake of completeness, I find that sections 117A  and  117B  do
      not apply because the appeal was heard  before  28th  July  2014.  The
      appeal  was  heard  on  the  10th  July  2014  and  the  decision  was
      promulgated on 29th July 2014.  Sections 117A and 117B  NIA  Act  2012
      did not require the Judge to reconvene the hearing. In any event,  any
      failure to consider the matters referred to in these sections was  not
      material to the decision to allow the appeals under Article 8.

17.   The remaining issue is whether the Judge erred in law  in  failing  to
      consider whether F's removal to Sudan  would  breach  Article  3.  The
      Judge found that there was insufficient evidence before her to justify
      the conclusion that F's father would be able to  use  his  family  and
      political connections to trace the Appellants and force F  to  undergo
      FGM. The Judge found that there was insufficient evidence to show that
      F would be at risk of being subject  to  FGM  by  her  father  or  her
      father's relatives in Sudan, who had never met her.  On  the  evidence
      before the Judge, F's father had made no mention of FGM either to  the
      Appellants, the Appellant's brothers or in the report by  Ms  Jackson,
      in relation to F's and A's experiences with their father.

18.   I have considered the case of FM (FGM) Sudan CG,  in  particular,  the
      passages to which I was specifically referred.  The  risk  of  FGM  by
      extended family members depends on a variety of factors including  the
      attitude and whereabouts of the parents and the location and reach  of
      the extended family members. F's father lived in Saudi Arabia. I  find
      that there was insufficient evidence before the Judge to show that her
      father was in favour of FGM or that he would be able to use his family
      connections to force F to undergo FGM.

19.   Ms Cronin submitted that F would be at risk of FGM because her  father
      would marry her into a religious conservative family. I am of the view
      that there was insufficient evidence before the Judge to support  this
      submission. The Judge considered the risk of FGM and her findings were
      open to her on the evidence before her.  I  find  that  there  was  no
      error of law in relation to Article 3.

20.   Accordingly, I find that that Judge erred in law in failing  to  allow
      A's appeal under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. There  was
      no error of law  in  the  decision  to  allow  F's  appeal  under  the
      Immigration Rules and in allowing the appeals of all three  Appellants
      under Article 8. The Respondent's appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
      dismissed. The cross-appeal of A, the Third Appellant, is allowed.

21.   The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
      the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. There  was
      no application to vary or discharge the anonymity  order.  I  continue
      that order (pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008).





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
15th October 2014
