
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/35825/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 10th April 2015                  |On 1st June 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Enkhjin Tserendorj
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant: Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
    For the Respondent:     Ms Osei-Kwatia, Counsel instructed by MR
    Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Mongolia date  of  birth  20th  October
    1976.  On the 5th January 2015 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Callender-
    Smith) allowed her appeal against a decision to  remove  her  from  the
    United Kingdom pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.
    The Secretary of State now has permission[1] to appeal.

    Background

 2. Ms Tserendorj came to the United Kingdom in July  2007  with  leave  to
    enter as a student, which was subsequently varied and she became a Tier
    4 (General) Student Migrant with leave until the 30th  April  2011.  An
    application  to  vary  that   leave   further   was   refused   because
    unfortunately for Ms Tsenderdorj her English language test  result  was
    not released in time for the Secretary of State to consider it as  part
    of the application; the refusal was issued on the 7th  April  2011  but
    the Home Office did not get the positive exam results until the 5th May
    2011.  Because at the date of the refusal Ms Tserendorj still had three
    weeks leave to remain the decision did not attract a right  of  appeal.
    Her solicitors requested reconsideration of the decision,  sending  six
    letters between May 2011 and March 2012,  to  which  they  received  no
    reply. In April 2012 Emily Thornberry  MP  wrote  to  the  Home  Office
    requesting an update on the case; she received a  letter  stating  that
    the matter  was  still  under  consideration.   It  was  not  until  Ms
    Tserendorj made a further application 'outside of  the  rules'  in  May
    2013 that she finally received a response. It was refused on  the  17th
    June 2013 with no right of appeal.  On the 24th  March  2014  she  made
    another application, on Article  8  grounds,  and  it  was  this  which
    resulted in the Secretary of State's refusal letter and  s10  decision,
    both of which are dated 27th August 2014.

 3. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal the  case  put  was
    firstly  that  Ms  Tserendorj  qualified  for  leave  to  remain  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.  She  submitted  that
    she had no friends or family remaining in Mongolia.  The Tribunal found
    that she did in fact have a brother, a  widowed  sister-in-law  and  an
    elderly grandmother.  It  accepted  that  she  would  face  significant
    obstacles in reintegrating into Mongolian society because of  animosity
    towards her on the part of some of  these  family  members,  but  these
    obstacles could not be found  to  be  "very"  significant.  She  is  an
    intelligent, determined and creative woman and she  will  manage.   The
    appeal therefore failed under the Rules and there is  no  challenge  to
    that decision.

 4. The second argument advanced by Ms Tserendorj was that her removal from
    the UK would be a disproportionate  interference  with  her  Article  8
    private life in the UK.  The rule left no scope to consider the quality
    of her private  life,  which  merited  the  Tribunal's  attention.   In
    summary her case was that since her arrival she had suffered  a  failed
    marriage which had included domestic violence,  she  had  come  through
    that  with  the  (ongoing)  support  of  good  friends,  and  she   had
    established a career as a successful fashion  designer.  Evidence  from
    third parties attested to her talent  in  that  area.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal found these matters, taken with  the  difficulties  she  would
    face in returning to Mongolia, to be compelling reasons why  Article  8
    'outside of the rules' should be considered.  In its  consideration  of
    proportionality the Tribunal considered the weight to  be  attached  to
    the public interest in controlling immigration control [at 65 and  66],
    the fact that  Ms  Tserendorj  had  apparently  worked  without  having
    permission to do so [65],  that it  is  in  the  public  interest  that
    people who seek leave to remain in the UK are  able  to  speak  English
    [66], which she can [67] and that it is in  the  public  interest  that
    people to seek leave to remain are  financially  independent  [68].  In
    respect  of  the  latter  the  Tribunal  accepted,  in  light  of   her
    "burgeoning work as a fashion designer", that  Ms  Tserendorj  has  not
    been, and is not likely to become in the future, a burden to the state.
      The determination then turns to the question of what weight to attach
    to her private life, established  whilst  her  status  in  the  UK  was
    precarious, if not unlawful.  Of  this  the  Tribunal  focuses  on  the
    chronology, noting the delay on the part of the Home Office in  dealing
    with any of the many letters sent by the solicitors  and  a  concession
    made in the refusal letter:

         "73. Finally I have to consider the weight that should be  attached
         to her private life established at  a  time  when  her  immigration
         status was precarious. Again the chronology is relevant.  Also,  at
         paragraph 51 of the [refusal letter] the Respondent states that her
         application for Leave to Remain as a Tier  4  Student  was  refused
         because - at the date of the application - she had not provided the
         required evidence that she had passed the relevant English language
         examination.  Importantly  it  is  then  stated  (with  my  italics
         inserted):

             '....However, in considering all the details of your  client's
             case we have taken into account that she sat her English  exam
             on 19th March 2011 and that her pass certificate  is  in  fact
             dated 22 April 2011 and that her leave did not expire until 30
             April 2011. The Home Office recognises that had your  client's
             then representatives waited to submit her application she  may
             have been granted Leave  to  Remain.  Nevertheless  the  above
             information was not in fact submitted until 5 May 2011,  after
             your client's leave expired'

         74. I find that the situation, despite what the Respondent  asserts
         at paragraph 52  of  the  [refusal  letter]  is  one  that  creates
         exceptional circumstances as to why the Appellant's  removal  would
         amount to a disproportionate interference with her right to respect
         for private life and that the refusal to grant  her  leave  outside
         the  Immigration  Rules  would  result   in   unjustifiably   harsh
         consequences for her.

         75. There  are  proper  and  exceptional  reasons  why  the  public
         interest in enforcing the removal of those  unlawfully  present  in
         the UK should be moderated by the public interest in  allowing  the
         Appellant to remain  for  all  the  reasons  I  have  explored  and
         outlined above."

 5. The Secretary of State now seeks that this decision be set aside. It is
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal erred in the following  material
    respects:

      i) There is a failure to "adequately identify" any  particular  reason
         why Article 8 outside of the rules should have been considered;

     ii) Beyond stating the accepted fact that the Ms Tserendorj has been in
         the UK for nearly seven years the determination fails  to  identify
         what if any aspects of her private life would engage Article 8;

    iii) The fact that the solicitors were in contact with the  Home  Office
         did not stop Ms  Tserendorj  being  here  unlawfully.  She  was  an
         overstayer once her leave expired;

     iv) The fact that she might have been given leave  to  remain  had  she
         waited  to  submit  her  application  in  April  2011  is  not   an
         "exceptional factor";

      v) The Judge fails to conduct a balancing exercise with  reference  to
         s117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 6. Mr Kandola submitted that in short, there was  nothing  exceptional  in
    this case which warranted leave to remain  outside  of  the  Rules.  It
    cannot be said that the Home Office had  acted  unreasonably  in  April
    2011. The refusal was issued on the 7th April, and by  the  22nd  April
    the English test results were available. Her leave did not expire until
    the 30th, and so her representatives had had eight  days  in  which  to
    make a fresh in-time application. That they failed to  do  so  did  not
    create an exceptional circumstance.

 7. Ms Osei-Kwatia pointed out that there was a peculiar chronology in this
    case and that the unfortunate events of April 2011,  coupled  with  the
    failure of the Home Office to make an appealable decision for over four
    years, were relevant factors  for  the  Tribunal  to  have  taken  into
    account.  Ms Tserendorj had consistently -  and persistently - tried to
    regularise her position.    That  all  went  in  her  favour.   It  was
    submitted that the decision was thorough, careful and open to the Judge
    on the evidence before him.  He addressed the mandatory  considerations
    set out in s117B of the NIAA 2002 (as amended by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014) and having done so  was  entitled  to  weigh  in  the  additional
    factors of the delay on the part of the Home Office and the  fact  that
    this applicant would have been granted a further  period  of  leave  to
    remain in 2011 but for the ineptitude of her then  representatives  and
    the intransigence of the Home Office.

    My Findings

 8. Ground (i) as it is set out above has no merit. Although not cited  the
    author of the grounds was apparently relying on the decision of Sales J
    (as he then was) in Nagre[2].  It has now been made  clear  that  Nagre
    was never intended to introduce an intermediary 'threshold' test before
    consideration of Article 8: there either is  an  Article  8  claim,  or
    there isn't: see MM[3], Khalid and Singh[4].  Even if there was such an
    intermediary threshold test in this case there was  a  good  reason  to
    consider Article 8 in its unvarnished  form;  that  is  that  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules is entirely silent on  the  nature  and
    quality of a person's private life in the UK.

 9. As to the nature of the private life in question, the matter raised  by
    ground (ii), the determination accepted that this was an appellant  who
    had entered into a marriage in  the  UK,  who  had  a  "strong  support
    structure with her British friends, family and the community"  and  who
    had "successfully adapted  and  integrated  into  British  culture  and
    tradition" [at 16].  That accepted evidence formed the backdrop to  the
    Tribunal's finding [at  63]  that  she  had  "clearly  established  and
    private life" in the seven years that she has spent here.  Having  read
    the determination as a whole I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal
    failed to consider whether Ms Tserendorj has a private life in the UK.

10. Nor can ground (v) be sustained. It is apparent from the  determination
    that the Tribunal properly  directed  itself  to  the  public  interest
    considerations set out in s117B. The fact that the outcome was  not  as
    the Secretary of State would have wished does not disclose an error  of
    law.  There was no failure to conduct a balancing exercise.

11. The real question is whether it was properly open to the  Tribunal,  on
    the evidence before it and the findings it had made, to  conclude  that
    the removal of Ms Tserendorj was a disproportionate  interference  with
    her private life.   Here Mr Kandola focused his  submissions  on  s117B
    (4) & (5). Between her arrival in 2007 and the expiry of her  leave  in
    2011 her leave was "precarious"; as far as the Secretary  of  State  is
    concerned her lack of leave ever since  renders  that  period  of  stay
    "unlawful". Ms Osei-Kwatia protested that  someone  who  is  repeatedly
    contacting the Home Office asking for a  decision  cannot  properly  be
    considered to be unlawful. It is a moot point, since either way the Act
    demands  that  "little  weight"  be  attached  to  any   private   life
    established during such periods of residence.  The Secretary  of  State
    submits that this being the case, it was not open to  the  Tribunal  to
    find that this "little weight"  could  outweigh  the  very  substantial
    weight to be placed on the public interest in removing persons with  no
    further leave to remain under the Rules.

12. It is apparent from paragraph 71 & 73 of  the  determination  that  the
    Tribunal directed itself to the fact that her leave had - at  the  very
    least - been precarious throughout the entire period of her  stay.   It
    cannot therefore be said that the Tribunal  failed  to  recognise  this
    statutory provision.   Nor, as I note above, can it  be  said  that  it
    failed to conduct a balancing exercise overall.  Two  additional,  non-
    117B factors,  are  identified  as  significant.    The  first  is  the
    recognition by the Secretary of State that had Ms Tserendorj  waited  a
    week or two before submitting her Tier 4 application in April 2011  she
    may have been granted a further period of leave, the second  being  the
    failure of the Home Office to respond to repeated communications from a
    migrant  doing  her  best  to  regularise  her  position.   Mr  Kandola
    submitted that it was in effect  perverse  for  the  Tribunal  to  have
    identified either or both of these matters as amounting to "exceptional
    circumstances".

13.  There  is  no  requirement  that  Ms  Tserendorj   show   "exceptional
    circumstances" and as such it was not  incumbent  on  the  Tribunal  to
    identify any. The question before it was whether, taking all the  facts
    of the case into account, it was disproportionate to remove  her;  that
    question had to be answered bearing in mind that the  number  of  cases
    likely to succeed 'outside of the Rules' was likely  to  be  small.  In
    this case it has not been  shown  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to  take
    relevant information into account, or that  it  placed  weight  on  any
    irrelevant factors. The fact that Ms Tserendorj was badly served by her
    representatives and that she then did her best for a number of years to
    regularise her position were factors that the Tribunal was entitled  to
    consider, along with all of those matters set out in s117B as part of a
    rounded assessment.  The test for showing the decision  perverse  is  a
    relatively high one, and having read the determination overall I do not
    find this to be a decision that no reasonable authority could have come
    to.  It is not a decision that many other  members  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal would have reached, but that in itself does not infect it with
    an error of law.

    Decision

14. The determination contains no error of law and it is upheld.  I make no
    direction for anonymity.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               25th May 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson on the
13th February 2015
[2] Nagre [2013] EWCA 720 (Admin), see also Gulshan (Article 8 - new rules
- correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC)
[3] MM & Ors [2014] EWCA Civ 985, at 129
[4] Khalid and Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74, at 64

