
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35176/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 August 2017                            |On 05 September 2017          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                 ABDUL KAYUM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. S. Iqbal of counsel instructed by Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr. S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS







BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant, who was born on  5  December  1987,  is  a  national  of
    Bangladesh. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 21 January  2010  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant. He married on 15 February 2012 and on
    23 March 2012 he applied for leave to  remain,  as  the  partner  of  a
    person settled in the United Kingdom. On 7 January 2013 he was  granted
    leave to remain in this capacity until 7 January 2015.

2.   On 22 October 2014  the  Appellant  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain as the victim of domestic violence.

3.   His application was refused. He appealed and his appeal  was  dismissed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence in a decision promulgated  on  21
    December 2016. The Appellant appealed and he was granted permission  to
    appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on 5 July 2017.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   Both counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    made oral submissions and I have  referred  to  the  content  of  these
    submissions, where relevant, in my decision below.  It became  apparent
    during the hearing that neither the Appellant's representatives or  the
    Upper Tribunal had a full copy of the Home Office Bundle and that  this
    also appeared to have been the case at the hearing  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

DECISION

5.   It was the Respondent's case that the Appellant  was  not  entitled  to
    indefinite leave to remain as he could not meet the requirement of sub-
    paragraph 289A(ii) of the Immigration Rules  because  his  relationship
    with his wife was not subsisting when he was last granted leave as  her
    spouse on 7 January 2013. She maintained that his marriage  had  broken
    down on 7 September 2012.

6.   In paragraph 6 of his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lawrence
    found that the Appellant's relationship with his wife had  ended  on  7
    September 2012.  However, he failed to give  any,  or  any  sufficient,
    reasons for reaching this conclusion in the light of the evidence which
    was before him. The  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  relied  on  the
    contents of the letter, dated 20 October 2014, which was written by the
    Appellant to accompany his application for indefinite leave to  remain.
    This letter concentrates on the events which led up to him leaving  the
    matrimonial home on 7 September 2012 and does not mention events  after
    that date.

7.   This incident is confirmed in an entry at page 42  of  the  Appellant's
    Bundle from a police investigation, which stated that "the  [Appellant]
    is safe and well and has now got his property back". His medical  notes
    also confirm that he told his GP  on  6  September  2013  that  he  had
    separated from his wife in  or  around  September  2012.  However,  the
    letter from  Dr.  Rana,  dated  4  September  2014,   states  that  the
    Appellant's medical notes for 6 September 2013 referred to his wife and
    mother-in-law being violent towards him, which suggests that  this  was
    an on-going situation.

8.   Furthermore, the police records included  in  the  Appellant's  Bundle,
    indicated that the Appellant and his wife were together as a couple  in
    Finsbury Park on 25  September  2013  when  they  suffered  a  racially
    motivated attack. The records also showed that they attended  Limehouse
    Police Station together on 9 October 2013 and were recorded  as  having
    been married  for  two  and  a  half  years  and  as  living  with  the
    Appellant's parents-in-law. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence did  not
    consider this evidence and reach any findings on it.

9.   I have also reminded myself that in MK (duty to give reasons)  Pakistan
    [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held that:

     "(1)     It is axiomatic that a  determination  disclosed  clearly  the
    reasons for a tribunal's decision
        (2)     If  a  tribunal  finds  oral  evidence  to  be  implausible,
    incredible or unreliable or a   document     to  be  worth  no  weight,
    whatsoever, it is necessary to say so in the     determination and  for
    such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare  statement  that     a
    witness was not believed or that a document was afforded no  weight  is
    unlikely to   satisfy the requirement to give reasons".

10.  Therefore, the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law by not  providing
    any reasons  for  deciding  that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 298A(ii) of the Immigration Rules.

11.  The Appellant also had to establish  that  for  the  purposes  of  sub-
    paragraph 298A(iii) of  the  Immigration  Rules  his  relationship  was
    caused to permanently break down before the end of the period of  leave
    as a result of domestic violence.

12.  I have reminded myself that in LA  (para  289A:  causes  of  breakdown)
    Pakistan [2009] UKAIT 00019 the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  also
    found  that  "when  deciding  if  an  appellant  has  proved  that  the
    "relationship was caused to permanently break down before  the  end  of
    that period as a result of domestic  violence"  the  Tribunal  must  be
    careful to assess the evidence in the round".

13.  Page 10 of the Home Office Guidance on Victims  of  Domestic  Violence,
    which was in force on 25 November 2016, also indicates  that  incidents
    of controlling, coercive or  threatening  behaviour  and  psychological
    abuse, not just  physical  violence,  fall  within  the  definition  of
    domestic violence. Page 29 of the Guidance also states that victims can
    rely on a letter from their GP and any evidence from the police.

14.  The letter from Dr. Rana refers to the Appellant having been  subjected
    to violence by his wife and mother in law. Paragraphs 7 to  16  of  the
    Appellant's statement also record numerous incidents  of  physical  and
    psychological  abuse.  In  addition,  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    accepted that the Appellant had provided photographs of injuries caused
    to his neck, shoulder and arm, which post-dated 7 January 2013 and were
    said by the Appellant to have been caused by his wife in April,  August
    and October 2013.

15.  In paragraph 10  of  his  decision,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    refers to this evidence but does not indicate what, if any  weight,  he
    gives to it. He also failed to take into account  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence. In LA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
     [2007] EWCA Civ 386 the Court of Appeal  adopted  the  finding  in  JL
    (Domestic violence: evidence and procedure) India  [2006]  UKAIT  00058
    where it was found that "the Immigration Judge is not  confined  on  an
    appeal to the evidence "required" by the Secretary of State, nor is  an
    appeal bound to fail if the "required" evidence has not been  produced.
    The question of  whether  domestic  violence  has  occurred  is  to  be
    determined on the basis of all  the  evidence  before  the  Immigration
    Judge".

16.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not follow the guidance given by  the
    Court of Appeal or by the Home Office  when  considering  the  evidence
    before him. Therefore, he also erred in law by not taking into  account
    relevant evidence and policy.

17.  As a consequence, I find that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lawrence  did
    make material errors of law in his decision and reasons.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  re-hearing
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Lawrence.

DIRECTIONS

(1)  The Respondent do file and serve a full  copy  of  her  bundle  on  the
    Appellant's solicitors and the First-tier Tribunal within  14  days  of
    the de novo appeal being re-listed in the First-tier Tribunal.



Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 31 August 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


