
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/35231/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 19 November 2015                          |   On 4 January 2016              |
|                                             |                                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                              HASSAN MUNIR KHAN
                        (NO anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr. C. Mannan of Counsel instructed by Bukhari
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Afako promulgated on 26 June 2015 in which he  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent to refuse
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as it was  "arguable  that  the  judge
    erred in law in finding that the Appellant's leave was curtailed  given
    that the judge appears to have accepted  that  the  Appellant  did  not
    receive notice of the curtailment.  The judge considered that Syed  had
    decided that there were circumstances  where  other  forms  of  service
    would be sufficient [30].  Whilst the judge gives extensive reasons for
    his conclusion, it is arguable that  the  ratio  of  Syed  is,  as  the
    Appellant submits, that actual notice is indeed required  -  see  Javed
    [2014] EWHC 4426 (Admin)."


 3. Further the notice of permission granting appeal states:


    "If the Appellant's  leave  was  not  validly  curtailed,  then  it  is
    arguable that he has been in the UK  for  10  years  continuously  with
    valid leave and accordingly the judge erred in the basis  on  which  he
    approached the Appellant's private life in the UK.  It is also arguable
    as set out in paragraphs 5 and 9 grounds (even if the leave was validly
    curtailed) that the judge erred in law in his approach to the fact that
    the decision of 16 September 2013 did not notify the Appellant  of  his
    right of appeal.  The judge considered that the  Appellant's  leave  to
    remain expired in 2013 (see [43] and [33]) but  there  is  an  argument
    that because the notice of decision of 16 September 2013 did not inform
    the Appellant that he did have a right of appeal albeit  on  restricted
    grounds, the Appellant's time for appealing and therefore  his  section
    3C leave is extended and in the circumstances was  extended  until  the
    Appellant in  fact  appealed  to  the  tribunal  -   see  CHH  (Notices
    Regulations) [2011] UKUT 00021.  Accordingly it is  arguable  that  the
    judge should  in  any  event  have  treated  the  Appellant  as  having
    continuing lawful leave."


 4. I heard submissions from both  representatives.   At  the  end  of  the
    hearing I reserved my decision, which I set out below with my reasons.


Submissions


 5. There was no Rule 24 response on the file but Ms Isherwood produced one
    which essentially submitted that the Appellant  was  not  credible  and
    that the notice of curtailment had been validly served.


 6. Mr. Mannan relied on the grounds of appeal.


 7. Ms Isherwood submitted that the judge had addressed the  case  of  Syed
    (curtailment of leave - notice)  [2013]  UKUT  00144  (IAC).   In  Syed
    curtailment letters were sent but they were returned to the Respondent.
     In the Appellant's case, nothing was returned.  The Appellant chose to
    cease studying 10 months before the curtailment letter was issued.  The
    Appellant accepted that he had  not  notified  the  Respondent  of  his
    change of address.  This responsibility lay with the Appellant.  In the
    case of Javed the College had lost its licence.  Here the Appellant had
    ceased studying but had not done anything to inform the Respondent.


 8. The Respondent had sent the curtailment letter by recorded delivery  to
    the last known address.  She submitted that there was nothing else  the
    Respondent could have done.  The decision to curtail was  not  returned
    to the Respondent.  She referred to paragraphs [21]  and  [28]  of  the
    decision.  The Appellant had made it  impossible  for  the  curtailment
    noticed to be served.  The onus was on  the  Appellant  to  notify  the
    Respondent and he had failed to do so.   Therefore  the  case  of  Syed
    could not apply.  The judge found that the Appellant was  not  credible
    and that the curtailment letter had been delivered.   She  referred  to
    paragraph [26] of the decision where the judge had applied the case  of
    Syed.  It was open to the  judge  to  make  these  findings  given  the
    situation.  The judge did not accept  the  Appellant's  evidence.   The
    Respondent had been kept in the dark about the Appellant's new address.
     I was referred to paragraph [14] of the decision.


 9. In relation to the right of appeal  I  was  referred  to  the  judicial
    review application.  The papers indicate that the Appellant knew he had
    a right of appeal at the time of the judicial review.  I  was  referred
    to paragraph [8] of the decision.


10. Ms Isherwood submitted that at the date of the hearing,  19  May  2015,
    the Appellant had not been in the United Kingdom  for  10  years  by  a
    number of days.  The judge  had  made  sustainable  findings  regarding
    Article 8.  The Appellant's leave had expired on 8 September  2013  and
    the judge was entitled to come to his findings at paragraph  [43].   He
    had treated the decision of 19 August 2014 correctly.


11. In response Mr.  Mannan  set  out  the  chronology  of  the  case.   He
    submitted that the Appellant had come to the United Kingdom on  25  May
    2005.  His last grant of leave had been from 19 July 2012 until 14 June
    2014.  His evidence was that on January 2013 he had changed address  to
    Horn Lane and had informed his college of  this  in  or  about  January
    2013.  He had not informed the Respondent.


12. In relation to the curtailment of 28 June 2013, this did  not  say  how
    the Respondent had been informed  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    attend his course.  If the Respondent had received a  letter  from  the
    college with this information, it had not been  disclosed,  and  it  is
    possible that it had mentioned the Appellant's change of  address.   On
    10 July 2013 the curtailment letter was sent to  Sancroft  Close.   The
    Respondent's position at the First-tier Tribunal was that as far as she
    was concerned it had  been  posted  and  delivered  and  therefore  the
    Appellant was aware of his curtailment on or about 10 July 2013.


13. The only evidence from the Respondent was the document entitled  "Track
    and trace" dated 20 May 2015 which indicated that  something  had  been
    delivered.  It did not show what had been delivered.  It did  not  show
    that it was delivered to Sancroft Close.  It did not show that  it  had
    been received by anyone at that address let alone by the Appellant.  It
    was submitted that this was a hopeless document for the  Respondent  to
    rely on.  On 15 August 2013 the Appellant made an application for leave
    to remain using the address of Horn Lane.   The  application  is  clear
    that his address is Horn Lane.  It was not known whether this had  been
    before the judge in the First-tier Tribunal.   However,  on  15  August
    2013, despite the Respondent being aware of  the  Appellant's  address,
    the curtailment of leave was not cancelled.  On 16 September  2013  the
    Respondent refused the application sending this decision to Horn  Lane.
    The letter of 16 September 2013  states  that  there  is  no  right  of
    appeal.


14. On 25 September 2013 the Appellant wrote to the Respondent (page 36  of
    the bundle).  This letter does  not  refer  to  the  curtailment.   The
    judicial review  application  did  not  mention  curtailment,  and  the
    Respondent  did  not  mention  curtailment  in  the   judicial   review
    proceedings.  On 13 June 2014 an Article 8 application  was  made,  but
    again there was no mention by the  Appellant  of  curtailment.   On  29
    August 2014 the application was refused, and curtailment was  mentioned
    in the reasons for refusal letter for the first time.  The  application
    was not refused on substantive grounds.


15. It was submitted that the judge had erred as there  was  no  evidential
    basis for saying that the curtailment notice had been  properly  served
    [32].  It was incumbent  on  the  Respondent  to  make  sure  that  the
    document was served properly.  I was referred to paragraph [33] of  the
    decision which refers to the fact that the Appellant's leave expired on
    8 September 2013.  However in paragraph [36] he refers to the  decision
    of 16 September 2013 as being the notice against which  the  appeal  is
    made.  This is the basis of  the  incorrect  conclusion  regarding  the
    curtailment [43].


16. In relation to the judge's treatment of  Syed,  in  paragraph  [22]  he
    stated that  actual  service  is  required  but  contradicted  this  in
    paragraph [30] when he said that there were circumstances where  postal
    service to the last address provided would be sufficient.


17. In conclusion he  submitted  that  the  Respondent  was  aware  of  the
    Appellant's correct address on 15 August 2013 but she did nothing about
    the curtailment, and did not mention it in her letter of  16  September
    2013.  Syed requires actual service and the judge had failed  to  focus
    on this.


Error of law

Curtailment


18. Paragraph (3) of the headnote to Syed states:


    "Accordingly, the Communication will be effective if made to  a  person
    authorised to receive it on that person's behalf: see Hosier v  Goodall
    [1962] 1 All E.R. 30; but the  Secretary  of  State  cannot  rely  upon
    deemed postal service."


19. Javed states in paragraph [25]:


    "In my judgment however, merely to send a curtailment of leave  letter
    to the person's address and rely  on  the  receipt  signed  by  another
    individual who happens to be present when the letter was  delivered  is
    manifestly insufficient.  Such a letter is not "given" to  the  person
    concerned as required by the statute. The  burden  of  proving  receipt
    lies on the Secretary of State; it is not for the person  concerned  to
    disprove receipt."


20. Paragraph [30] of the decision states:


    "I therefore read Syed as determining  that  where  a  non-"immigration
    decision" to curtail leave has been made, actual service would normally
    be required, but there are circumstances where other forms of  service,
    including postal service to the last address provided  by  the  Migrant
    will be sufficient."


21. I find that this is not what Syed held.  It is clear from the  headnote
    that the Respondent must "be able  to  prove  that  notice  of  such  a
    decision was communicated to the person concerned, in order for  it  to
    be effective."  Syed does not state that postal  service  to  the  last
    address provided will suffice.


22. The evidence before the judge of service of the curtailment letter  was
    the "Track and trace" document referred to above.  There is no name and
    address indicated on this document.  It is dated 20  May  2015,  almost
    two years after the date on the curtailment letter, 10 July  2013.   It
    does not indicate that anything was  signed  for.   Under  the  heading
    "Progress of your item" it states "Please come back later.  Information
    on your Royal Mail Signed For item is not yet available."


23. The only other evidence of the curtailment letter  is  a  copy  of  the
    letter itself.  This is dated 10 July 2013 at the address given for the
    Appellant is Sancroft Close, but this letter in and of  itself  is  not
    evidence that the letter has been sent.   I  find  that  there  was  no
    evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  any  letter  had  been
    received by anybody at  Sancroft Close.  Further, even if the judge was
    right that postal  service  to  the  last  address  provided  would  be
    sufficient, I find there was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal
    that the Respondent had sent the curtailment letter at all.  The "Track
    and trace" document, as  I  have  found  above,  does  not  contain  an
    address.  Neither does it confirm receipt.


24. I find that the decision contains an error of law in paragraph [30]  in
    the application of the case of Syed.  I also find that, on the evidence
    before him, referred to in paragraph [15],  the  judge  was  not  in  a
    position to find that the curtailment letter had been  served  at  this
    address given that the "Track and trace"  document  relied  on  by  the
    Respondent contains no such confirmation of delivery.


25. Further, I note that the chronology of this case indicates that,  while
    the Respondent claims that she served the notice of curtailment on  the
    Appellant on 10 July 2013, on  15  August  2013,  a  month  later,  the
    Appellant made a further application for leave to remain.  His  address
    is given as Horn Lane.  On 16 September  2013  the  Respondent  refused
    this application by way of a letter which was sent to the Appellant  at
    Horn Lane.  There is no reference in this letter to the fact  that  the
    Appellant's leave had already been curtailed by a letter dated some two
    months earlier.  The Appellant made a judicial  review  application  in
    respect of this decision and there is no reference in the documents  to
    the fact that the Appellant's leave had already been curtailed.


26. I find that within six weeks of the date of the curtailment letter, the
    Appellant made an application to the  Respondent  which  contained  his
    correct address.  The Respondent  refused  his  application  making  no
    reference at all to the fact that she had curtailed his leave some  two
    months earlier.  She made no reference to the fact that  she  had  sent
    any correspondence to his previous address.  She did not serve  a  copy
    of the curtailment letter on the Appellant at the address now  notified
    to her.  I find that the Respondent, while claiming to have served  the
    curtailment  letter  on  the  Appellant  some  two  months  previously,
    proceeded as if this letter had not been served and as if his leave was
    not subject to curtailment.  The Respondent only claimed that his leave
    had been curtailed in August 2014, over a year after she claims to have
    served the curtailment notice.


27. Paragraph [32] of the decision states:


    "Accordingly, I find that the Appellant's leave to remain was  in  fact
    curtailed by the decision of the Respondent of 10 July 2013, which  was
    properly served on the  Appellant  at  Sancroft  Close,  and  that  the
    consequence of that decision is that the Appellant's leave  had  lapsed
    well before the refusal to grant further leave 19  August  2014,  which
    accordingly, cannot be treated as a refusal of leave to vary  leave  to
    remain."


28. I find that there was no evidence before the judge that the  letter  of
    curtailment had been received at the property, let alone  that  it  had
    been received by the Appellant.  I therefore find that  the  judge  was
    not entitled to make this finding in paragraph [32].  I find  that  the
    Appellant's leave was not validly curtailed.  I therefore find that the
    Appellant had valid leave to remain when he made  his  application  for
    leave to remain under Article 8, and that he  had  a  right  of  appeal
    against the decision of 19 August 2014.


Article 8


29. Although the judge did not find that  the  Appellant  had  a  right  of
    appeal against the decision of 19 August 2014,  he  nevertheless  judge
    considered Article 8, [39] to [46].  He found that while there were  no
    suitability grounds identified for rejecting his claim, he had lived in
    the United Kingdom for 10 years [41] but given his  decision  regarding
    curtailment, the judge stated "Therefore he has been  in  this  country
    lawfully  for  little  more  than  eight  years  and  is  not  able  to
    demonstrate that he qualifies for indefinite leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of 10 years lawful stay in this country." [43].

30. I have found that the Appellant's leave was not validly  curtailed  and
    therefore I find that he has had lawful leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom since 25 May 2005.  I find that the judge's decision  that  the
    Appellant's leave had been validly curtailed and therefore that he  had
    only been in the United Kingdom lawfully for a little more  than  eight
    years affected his consideration of Article 8.  It was submitted by Mr.
    Mannan at the hearing that I should remake the decision and  allow  the
    Appellant's appeal on the basis that he has been in the United  Kingdom
    lawfully for 10 years under paragraph 276B.  However, I find  that  the
    Appellant had not been in the United Kingdom for a full 10 years as  at
    the date of the hearing, 19 May 2015, so even had the judge found  that
    the curtailment was not valid, the Appellant would not have  been  able
    to meet the requirements of paragraph 276B.


31.   Paragraph 276B provides:


    "The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite leave to
    remain on the ground of long residence in the United Kingdom are that:


         (i) (a) he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful residence in
         the United Kingdom.


         (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons why
         it would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave to
         remain on the ground of long residence, taking into account his:


             (a) age; and
             (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and
             (c) personal history, including character, conduct,
             associations and employment record; and
             (d) domestic circumstances; and
             (e) compassionate circumstances; and
             (f) any representations received on the person's behalf; and


         (iii) the applicant does not fall for refusal under the general
    grounds for refusal.


         (iv) the applicant has demonstrated sufficient knowledge of the
         English language and sufficient knowledge about life in the United
         Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix KoLL.


         (v) the applicant must not be in the UK in breach of immigration
         laws except that any period of overstaying for a period of 28 days
         or less will be disregarded, as will any period of overstaying
         between periods of entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to
         remain of up to 28 days and any period of overstaying pending the
         determination of an application made within that 28 day period."


32. The Appellant states in the grounds of appeal that he  is  entitled  to
    indefinite leave to remain on  the  basis  of  having  spent  10  years
    legally in the United Kingdom [9].  However, no  further  evidence  was
    provided for the  hearing  before  me  to  show  that  this  leave  was
    continuous, and although the judge  stated  in  the  decision  that  no
    suitability grounds for rejecting his application had been  identified,
    the Respondent has not considered an application by the Appellant under
    paragraph 276B and therefore has not considered paragraphs (ii) to  (v)
    above.  The directions provide that any further evidence upon which  is
    intended to rely be  served  prior  to  the  hearing,  yet  no  further
    evidence was submitted and, given that the Appellant was relying  on  a
    paragraph of the immigration rules upon which he had not been  able  to
    rely before, and which he had not  raised  in  his  grounds  of  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal, I would have expected further  evidence
    before me to show that he met the requirements  of  paragraph  276B  in
    their entirety.  No evidence was provided to show me that the 10  years
    he has spent the United Kingdom has been  continuous  residence  within
    the meaning of the immigration rules.


33. It is open to the Appellant to make an application under paragraph 276B
    against the background of my finding that he has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom with leave to remain for a period of 10 years.


Notice of Decision

The decision involves the making of an error on a point of law  and  is  set
aside.

I remake the decision dismissing the Appellant's appeal under Article 8.


Signed                                  Date 19 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

