
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/35108/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 6th December 2017                  |On 19th January 2018                  |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                               mr Hussain Fida
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Maqsood instructed by Lamptons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State of  8th  December
    2015 refusing his application for a residence card as confirmation of a
    right to reside in the UK as the unmarried partner of an EEA  national.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Khawar dismissed the Appellant's appeal in  a
    decision promulgated on 22nd February 2017.

 2. The Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  putting  forward  two
    grounds.  The first ground is that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    determining the appeal as he had no jurisdiction to do so following the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal: Albania)
    [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC).  It was agreed by Mr Maqsood and Mr Richards  at
    the hearing that this Ground of  Appeal  fell  away  in  light  of  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Khan v  Secretary  of  State  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1755.

 3. The second Ground of Appeal remained live,  it  is  contended  in  that
    ground that there was a procedural error on the part of  the  Tribunal.
    The hearing was listed for 13th February 2017. It is contended that the
    Appellant's solicitors faxed a letter to the Tribunal on 10th  February
    2017 indicating that the Appellant had  instructed  the  solicitors  to
    withdraw  his  appeal  listed  for  13th  February   2017.   In   those
    circumstances it was submitted that there was  a  procedural  error  in
    proceeding with the appeal despite receipt of this letter.

Error of Law

 4. Mr Maqsood outlined the chronology to this appeal.   The  Secretary  of
    State's reasons for refusal letter was dated 8th December 2015 and  the
    appeal was lodged on 16th December 2015.  He highlighted that the Upper
    Tribunal decision in the case of Sala was promulgated in September 2016
    and that case determined that there was no right of appeal available to
    the extent of family members of EEA nationals.  He pointed out that  on
    25th November 2016 the 2016 amendments to the EEA Regulations came into
    effect.  In his submission it was in response to that change of the law
    that the Appellant decided that it  was  appropriate  to  withdraw  the
    outstanding appeal on the basis of the decision in Sala.  Notice of  an
    application to withdraw  was  submitted  on  10th  February  2017.   Mr
    Maqsood accepted that this reason is not  put  forward  in  the  letter
    purporting  to  withdraw  the  appeal.   However  he  said   that   his
    instructions were that the only reason for withdrawing the  appeal  was
    because of the decision in Sala.

 5. Mr Maqsood pointed out that it is  now  apparent  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did not see the fax of 10th  February  2017  because  at
    paragraphs 7 and 8 the judge considered whether it was  appropriate  to
    determine the appeal in the absence of the Appellant.  The judge  noted
    that no communication had been received from  the  representatives  and
    there was no attendance by the Appellant and  no  explanation  for  his
    absence.  He further pointed out that at paragraph 19  the  judge  took
    into account the absence of  the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  at  the
    hearing before concluding that any  evidence  submitted  had  not  been
    subjected to testing and therefore carried  little  evidential  weight.
    The judge's decision was promulgated on 22nd February 2017.

 6. Mr Maqsood highlighted that on 6th March 2017 an application  was  made
    to the First-tier Tribunal for permission to appeal on the  grounds  of
    the decision in Sala and on the basis of the fact that the  application
    to withdraw  was  not  taken  into  account.   On  7th  September  2017
    permission to appeal was granted on the basis of the decision  in  Sala
    as well as the purported withdrawal.  He highlighted that the  decision
    in Khan v Secretary of State was issued on 9th November 2017  and  that
    decision the Court of Appeal confirmed that extended family members  do
    in fact have a right of appeal.

 7. Mr Maqsood formulated the issue to be determined as  to  whether  there
    was a good reason for the Appellant's absence from the hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  He submitted that there was a good reason as  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor chose not to attend as they were advised  and
    believed  that  there  was  no  point  in  attending   based   on   the
    jurisdictional issue determined by the Upper Tribunal in  the  decision
    in Sala. In his submission, given subsequent events, there was  a  good
    reason not to attend but one that would now require the decision to  be
    set aside.  He also noted that  under  Rule  17(3)  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Procedure Rules the Tribunal must notify  each  party  that  a
    withdrawal has taken effect and in the absence of that notice there was
    no effective withdrawal in this case.

 8. Mr Richards submitted that there was no procedural error in  this  case
    as there was no reason given in the withdrawal request and, if they had
    not received a withdrawal notice, the Appellant and Sponsor should have
    attended the hearing.

 9. In my view there is a straightforward interpretation of the  procedural
    matters in this case.

10. I have seen a copy of the fax dated 10th February 2017.  It is  not  in
    dispute that this was received by the Tribunal.  That  fax  contains  a
    letter from the Appellant's solicitors indicating  that  the  Appellant
    had instructed that the appeal be withdrawn and asking for confirmation
    to this effect.  It is clear from the decision made by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge that that withdrawal request was not before him.  It  is
    not in dispute that that purported  withdrawal  does  not  contain  any
    reasons for the request to withdraw the appeal as required by paragraph
    17 of the Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.

11. However in my view, had the fax been before him on 13th February  2017,
    the judge would have had to consider whether the notice  of  withdrawal
    had been given in compliance  with  Rule  17  and  would  have  had  to
    consider  whether  withdrawal  was  appropriate   (TPN   (FtT   appeals
    -withdrawal) Vietnam  [2017]  UKUT  00295  (IAC)).  If  the  judge  had
    considered that the absence  of  a  reason  was  a  barrier  to  proper
    consideration of the request he would have had to consider  whether  it
    was appropriate to adjourn the hearing or to  go  ahead  and  hear  the
    appeal in the absence of the Appellant under Rule 28.  It may well have
    been that the judge would have considered that, in  the  context  of  a
    withdrawal application, it  may  have  been  appropriate  to  give  the
    Appellant an opportunity to either provide reasons  or  to  attend  the
    hearing.

12. In these circumstances I consider that the fact the judge did not  have
    the withdrawal request before him due to an  administrative  error  and
    accordingly was unable to consider the request in accordance  with  the
    Procedure Rules amounts to a procedural error in this case.   In  these
    circumstances in my view the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should
    be set aside.

13. In considering remaking the decision I take into account  the  decision
    of the Court of Appeal in Khan. The Appellant  has  not  had  his  case
    fully considered by the First-tier Tribunal. In my view it  is  in  the
    interests of justice in this particular case for the Appellant to  have
    his  appeal  heard  afresh.   In  these  circumstances  I  consider  it
    appropriate for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed                              Date: 14th January 2018



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




