
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/35184/2014
                                                               IA/35193/2014
                                                               IA/35194/2014
                                                               IA/35195/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th November 2015                |On 30th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                             PRATHVINATHA SHETTY
                                SOWMYA SHETTY
                               PRATHAM SHETTY
                              RAJESHWARI SHETTY
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini (counsel) instructed by Gulbenkian
                    Andonian Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of any of these Appellants. Having  considered  all  the  circumstances  and
evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellants against  the  decision  of  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Wiseman promulgated on  15  May  2015,  which  dismissed
each Appellant's appeal on all grounds .

Background

3.    The Appellant's are  all  members  of  the  same  family.  The  second
appellant is the first appellant's wife. The  third  and  fourth  appellants
are their children. The first appellant was born on  8  November  1963.  The
second appellant was born on 24 September  1977.  The  third  appellant  was
born on 24 January 2002. The fourth appellant was born on 22 May 2007.

4.    On 25 July 2013 the first appellant applied for  leave  to  remain  in
the  UK  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  remaining  appellants  were
included in that application as  the  first  appellant's  dependants.  Those
applications were refused by the respondent on 9  October  2013.  A  consent
order for reconsideration was made on 27 June 2014, and on  23  August  2014
the respondent refused the applications of new.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Wiseman ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeals  against  the
Respondent's decision.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 7 September 2015  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Kopieczek gave permission to appeal stating

    "Notwithstanding the First-tier Judge's conclusions under  appendix  FM
    on the question of the reasonableness of  the  minor  appellants  being
    required to leave the UK, I consider arguable the point in the  grounds
    in relation to an apparent failure by the Judge to  consider  paragraph
    276 ADE(iv). It is also arguable that there was inadequate analysis  of
    the application of article 8.

    "Whilst other aspects of the grounds could be said to amount only to  a
    disagreement with the judge's analysis of the evidence, I do  not  rule
    out of consideration any aspect of the grounds."

The Hearing

7.    Mr Bazini, counsel for  the  appellants,  relied  on  the  grounds  of
appeal and was  critical  of  the  structure  and  content  of  the  Judge's
decision. He took  me  through  a  number  of  separate  paragraphs  in  the
decision, and argued that the decision is tainted by material errors of  law
because the Judge had conflated consideration of the  "reasonableness  test"
(contained in the immigration rules) with the  balancing  exercise  required
to assess proportionality in terms of article 8 ECHR. He told  me  that  the
Judge's consideration of  the  immigration  rules  was  woefully  inadequate
because there is no consideration of paragraph 276 ADE(iv). He  reminded  me
that no reference is  made  to  paragraph  276ADE  by  the  Judge.  He  then
questioned whether or not the Judge had gone on to consider article  8  ECHR
and reminded me that there is no reference in the decision to  section  117B
of the 2002 Act. He relied on E-A (Article 8  -  best  interests  of  child)
Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315 (IAC), EV (Philippines) and Others v  SSHD  [2014]
EWCA Civ 874, Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions affecting children;  onward
appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) amongst other cases, and  told  me  that  the
Judge had incorrectly found that factors which mitigated in the  appellant's
favour counted against the appellants. He told me that  the  best  interests
of the children  had  not  been  properly  considered,  and  relied  on  the
respondent's own statement of policy which emphasised the  manner  in  which
cases involving children who had lived in the UK for more than  seven  years
should be considered. He told me that the Judge's  errors  had  tainted  the
entirety of the decision and that the  decision  should  be  set  aside  and
determine of new.

8.    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, for the respondent, told  me  that  the  decision
does not contain any material errors of law and should stand.  She  conceded
that the Judge does not refer to paragraph 276  ADE  of  the  rules  nor  is
there reference to section 117B of the 2002 Act, but  she  argued  that  the
correct test  had  been  applied  and  that  the  Judge's  consideration  of
reasonableness in terms of appendix FM and paragraph  EX(1)  was  sufficient
to encompass consideration of paragraph 276 ADE of the rules. If  the  Judge
had taken another approach it would simply have been repetition. She  relied
on the  cases  of  Dube  (ss.117A-117D)  [2015]  UKUT  00090  (IAC),  Forman
(ss.117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC) and AM  (S  117B)  Malawi
[2015] UKUT 260 (IAC), and argued that it is unnecessary for  the  Judge  to
rehearse section 117B of the  2002  Act.  She  argued  that  the  Judge  had
manifestly considered the provisions of section 117B of  the  2002  Act  and
has carried out an adequate balancing exercise. She urged me to dismiss  the
appeal and to allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

9.    There are deficiencies in the Judge's decision  quite  simply  because
the Judge does not refer to section 117B of the 2002 Act nor does the  Judge
mention paragraph 276 ADE (iv) of the immigration  rules.  Those  are  quite
clearly errors, but are they material errors of law? The correct test is  to
consider whether the outcome could have been different if those errors  were
not present.

10.   At  [45]  the  Judge  unambiguously  states  that  if  the  two  adult
appellants were alone ".... Their appeals  would  not  stand  the  slightest
chance of success". Between [47] and  [52]  the  Judge  explains  that  bald
statement, and in doing so sets  out  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the
appeals of the first and second appellants. The focus in this case is  quite
clearly on the two child appellants. Between  [53]  &  [70]  the  facts  and
circumstances pertaining to the two children are carefully analysed.

11.   In E-A (Article 8 - best  interests  of  child)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT
00315 (IAC) the Tribunal  held  that  (i)  The  correct  starting  point  in
considering the welfare and best interests of a young child  would  be  that
it is in the best interests of a child to live with and  be  brought  up  by
his or her parents, subject to any very strong contra-indication.  Where  it
is in the best interests of a child to live with and be brought  up  by  his
or her parents, then the child's removal with his parents does  not  involve
any separation of family life.(ii) Absent other factors, the  reason  why  a
period  of  substantial  residence  as  a  child  may   become   a   weighty
consideration in the balance of competing  considerations  is  that  in  the
course of such time roots are put down, personal identities  are  developed,
friendships are formed and links are made with  the  community  outside  the
family unit. The degree to which these elements of private life  are  forged
and therefore the weight to be given to the  passage  of  time  will  depend
upon the facts in each case. (iii)During a child's very early years,  he  or
she will be primarily focused on self and the caring  parents  or  guardian.
Long residence once the child is likely to  have  formed  ties  outside  the
family is likely to have greater impact on his or her well-being.  (iv)Those
who have their families with them during a period of study in  the  UK  must
do so in the light of the expectation of return. (v)The Supreme Court in  ZH
(Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 was not ruling that the ability of  a  young  child
to readily adapt to life in a new country was an irrelevant  factor,  rather
that the adaptability of the child in each case must be assessed and is  not
a conclusive consideration on its own.

12.   In EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 it was  held
that the best interests of the child were to be determined by  reference  to
the child alone without reference to the immigration history  or  status  of
either parent (paras 32 and 33). In then  determining  whether  or  not  the
need for immigration control outweighed the best interests of the  children,
it was necessary to determine the relative strength  of  the  factors  which
made it in their best interests to remain  in  the  UK;  and  also  to  take
account of any factors that pointed the other way. At  paragraph  35  of  EV
(Philippines) and Others it was stated that the best interests  of  children
will depend on a number of factors including their age, the length  of  time
that they have been in the United  Kingdom,  how  long  they  have  been  in
education, the stage that their education has reached, to what  extent  they
have been distanced from the country to which they are to be  returned,  how
renewable their connection with it may be, the extent that  they  will  have
linguistic, medical or other difficulties in adapting to life there and  the
extent to which the course proposed will interfere with  their  family  life
or other rights in this country.  The longer the child had been in  the  UK,
the more advanced or critical the stage of his  education,  the  looser  his
ties  with  the  country  in  question,  and  the   more   deleterious   the
consequences of his return, the greater the weight that fell into  one  side
of the scales. If it was overwhelmingly in the child's best  interests  that
he should not return, the need to maintain immigration control may well  not
tip the balance. By contrast if it was in  the  child's  best  interests  to
remain, but only on balance with some factors pointing the  other  way,  the
result may be the opposite. In the balance on the other side there  fell  to
be taken into account the strong weight to be given to the need to  maintain
immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of  the  country
and the fact that,  ex  hypothesi,  the  claimants  had  no  entitlement  to
remain. The immigration history  of  the  parents  might  also  be  relevant
(paras 34 - 37). Although the party

13.   Although counsel placed weight on both of those cases, he only  placed
selected emphasis on the effect of those cases in the balancing exercise.  A
fair reading of both E-A (Article 8 - best interests of child)  Nigeria  and
EV Philippines indicates that there are aspects of the  child's  life  which
must be considered and carry weight in the  balancing  exercise,  but  there
are other factors which must be considered and the length  of  time  of  the
child's residence in the  UK  is  not  necessarily  the  only  determinative
factor.

14.   The Judge  does  not  specifically  referred  to  section  55  of  the
Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. In R (on the  application  of
Mine and others) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2011]  EWHC
2337 (Admin) Simons J said that failure to refer to s 55 of the 2009 Act  or
to the provisions of the UNCRC would not of itself render the  decision  not
in  accordance  with  the  law.  Neither  would  citing   those   provisions
automatically make a decision lawful. The  relevant  consideration  was  the
substance of the decision, not its form. The obligation  to  act  in  a  way
that promoted the welfare of the child and treated its best interests  as  a
primary consideration had to be  viewed  in  this  context.  In  R  (on  the
application of Khadra Ahmed Ali) [2015] EWHC 7  it  was  said  that  it  was
sufficient if the substance of  the  section  55  duty  was  discharged  and
explicit reference to statute or guidance was not required.

15.   For each of the child appellants, paragraph 276ADE(iv)  of  the  rules
is relevant. That paragraph of the rules states

    "276ADE.     The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to
    remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of
    application, the applicant:

              ...

              (iv)      is  under  the  age  of  18  years  and  has  lived
              continuously in the UK for at least 7 years (discounting  any
              period of imprisonment) and it would  not  be  reasonable  to
              expect the applicant to leave the UK;"

16.   That paragraph of the rules is not mentioned by the  Judge,  but  when
he considers the facts and circumstances of the child appellants, the  Judge
quite clearly considers that paragraph (276ADE(iv)) to be the relevant  part
of the immigration rules. The Judge commences [68]  by  stating  "I  do  not
therefore regard the period of more than seven  years  in  this  country  as
being decisive..." - quite clearly demonstrating that having considered  the
evidence in this case he applies the relevant paragraph of  the  immigration
rules. It would have been helpful if the Judge had referred specifically  to
paragraph 276 ADE (iv), but when time is taken to read the decision  it  can
be seen  that  the  paragraphs  of  the  decision  leading  to  [68]  are  a
consideration of paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the rules.

17.   At [50] the Judge specifically refers to part 5A of the 2002 Act,  as
introduced by the Immigration Act  2014.  That  is  a  clear  and  specific
reference to section 117B of the 2002 Act. Despite what is argued  for  the
appellants, it is clear that in the ensuing paragraphs (when carrying out a
balancing exercise) the Judge takes account of section  117B  of  the  2002
Act. In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held that the
statutory duty to consider the matters set out in s 117B of the 2002 Act is
satisfied if the Tribunal's decision shows that it has had regard  to  such
parts of it as are relevant.

18.   This case turns on the long residence of the child appellants  in  the
UK, and the  progress  the  children  have  made  in  education  and  social
circles. It is beyond dispute that they are both gifted children of  capable
parents. In EM and others (Eritrea)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1336  the  Court  of
Appeal accepted "the  favourable  account"  they  had  been  given  "of  the
children's response to education and their unwillingness to be  parted  from
it".  The Court of Appeal also accepted  "as real their  fear  of  returning
to the state of street homelessness in which  the  family  previously  found
itself in Italy".  Nonetheless, the Court of Appeal then went on  "we  still
have to consider whether there is any real possibility  of  MA's  article  8
claim being upheld on an in-country appeal to an immigration judge.  We  are
satisfied that there is none. Her  daughter  is  now  an  adult  and  cannot
legitimately have her interests aggregated with MA's. Her son,  now  14,  is
settled in school; but he is here only because his mother has been able  for
four years to resist removal".

19.   The approach taken in Zoumbas was the same approach taken in   Azimi-
Moayed and others (decisions affecting  children;  onward  appeals)  [2013]
UKUT 197(IAC) in which the Tribunal held that (i)   The  case  law  of  the
Upper Tribunal has identified the following principles  to  assist  in  the
determination of appeals  where  children  are  affected  by  the  appealed
decisions: (a) As a starting point it is in the best interests of  children
to be with both their parents and if both parents are  being  removed  from
the United  Kingdom  then  the  starting  point  suggests  that  so  should
dependent children who form  part  of  their  household  unless  there  are
reasons to the contrary.

20.   The errors made by the  Judge  are  a  failure  to  set  out  specific
reference to the immigration rules and the  relevant  statutory  provisions,
so that the decision requires careful reading. Once the  decision  has  been
carefully read it can be seen that there is no misdirection in law.  It  can
also be seen that, although  the  Judge  does  not  spell  it  out,  he  has
directed himself correctly. The decision that the Judge reaches is one  that
the appellants do not like, but it  is  supported  by  case  law.  The  many
positive aspects of this family's lives and  the  progress  that  they  have
made in the UK is not a guarantee of success in their appeal.

21.   I therefore find that although the  decision  contains  errors,  those
errors are not material errors of law because the Judge has not  misdirected
himself in law; he has, in fact, correctly directed himself in law.  He  has
made findings which were open  to  him  on  the  evidence  available.  Those
findings led him to  a  conclusion  which  was  well  within  the  range  of
conclusions available to the Judge. The errors are  stylistic  but  they  do
not affect the quality of the decision which is ultimately reached.

22.   It is not an arguable error of law for a  Judge  to  give  too  little
weight or too much weight to a factor, unless irrationality is alleged.  Nor
is it an error of law for an Judge to fail to deal with every factual  issue
under argument.  Disagreement  with  an  Judge's  factual  conclusions,  his
appraisal of the evidence or assessment of credibility,  or  his  evaluation
of risk does not give rise to an error of law. Unless a  Judge's  assessment
of proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
of law, Rationality is a  very  high  threshold  and  a  conclusion  is  not
irrational just because some alternative explanation has  been  rejected  or
can be said to be possible.

Conclusion

23.   No material errors of law have been established; the Judge's  decision
stands.

DECISION

24.   The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 25 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
