






UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35407/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 9 September 2014                          |On: 10 October 2014          |
|Prepared:  29 September 2014                  |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                           Jiokwu Christopher Azi
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 24th December 1974. He
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  determination  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge James who, in a determination promulgated on  19th  May
      2014, dismissed his appeal against the respondent's refusal to issue a
      residence card pursuant to  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006
      ("the 2006 Regulations").


   2. The appeal before Judge James was on the papers.


   3. The respondent was not satisfied that his marriage  was  conducted  in
      accordance with the relevant Ghanaian law. Accordingly, the respondent
      did  not  accept  that  the  registration  and  statutory  declaration
      submitted were validly and lawfully issued.


   4. The application was also considered under Regulation 8(5) of the  2006
      Regulations on the basis that he was the unmarried partner of  an  EEA
      National. The respondent concluded that he had not provided sufficient
      documentation to suggest that he was in a  durable  relationship.  The
      respondent also noted that on 10th November  2012,  he  submitted  two
      birth certificates - his father's and father-in-law's - in support  of
      the application ".....to evidence the nationality  of  your  parents".
      Both these certificates had been  dismissed  by  the  Home  Office  as
      fraudulent. That was said to constitute a clear attempt to deceive the
      Home Office and this consequently harmed his credibility.


   5. Further, the  sponsor  did  not  provide  the  Home  Office  with  any
      "official evidence" to verify her claim that she  missed  a  "marriage
      interview" in order to attend  the  medical  procedure/hospital.  That
      counted against the credibility his application. Accordingly, even  if
      he did meet the criteria under Regulation 8(5), it would not have been
      deemed appropriate to issue him with a residence card. His application
      was  accordingly  refused  under  Regulation  17(4)(b)  of  the   2006
      Regulations.


   6. The application was also considered  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
      Rights  Convention.  The  respondent  referred  to  Appendix  FM   and
      paragraph 276 ADE of the rules, setting out the requirements for those
      seeking leave to remain on the basis of their  right  to  respect  for
      private or family life. The appellant was required to make a  separate
      charged application using the appropriate specified  application  form
      should such an application be pursued.


   7. Judge James noted [10] that  the  appellant  had  twice  been  refused
      following  similar  applications.  She  set  out  the  basis  for  the
      respondent's contention that the two Ghanaian  birth  certificates  of
      their respective fathers were fraudulent documents [10].


   8. Judge James noted that the appellant submitted a Nigerian passport and
      his wife submitted a French passport. Neither demonstrated that  their
      fathers have Ghanaian nationality. Accordingly, it  was  not  accepted
      that the marriage by proxy was lawful or that the couple were  married
      as claimed.


   9. At paragraph 14, Judge James noted that there had been an  application
      by the appellant for an extension of time to lodge documents. That had
      been granted by the duty Judge.  However,  there  are  no  grounds  of
      appeal on the notice of appeal. Accordingly, she found that there  was
      no valid appeal before her "and this application must fail" [14].


  10. Judge James found "in the alternative" that in any  event  the  appeal
      would fail for reasons which she set out from  paragraph  16-28.  With
      regard to the tenancy agreement produced, dated 2011 in the  names  of
      the appellant and the EEA National, their signatures were witnessed by
      persons who only gave a single name without "a proper first  name  and
      surname." No reason was given why the  agreements  were  not  properly
      witnessed or why they appear to have been  accepted  by  the  landlord
      despite not being properly witnessed. That raised concerns  about  the
      authenticity of the document itself [16].


  11. There were no joint bills held at the address,  only  bank  statements
      sent separately to the appellant and his claimed wife. It is not known
      whether this was shared accommodation of flatmates or  spouses.  There
      are no more recent documents with joint names  other  than  the  three
      year "out of date" tenancy agreement.


  12. Although numerous payslips for the  appellant  at  that  address  were
      submitted and similar payslips for his claimed wife, there  is  not  a
      single further original document confirming that they  are  cohabiting
      as a couple  as  they  claimed,  or  that  they  were  in  a  genuine,
      subsisting marriage, or relationship.


  13. There was a poor photocopy of a Lloyds bank statement in the  name  of
      the couple.  However,  their  names  have  different  font  sizes  and
      contradict the single name of the appellant on the following line, and
      the joint names are not flush to the line, so they are "tangential  to
      the main document." This is 'suggestive' that this is  not  a  genuine
      photocopy document or alternatively it has been  badly  copied.  These
      comments also applied to another poor quality photocopy document  from
      Aviva [19].


  14. There was a single letter from the Cooperative Bank referring to  both
      names of the  couple  at  their  address,  but  this  single  original
      document was not sufficient  to  constitute  evidence  of  an  ongoing
      genuine subsisting relationship.


  15. Although  there  were  utility  bills  in  separate  names,  what  was
      concerning to the Judge was that the same utility bills are  addressed
      to the same address but to different people, i.e.  the  appellant  has
      been issued the utility bills in his name alone and then  a  duplicate
      set of bills are in the name of his  claimed  wife  alone.  This  also
      raised concerns about the authenticity of these documents.


  16. Judge James consequently found that the  appellant  failed  to  submit
      easily accessible documents to  support  his  appeal.  He  could  have
      obtained witness statements from the fathers and their  apparent  trip
      to Ghana, together with their travel documents and receipts. He  could
      have submitted a witness statement from  neighbours,  work  colleagues
      and friends, confirming when and how the  relationship  developed  and
      details  of  the  asserted  relationship.  This  constituted  a  basic
      material omission.


  17. Further, the appellant failed credibly  or  properly  to  address  the
      concerns raised in the respondent's reasons for refusal, which  remain
      unchallenged. The lack of original documentation and the submission of
      poor  quality  photocopies  and  contradictory   photocopy   documents
      submitted with discrepancies raises concerns about the authenticity of
      the documentation submitted.


  18. Accordingly, she found [25] that "on the whole" the  appellant  failed
      to address the respondent's concerns or present credible  evidence  of
      his  claim  to  be  in  a  relationship  with  an  EEA  national.  She
      accordingly found that the appellant is not lawfully married according
      to Ghanaian law and is not in a  genuine  relationship  with  the  EEA
      national. Her failure  to  provide  credible  evidence  of  a  durable
      relationship of 'two years' also undermined the appeal.


  19. She further found that the  respondent  has  proven  to  the  required
      standard that the appellant has deliberately and  knowingly  submitted
      forged documents with regard to the birth certificates of both his and
      his partner's father to support his application, which if true,  would
      have meant that the fathers would have been only 6 and 11 years of age
      at the date of the couple's respective births [26].


  20. There was no Article 8 appeal before her. In any event, on the face of
      the adverse findings, any such grounds would also fail [27].


  21. On 6th June 2014, First-tier Tribunal Judge P J G  White  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal.  He found that there was  arguably  an
      error of law. In particular, the Judge might have failed to  have  had
      due regard to the fact that an appeal fee had been taken and  judicial
      directions had been previously given, indicating that the Tribunal had
      already accepted that the appeal was valid.


  22. Further, in finding that the appellant had knowingly and  deliberately
      submitted false documents, it is arguable that  the  Judge's  approach
      did not accord with  the  Shen  (Paper  Appeals;  proving  dishonesty)
      [2014] UKUT 00236 (IAC).


  23. Further, it is arguable that the Judge failed to  give  proper  weight
      and/or  make  adequate  findings  in  regard  to  the  documents  sent
      individually but not jointly to the appellant and sponsor at the  same
      postal address as evidence of cohabitation.


  24. Judge White also noted that if the appellant still maintained that  he
      and his sponsor should be regarded as lawfully  married,  rather  than
      being simply in a  "durable"  relationship,  the  appellant  would  be
      expected to be able to deal with the issues set out in  Kareem  [2014]
      UKUT 24 and in particular whether a marriage is recognised  under  the
      law of France, being the sponsor's "own country." Those issues had not
      been addressed in the determination.


  25. Mr Iqbal, who had not been responsible for preparing the  reasons  for
      appealing,  noted  that  the  Judge  agreed  with  the  Home  Office's
      assertions regarding the birth certificates.


  26. Mr Iqbal very properly drew my attention to the fact that the  grounds
      of appeal before the First-tier tribunal did not refer to the issue of
      the birth certificates as set out in the reasons for refusal.


  27. At page 6 of the reasons for refusal,  the  respondent  had  expressly
      asserted that the appellant had submitted on 10th  November  2012  two
      birth certificates in support of the application and to  evidence  the
      nationality of the parents. Those certificates were dismissed  by  the
      Home Office as fraudulent as they contradicted the laws of the country
      from which they would claim to have been issued. Furthermore, the ages
      of the claimed parents did not realistically correlate with the age of
      the appellant or his sponsor. This was asserted to be a clear  attempt
      to  deceive  the  Home  Office  and  this  consequently   harmed   his
      credibility.


  28. Mr Iqbal also accepted that the finding by the Judge at  paragraph  26
      that the respondent had proven  to  the  required  standard  that  the
      appellant had deliberately and knowingly  submitted  forged  documents
      with regard to the certificates was not a ground that  was  raised  by
      the appellant. It was a matter raised  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      White in granting permission. I none the less consider  its  merit  in
      this appeal.


  29. In Shen, supra, the Judge also  dismissed  on  paper  the  appellant's
      appeal against the  respondent's  decision.  There  was  a  subsequent
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal against that determination.


  30. The  appellant  in  Shen  stated  in  answer  to  a  question  in  her
      application that she had never  used  "deception"  to  gain  leave  to
      remain in the UK. Through routine checks made by the Home Office,  she
      had not disclosed driving offences. Accordingly, her application for a
      Tier 4 (General) Student visa was refused.  In  the  application  form
      there was however no reference to convictions  as  including  "traffic
      offences."


  31. Ms. Shen appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  stating  that  she  had
      never used deception to gain leave to remain. She was not  aware  that
      she  was  required  to  disclose  convictions  and   disqualifications
      relating to driving. At her appeal she stated that she was informed by
      the police that she would receive a  letter  by  post  disclosing  the
      penalty charges. However, she had not received  any  letter  when  she
      moved accommodation elsewhere. She  contacted  friends  who  continued
      living at her previous address to inquire whether the letter had  been
      received. However, the letter had still not  been  posted.  She  again
      moved address and updated her new address with  the  police.  At  that
      time she had still not received a letter "to my previous address."  As
      she had updated the police with her new address, she presumed that her
      case had been closed and that no further action would be taken.


  32. When she made her application therefore, she did not  understand  that
      she should disclose information about traffic offences as she believed
      the police had taken no further action to convict her.


  33. Shen's appeal was also heard on paper. It was explained to  the  Upper
      Tribunal that internally, the secretary of state  had  no  process  or
      mechanism pursuant  to  which  appeals  submitted  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal on paper were appraised with a view to being responded to  in
      the course of the paper appeal  process.  Accordingly  the  facts  and
      matters set out by the appellant in her appeal documentation would not
      put in issue or challenge.


  34. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in Shen dismissed the appeal.  He  found
      that the burden was on the secretary of state.  He  recited  paragraph
      322(1A) of the rules and recited the appellant's arguments.  He  found
      that although the appellant stated that she informed the police of her
      change of address there was no sufficient evidence from her to support
      that contention.


  35. He also concluded that the appellant has not been entirely  honest  in
      her approach to this application as demonstrated by the fact that  she
      asserted that she believed the police were taking no  further  action,
      but that would not have justified answering  the  question  concerning
      charges  in  the  negative.  Whilst  the  legal  burden  is  upon  the
      respondent, in the face of sufficient evidence there was an evidential
      burden on the appellant to refute what was being said against her.


  36. The Upper Tribunal found upon analysis  of  that  reasoning  that  the
      Judge had erred. The only evidence before the Judge as  to  the  facts
      surrounding the appellant's state of mind, and whether  this  amounted
      to dishonesty, were those set out in the form. The respondent had  not
      adduced any evidence to gainsay this account. Although the  respondent
      did not adduce evidence in the present case, there  was  nothing  that
      prevented her as a matter of principle or law from adducing  evidence.
      She had a copy of the appellant's application and  was  aware  of  the
      position adopted by the appellant in relation to her decision. On  the
      face of the appellant's explanation it is  plausible.  Nothing  leaped
      out from the page which would lead a reader to doubt its veracity. The
      appellant provided a plausible explanation for the mistake.


  37. The Tribunal in Shen asked what inferences it  was  possible  to  draw
      from the state of affairs about dishonesty.


  38. It ultimately found [20] that in the circumstances and upon the  basis
      of the Judge's logic, they could not see a basis whereby it was proper
      in law to uphold a finding of dishonesty. The Judge  evidently  became
      sceptical of the appellant's  case  and  proceeded  to  act  upon  his
      scepticism.


  39. In the absence of evidence from the respondent putting the appellant's
      prima facie plausible explanation into doubt, it  was  wrong  to  find
      dishonesty. The appellant's  versions  of  events  were  credible  and
      unchallenged. It was more than sufficient  to  switch  the  burden  of
      proof back to the respondent  to  prove  her  case  on  deception  and
      dishonesty. For whatever reason, she declined to do so.


  40. At paragraph 27, the Tribunal stated that  if  the  Judge  entertained
      doubts  as  to  the  appellant's  story,  he  should  have  sought  to
      investigate further. He could have exercised powers pursuant to  Rules
      44 and/or 51 of the 2005 Procedure Rules to require, for example,  the
      appellant to adduce supporting documentary evidence, or the  secretary
      of state to comment upon the  appellant's  evidence  and  adduce  such
      evidence as she  considered  appropriate  to  refute  the  appellant's
      evidence.  He could even remit the matter for oral hearing.


  41. The Tribunal found that dismissing the appeal was not the  proper  way
      to resolve any doubts outstanding in his mind in a case of dishonesty.
       In the circumstances, the  Tribunal  concluded  that  the  First-tier
      Judge had erred in a manner material to the decision.


  42. Mr Iqbal contended that the present case was also a paper case and the
      Judge should have used the powers identified in Shen. He accepted that
      the allegation of dishonesty referred to in the  reasons  for  refusal
      had not been responded to by the appellant.


  43. Further, he contended, relying on  paragraph  2(c)  of  Judge  White's
      permission, that the Judge had failed to  give  proper  weight  and/or
      failed to make adequate findings  in  regard  to  the  documents  sent
      individually but not jointly to the appellant and sponsor to the  same
      postal address as evidence of cohabitation.


  44. In the grounds seeking permission, it was contended that as  proof  of
      their living together at the  same  address,  the  couple  "have  many
      documents as proof of their address on joint name and on separate name
      of  the  same  address"  (sic).  Despite  all  these  documents,   the
      respondent still made the decision carelessly.  Although there was  no
      specific contention as  to  how  the  Judge  had  erred,  Judge  White
      nevertheless found it was arguable  that  the  Judge  failed  to  give
      proper weight and/or make  adequate  findings  with  regard  to  those
      documents.


  45. Mr Iqbal submitted that if  the  Judge  was  not  satisfied  with  the
      tenancy agreement, the  Judge  should  have  given  the  appellant  an
      opportunity to deal with that. He  further  submitted  that  the  2006
      Regulations do not require any specific evidence. The  appellant  must
      simply show on the balance of probabilities that he was in  a  durable
      relationship.


  46. Finally, Mr Iqbal took issue with the Judge's finding at paragraph  25
      that the appellant is not in  a  genuine  relationship  with  the  EEA
      National. That, he submitted, was  an  impermissible  finding  in  the
      circumstances. It is one thing to find that he had failed  to  provide
      credible evidence  of  a  durable  relationship  of  two  years  which
      undermined the appeal. It did not however follow that they were not in
      a genuine relationship. That, he submitted, potentially  affected  the
      findings.


  47. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Kenny submitted  that  the  Judge  had
      directed himself appropriately. Even though the Judge  concluded  that
      there was no right of appeal, he nevertheless  continued  to  consider
      the issue substantively from paragraph 16-26 of the determination.


  48. She also submitted that Shen is not an authority for  concluding  that
      in a  paper  case  an  appellant  is  necessarily  absolved  from  the
      evidential burden upon him to make his case.


  49. In particular, the appellant  had  been  given  the  reasons  for  the
      contention that the birth certificates  that  had  been  submitted  in
      November 2012 in support of his application had been dismissed by  the
      Home Office as fraudulent for the reasons contained at page 6  of  the
      refusal letter.


  50. No attempt had been made to refute those allegations.  They  were  not
      even referred to in the grounds of  appeal,  nor  in  the  application
      seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. Unlike in Shen, no
      explanation has been given by the appellant or the sponsor as  to  the
      birth certificates. It is evident from paragraph 27 in Shen  that  the
      appellant had given his explanation, which the Judge should  in  those
      circumstances have investigated further.


  51. She submitted that Mr Iqbal's submission that there is no  requirement
      to provide bills and documents under the 2006 Regulations was "out  of
      context." The Judge had from paragraph 15 onwards  given  the  reasons
      why the appellant's appeal could not succeed. It was not simply on the
      basis that the documents had not been provided in joint names. It  was
      the appellant's  duty  to  show  that  they  had  been  in  a  durable
      relationship. The Judge moreover had concerns about  the  authenticity
      of  the  tenancy  agreement  [16].  She   furthermore   analysed   the
      documentation before the respondent that had been relied on. She found
      that the appellant had failed to  address  the  respondent's  concerns
      regarding the documentation [24]. She has  given  proper  reasons  for
      discounting the  documentary  evidence  tendered  in  support  of  the
      application. Even the photographs submitted were not clear.


  52. Ms Kenny submitted that the Judge had summarised at paragraph  25  the
      effect of the appellant's failure  to  address  the  concerns  of  the
      respondent or to present credible evidence  of  his  claim.  From  the
      earlier findings, she  found  that  the  appellant  was  not  lawfully
      married and was not in a genuine relationship.  In  particular,  there
      had  been  a  failure  to  provide  credible  evidence  of  a  durable
      relationship which undermined the appeal. The finding that he was  not
      in  a  genuine  relationship  with  an  EEA  National   was   in   the
      circumstances a  justifiable  inference  from  the  lack  of  evidence
      provided with regard to that relationship.


     Assessment


  53. The respondent had set out clearly in the reasons for refusal that the
      two birth certificates in support of an earlier  application  made  on
      10th  November  2012  had  been  dismissed  by  the  Home  Office   as
      fraudulent, particularly having regard to  the  ages  of  the  claimed
      parents which did not correlate with the age of the appellant  or  his
      sponsor. That constituted a clear attempt to deceive the  Home  Office
      and harmed his credibility.


  54. As already noted, the appellant did not seek to dispute that assertion
      in the grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  Nor  did  he
      adduce any evidence either from his  own  witness  statement  or  from
      other documentation in rebuttal of that assertion.  Accordingly,  that
      assertion remained unchallenged.


  55. In his witness statement, he simply maintained that since his  alleged
      marriage, he has been  living  at  his  address  with  his  wife.  The
      respondent had he claimed, refused his application  "....on  technical
      issues". He stated that he disagrees with the decision.


  56. He asserted that both are working full time. The refusal is  incorrect
      and disproportionate. Moreover, it is an interference "into my  family
      life" contrary to Article 8. He has established his family  life  here
      with his wife and has made lots of "family friends  and  personal  and
      common friends in the UK." He has also produced documents relating  to
      his employment including payslips sent to him at the address.  He  has
      produced a copy of a letter from Aviva sent to both him and Ms  Cabral
      at the address.


  57. Judge James has proceeded to determine the appeal on  the  basis  that
      the appellant had submitted a ground of appeal challenging the reasons
      for refusal.


  58. She has analysed the documentation including the tenancy agreement and
      bank statement. She has analysed the documents  individually,  stating
      that in some respects, the photocopy from Lloyds Bank in the  name  of
      the couple have different font sizes and contradicts the  single  name
      of the appellant on the following lines. She also found that the joint
      names are not flush to the line.


  59. Moreover, she has  regard  to  the  fact  that  the  appellant  failed
      properly to address the concerns raised in  the  respondent's  reasons
      for refusal which thus remained  unchallenged.  She  ultimately  found
      that the lack of original documentation and  the  submission  of  poor
      quality  photocopies  and  contradictory  photocopy   documents   with
      discrepancies,  raises  concern  about   the   authenticity   of   the
      documentation submitted.


  60. It is furthermore to be noted,  as  pointed  out  by  Judge  White  in
      granting permission, that the appellant had not adduced  any  evidence
      as to the validity of the proxy marriage  in  accordance  with  French
      law.


  61. The finding in these circumstances that the respondent had  proved  to
      the  required  standard  that  the  appellant  had  deliberately   and
      knowingly  submitted  forged  documents  in  regard   to   the   birth
      certificates in support  of  his  application  was  justified  in  the
      circumstances. As noted, no  attempt  had  been  made  to  place  that
      assertion  in  issue,  before  either  the  first-tier  or  the  upper
      tribunal, unlike the appellant in Shen.


  62. The finding that the appellant  had  not  provided  credible  evidence
      relating to the durability of the relationship  was  based  on  proper
      reasons set out at pages 3 and 4 of  the  determination.  The  finding
      that theirs is not a genuine relationship was not  necessary  in  this
      case but in any event, having found from the evidence relating to  the
      passports as well as the findings in respect of  a  lack  of  credible
      evidence in  respect  of  the  durability  of  the  relationship,  the
      inference drawn was available on the evidence.


  63. I have already referred to the grounds seeking  permission.  There  is
      only one ground relied on in respect of the determination  dated  19th
      May 2014. It is contended that  Judge  James  erred  without  properly
      looking  into  the  appellant's  evidence  requiring   the   "impugned
      decision" to be reviewed and reversed.


  64. However, for the reasons already given, I am satisfied that the  Judge
      has given proper and cogent reasons justifying her conclusions.


     Decision


     The determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not involve  the
making of     any material error of law and shall stand.

                               Signed                     Date 29/9/2014






                                Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
















