

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35530/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                    Decision & Reasons  |
|                                      |Promulgated                             |
|On 30 September 2015                  |                    On 4 January 2016   |
|                                      |                                        |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Ms Elizabeth Oluwatoyin Olowoniyi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Iqbal, Counsel instructed by Britain Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal against the
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to issue a residence  card
    on the  basis  of  a  retained  right  of  residence  pursuant  to  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)   Regulations   2006   ("   The
    Regulations").

2.   For the sake of continuity Ms Olowoniyi will  be  referred  to  as  the
    appellant as she was before the First-tier Tribunal.  She is a  citizen
    of Nigeria and her date of birth is 12  June  1980.   It  appears  from
    correspondence from her solicitors that she came to the UK as a visitor
    in 2006 and overstayed. She married a Portuguese national on 16 October
    2008 and on 11 May 2011 she was granted a residence  card  pursuant  to
    the 2006 Regulations which was valid until 11 May 2016.  The  appellant
    gave birth to her first child on 31 December 2013.  On 5 December  2014
    the appellant and her Portuguese husband divorced.  On 20 June 2014 the
    appellant made an application for a residence card on  the  basis  that
    she had retained right of residence pursuant to reg.  10  of  the  2006
    Regulations. At this time she was pregnant with her second child.   She
    was last employed in June 2013  and  she  claims  to  have  been  self-
    employed since. The application was refused on 28 August  2014.   Judge
    Oliver allowed her appeal  and  the  Secretary  of  State  was  granted
    permission to appeal. Thus the matter came before us.

3.   It is common ground  that  the  Regulations  faithfully  transpose  the
    requirements of Directive 2004/38/EC ("the  Citizens  Directive")  into
    United Kingdom domestic law.  A non-EEA national who is  divorced  from
    her Union citizen spouse is able to benefit from a  retained  right  of
    residence  in  the  circumstances  set  out  in  reg.10  of  the   2006
    Regulations.  Reg.10 is the transposition of Article 13 of the Citizens
    Directive.  It requires conditions to be met; some by the EEA  national
    former spouse and some by the  non-EEA  national.   Upon  divorce,  the
    appellant was no longer "the family member of the  EEA  national"  (her
    husband) and thus the extended right to residence under reg. 14(2) came
    to an end.  However, she became eligible for such a right of  residence
    after her divorce under reg. 14(3) if she retained it  by  meeting  the
    requirements  of  Reg.  10(5)  and  (6).      Reg.10(6)(a)  imposes   a
    condition that; "the person who is not an EEA national but would, if he
    were an EEA national, be a worker,  self-employed  person  or  a  self-
    sufficient person under reg.6."  The time at which this condition is to
    be met and the period during which the condition  has  to  be  met  are
    nowhere specified in the Regulations.

The Issues

4.   The issue in this case is whether these conditions are  to  be  met  by
    the non-EEA national at the date of the  decree  absolute  (5  December
    2014) (this is the first point at which reg.10 might operate), the date
    of the decision (29 August 2014) or the date of the hearing  (30  March
    2015) and whether there is  any  requirement  to  establish  continuous
    economic activity throughout this period.

5.   The relevant parts of reg.10 read as follows:

             "(5) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if -




                  (a)  he ceased to be a family member of a qualified person
                      or of an EEA  national  with  a  permanent  right  of
                      residence on the termination of the marriage or civil
                      partnership of the qualified person;]


                  (b)  he was residing in the United Kingdom  in  accordance
                      with  these  Regulations   at   the   date   of   the
                      termination;


                  (c)  he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and


                  (d)  either -


                      (i)  prior to the initiation of the  proceedings  for
                           the termination of  the  marriage  or  the  civil
                           partnership the marriage or civil partnership had
                           lasted for at least three years and  the  parties
                           to the marriage or civil partnership had  resided
                           in the United  Kingdom  for  at  least  one  year
                           during its duration;




         (6)  The condition in this paragraph is that the person -


             (a)  is not an EEA national but  would,  if  he  were  an  EEA
                  national, be a worker, a self-employed person or  a  self-
                  sufficient person under regulation 6; or


             (b)  is the  family  member  of  a  person  who  falls  within
                  paragraph (a).






         Directive 2004/38/EC (Citizens' Free Movement)


         Article 13 (retention of the right of residence by  family  members
         in the event of divorce, annulment of marriage  or  termination  of
         registered partnership)


         2.    Without  prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,   divorce,
             annulment  of  marriage  or  termination  of  the   registered
             partnership referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2  shall  not
             entail loss of the right of residence  of  a  Union  citizen's
             family members who are not nationals of a member state where:


             (a)   prior  to  initiation  of  the  divorce   or   annulment
                  proceedings or termination of the  registered  partnership
                  referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2,  the  marriage  or
                  registered partnership has lasted at  least  three  years,
                  including one year in the host member state; or


             (b)  by agreement between the spouses or the partners referred
                  to in point 2(b) of Article  2  or  by  court  order,  the
                  spouse or partner who is not a national of a member  state
                  has custody of the Union citizen's children; or


             (c)    this   is   warranted   by    particularly    difficult
                  circumstances, such as having been a  victim  of  domestic
                  violence while the marriage or registered partnership  was
                  subsisting; or


             (d)  by agreement between the spouses or partners referred  to
                  in point 2(b) of Article 2 or by court order,  the  spouse
                  or partner who is not a national of a member state has the
                  right of access to a minor child, provided that the  court
                  has ruled that such access must  be  in  the  host  member
                  state, and for as long as is required.


         Before acquiring the right of permanent  residence,  the  right  of
         residence of the persons concerned  shall  remain  subject  to  the
         requirement that they are able to show that  they  are  workers  or
         self-employed persons or that they have  sufficient  resources  for
         themselves and their family members not to become a burden  on  the
         social assistance system of the  host  member  state  during  their
         period of residence and have comprehensive sickness insurance cover
         in the host member state, or that they are members of  the  family,
         already  constituted  in  the  host  member  state,  of  a   person
         satisfying these requirements.  'Sufficient resources' shall be  as
         defined in Article 8(4).


         Such  family  members  shall  retain  their  right   of   residence
         exclusively on a personal basis."

6.   In Amos & Anor v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2011]
    EWCA Civ 552 the Court of Appeal considered  reg.10  and  the  Citizens
    Directive and how it applied to  a  non-EEA  national  ex  spouse.  The
    following paragraphs are relevant to the issues in this case:

         "29. Thus the requirements  of  the  Directive  applicable  to  the
             appellants were as follows:

             (1)  At all times while residing in this country  until  their
                  divorce, their spouse must have been  a  worker  or  self-
                  employed  (or  otherwise  satisfied  the  requirements  of
                  Article 7.1).

             (2)  Their marriages had to have lasted at least three  years,
                  including one year in this country.

             (3)  They must be able to show that they are workers or  self-
                  employed persons or otherwise satisfy the requirements  of
                  the penultimate paragraph of Article 13.2.

         30.   The  Regulations  are  consistent  with  these  propositions.
             Regulation 10(5)  provides  that  a  'family  member  who  has
             retained the right of residence' must in a case  such  as  the
             present appeals satisfy the following conditions:

             (a)  His or her divorce from the EEA national.


             (b)  He or she was residing in the UK in accordance  with  the
                  Regulations at the date of the divorce.  He  or  she  will
                  have been so residing if regulation 14  applied,  i.e.  if
                  the EEA national spouse was a  'qualified  person',  i.e.,
                  for present purposes, a worker or self-employed person (as
                  to which see the definitions in regulations 2 and 6).


             (c)  He or she  is  a  worker  or  self-employed  person,  and
                  therefore satisfies paragraph (6).


             (d)   3  years'  marriage,  including  at  least  one   year's
                  residence in the UK."

7.   It is accepted in this case that the  appellant  satisfies  reg.10  (5)
    (a), (b) and (d).   The only issue is  whether  or  not  the  appellant
    satisfies reg. 10 (6) (a).

The Arguments Advanced by the Parties

8.   The Secretary of State's position  is  that  a  non-EEA  national  must
    establish that she meets the requirements of reg. 10(6)  (that  she  is
    economically active) continuously from the date of the divorce  to  the
    determination of her application (the  date  of  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State or  the  date  of  the  hearing).   The  appellant's
    position, advanced in Mr Iqbal's written submissions, is that it is not
    possible to construe reg. 10 (6) as laying down a requirement which  is
    to be met at the date of hearing because it flows  out  of  reg.  10(5)
    which refers to circumstances surrounding the event  of  divorce.  Thus
    reg. 10 (6) must not be interpreted in  such  a  way  that  it  offends
    reg.10 (5).  We will discuss these issues first and  then  turn  to  Mr
    Iqbal's first, but undeveloped argument which is,  on  reliance  on  HS
    (EEA: revocation and retained rights)  Syria  [2011]  UKUT  00165,  the
    appellant's appeal must be allowed.

Discussion

9.   The first position we will consider is that  of  the  non-EEA  national
    having to establish that she meets  reg.  10(6)  at  the  date  of  the
    decision and/or hearing.   However, it is clear to us that  this  would
    be problematic for a number of reasons.  A non-EEA national  who  meets
    the requirements of reg.10 (6) at the  date  of  divorce  and  thus  in
    theory retains a right of  residence  could  lose  this  if  unable  to
    establish economic activity on an arbitrary future date.   We  consider
    the "loss" of retained rights when considering continuity, but  suffice
    to say  for  the  hypothesis  under  consideration,  that  we  consider
    "losing" a "retained" right is not contemplated in the 2006 Regulations
    other than flowing from a decision in terms of reg. 14(5).

10.  There is support for a retained right crystallising at the date of  the
    hearing in the judgment in Boodhoo  and  another  (EEA  Regs:  relevant
    evidence)  [2013]  UKUT  00346.  However,  this   support   is   wholly
    superficial. The case concerned the admissibility of  evidence  in  EEA
    cases and decided that Section 85A of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 has no bearing on an appeal under the 2006 Regulations.
    The admissibility of evidence is not in issue in this  case.  The  case
    did not concern retention of rights of residence.  The very nature of a
    retained right of residence requires one to consider the  circumstances
    on divorce which will always be historic.

11.  We posit a scenario in which the non-EEA national is  not  economically
    active at the date of divorce and  remains  so  and  delays  making  an
    application which is then refused as a result of  economic  inactivity.
    The non-EEA national appeals and produces evidence at the hearing which
    establishes that, at that day, he or she is  economically  active.  The
    problem that arises here is that there is a significant period of  time
    from the  divorce  to  the  crystallisation  of  a  retained  right  of
    residence.  During this time the status  of  the  non-EEA  national  is
    liable to fluctuate depending on whether at any given time he or she is
    economically active. The hearing  date  then  becomes  a  lottery,  the
    outcome of which depends  on  whether  the  appellant  is  economically
    active on an arbitrary date.

12.  We  now  consider  an  alternative  hypothesis  which  is  whether  the
    requirement in reg 10(6) is to be met at the date of the divorce  (when
    the parasitic relationship between the EEA  national  and  the  non-EEA
    national ceases and the non-EEA national is given  the  opportunity  to
    retain a right of residence in her own right).  It is  obvious  in  our
    view that this would accord with  the  way  the  2006  Regulations  are
    expressed.  Indeed this appears to be  the  position  of  both  parties
    (albeit the Secretary of State's position  is  that  economic  activity
    must continue beyond the divorce for a right to be  retained).   It  is
    our view that it is at the point of divorce that a  retained  right  of
    residence crystallises.

13.  We  reject  the  Secretary  of  State's  submission  that  there  is  a
    requirement to  establish  continuity  of  economic  activity.  Such  a
    requirement is not made out in the Regulations which in accordance with
    the  Citizens  Directive,  refers  to  the  retention  of  a  right  of
    residence. The requirement for continuity could  in  many  cases  bring
    about the loss of a retained right of residence. This in  our  view  is
    contradictory and not contemplated in the 2006 Regulations.   Retention
    is about keeping possession rather than  losing  something.   We  agree
    with Mr Justice Blake in HS in relation to continuity.  At paragraph 46
    he stated as follows:

         "46. Third, it sought  evidence  of  the  appellant's  exercise  of
             Treaty rights from the date of divorce  to  the  date  of  the
             application.  If this meant evidence of continuous  employment
             we cannot see how such a requirement  is  consistent  with  EU
             law.  If the appellant obtained a retained right of  residence
             on divorce because of the duration of  his  marriage  and  his
             wife's status as a worker he  did  not  lose  it  subsequently
             because he ceased to be employed or self employed."


14.  The Secretary of State argues that unless there  is  a  requirement  of
    continuity there will be disparity between the non-EEA national and the
    EEA national. The EEA national is disadvantaged because he  or  she  is
    required to show that they are  economically  active  at  the  date  of
    decision in order to acquire a right of residence.  We  do  not  accept
    that the comparison is of any assistance. If unable to retain  a  right
    of residence on divorce, the non-EEA national's right of  residence  is
    lost and she has no right to be here under  EU  law.   Whereas  an  EEA
    national continues to have the right to move freely, albeit subject  to
    conditions, and does not forever lose a right  of  residence  following
    the inability to establish economic activity at a given time.


15.  At this point we will consider in more detail the decision in HS  which
    was produced by Ms Fijiwala at the hearing before us  on  30  September
    2015 and which is the reason for Mr Iqbal's submission that the  appeal
    must be  allowed.  Mr  Justice  Blake  at  [41]  decided  that,  having
    considered the penultimate paragraph of Article 13 (2) of the  Citizens
    Directive (..." the right of residence of the persons  concerned  shall
    remain subject to the requirement that they are able to show that  they
    are workers or self-employed persons...") which fails to  identify  who
    is the person required to be economically active (the EEA  national  or
    the spouse), decided that it is the EEA national and it  is  sufficient
    for the non-EEA national to be the former family member of a person who
    was working at the time of the divorce.  His view was that there was no
    indication in Article 13 of the Directive that the non-EEA national has
    to be economically active on their own account on  the  termination  of
    the marriage or indeed at all (providing the requirements  of  reg.  10
    (5) (a), (c) and (d) are satisfied).   The  result  of  following  this
    approach would be that the appellant in this case is  not  required  to
    show that she  is  economically  active  at  all  and  that  the  above
    discussion about reg. 10 (6) is wholly irrelevant.   The  Secretary  of
    State's position is that the  decision  is  obiter  dicta  and  decided
    incorrectly. The appellant's position, advanced in Mr Iqbal's  skeleton
    argument, is that HS stands as good law and as such  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal should be dismissed. His submission is an assertion.  It
    is insufficiently developed in  his  skeleton  argument.  There  is  no
    analysis of HS or mention of the later  court  of  appeal  decision  of
    Amos.

16.  We observe that the factual matrix in HS was different.   HS  concerned
    the revocation of a residence card.  The Tribunal found that, if indeed
    reg.10 (6) (a) is a legitimate requirement, the evidence was sufficient
    to establish that the appellant in that  case  would  satisfy  it.  The
    issue was not determinative of the appeal and the  conclusions  of  the
    Tribunal in respect of reg. 10 (6) are not part of the ratio decidendi.
    In any event, we are bound by the Court of Appeal in Amos which took  a
    different view, concluding that the penultimate paragraph of Article 13
    (2) of the Directive and reg 10 (6) (a) requires the  non-EEA  national
    to be economically active  (  see  paragraph  29  and  30  of  Amos  at
    paragraph 7 of this decision). There is no  doubt  in  our  minds  that
    Article 13(2) of the Citizens Directive deals exclusively with  a  non-
    EEA resident.  It mirrors the penultimate paragraph  of  Article  12(2)
    (see below) which concerns the retention of rights on the death of  the
    EEA national.  The requirement to show that "persons" are  economically
    active in Article 12(2) can only relate to the non-EEA resident and not
    the deceased EU citizen. It reads as follows;

              "Before acquiring the right of permanent residence, the right
of residence           of the persons concerned shall remain subject to the
requirement that they           are able to show that they are workers or
self-employed persons or that           they have sufficient resources for
themselves and their family members              not to become a burden on
the social assistance system of the host Member           State during
their period of residence and have comprehensive sickness
insurance cover in the host Member"


17.      The appellant before us asserted a retained right of residence  and
    not a right to permanent residence. There is a  need  for  the  non-EEA
    national to establish continuous economic activity (which is  reflected
    in the wording of the penultimate paragraph of paragraph 13 (2) of  the
    directive) for a period of five years in order to establish a right  to
    permanent residence (see reg 15 (f)).

18.  To summarise, we find that a non-EEA national has to establish that  he
    or she is economically active at  the  date  of  divorce  in  order  to
    qualify for a retained right of residence. There is no  requirement  to
    establish economic activity at the date of the decision or the hearing.
    There is no requirement to establish continuity of economic activity.

The Appellant's Case

19.  The appellant's evidence is that she was self employed at the  date  of
    the divorce (5 December 2014) and this continued to  the  date  of  the
    hearing (30 March 2015).  The evidence she submitted in support of this
    comprised a letter from accountants of 23 March 2014 asserting that she
    is self-employed and that her tax affairs for  2013 and 2014 are up-to-
    date. This speaks to 23 March 2014, but not beyond. There  is  a  self-
    assessment statement of March 2015 from  HM  Revenue  &  Customs.  This
    indicated that for the years 2011/2012 and 2012/2013 there was  no  tax
    due. This speaks to April 2013, but not beyond.  There is a tax  return
    relating to the appellant for the tax year 2013 to 2014. This speaks to
    April 2014, but not December 2014.  At the hearing before Judge  Oliver
    the appellant produced a book showing 97 carbon copies of invoices  for
    work she had undertaken from 11 January 2014 to 31 March  2014.   There
    was no evidence beyond March/April 2014.  All  evidence  pre-dated  the
    divorce.

20.  Judge Oliver found that the appellant's evidence  was  "unsatisfactory"
    but he went on to find "on balance that she was working at the relevant
    time such that she would be considered to have been  exercising  treaty
    rights had she been an EEA national". The judge did  not  identify  the
    relevant time. Whether the relevant date is the date of the divorce  or
    the hearing, by failing to identify it,  he  made  an  error.  This  is
    compounded by the fact that, although there was some scant evidence  of
    economic  activity,  by  any  account  it  fell   woefully   short   of
    establishing that the appellant was economically active at the date  of
    divorce or indeed the date of the hearing. The error is material and we
    set aside the decision and remake it.

21.  The appellant has failed to establish that she was economically  active
    at the date of the divorce  and  the  appeal  falls  to  be  dismissed.
    However, whether the relevant date  is  the  divorce  or  the  date  of
    hearing is not material. The appellant did not seek to  adduce  further
    evidence and relied on that before the First-tier Tribunal.  There  was
    no evidence before us that the appellant was economically active at the
    date of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal. There  was  no  evidence
    before us that she was economically  active  at  any  of  the  possibly
    relevant times. We re-make the appeal and dismiss  it  under  the  2006
    Regulations.

Notice of Decision

There is a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
and we set it aside and remake it.  The appeal is dismissed under  the  2006
Regulations.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                        Date 18 December 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
