
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35456/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th February 2016                         |On 13th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                         MR AAMIR AYUB KHAN KHAKWANI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 31st December 1989.   On
    31st November 2012 the Appellant  was  granted  a  biometric  residence
    permit which conferred leave to remain as a Tier 4  (General)  Student.
    On 7th September 2014  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  at  Terminal  4,
    Heathrow Airport issued the Appellant with Notice of Refusal  of  Leave
    to Enter on the basis that the Entry Clearance  Officer  was  satisfied
    that either false representations were employed or material facts  were
    not disclosed for the purpose of obtaining the leave or that there  had
    been such a change of circumstances since the leave was granted that it
    should be cancelled.  The reason for  this  was  that  the  Educational
    Testing Service (ETS) had  indicated  that  a  false  English  language
    certificate was obtained by the Appellant which he used as part of  his
    application for leave to remain on 30th November 2012.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  Lingam  at  Taylor  House  on  28th  July  2015.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 28th August 2015  the  Appellant's  appeal
    was allowed under the Immigration Rules and alternatively under Article
    8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

 3. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal on 11th September
    2015.  On 12th January 2016 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Holmes  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Holmes noted that it was arguable that the
    judge fell into error in  his  approach  to  the  decision  by  ETS  to
    withdraw the language test certificate and upon which the Appellant had
    relied when seeking leave to remain.  He considered that  arguably  the
    judge had treated the Respondent as  having  the  burden  of  proof  in
    establishing deception on the part of the Appellant in undertaking  the
    language test that led to the issue of that certificate.  Even  if  the
    judge was correct to do so Judge  Holmes  considered  he  was  arguably
    wrong to dismiss the Respondent's evidence in the way that he  did  and
    that the judge had failed to apply the guidance to be found in Gazi and
    had thus failed to identify  that  the  same  evidence  that  was  then
    described by McCloskey J as being "sufficient to warrant the assessment
    that the Appellant's TOEIC had been  procured  by  deception  and  thus
    provided an adequate foundation for the decision made under Section 10"
    was before him.  He thus considered that arguably any decision  by  the
    judge that the Respondent's evidence was not  sufficient  to  discharge
    any burden of proof that lay upon the Respondent was either flawed,  or
    disclosed a departure on his part from the applicable civil standard of
    proof of the balance of probabilities.

 4.  Moreover  the  judge  considered  that  the  approach  taken  in   the
    alternative to the Article  8  appeal  arguably  failed  to  apply  the
    guidance of the Supreme Court upon the proper approach  to  a  "private
    life" appeal as set out in Patel [2013] UKSC 72 and amplified in  Nazim
    [2014] UKUT 25 and that it was also arguable that the judge  failed  to
    follow the guidance on the approach to Section 117A to D to be found in
    AM (Malawi) [2015] UKUT 260.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  matter  comes  before  me  to  determine
    initially whether there is a material error of law in the  decision  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   For  the  purpose   of   continuity
    throughout the appeal process Mr Khakwani is referred to herein as  the
    Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent albeit that this
    is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  The Appellant fails to attend.
     I note that due notice has been given to him  and  to  solicitors  who
    were originally instructed to act in his behalf.  I note that there  is
    correspondence from those solicitors indicating that they have  had  no
    further instructions and wish to withdraw their representation.   I  am
    satisfied from the enclosed correspondence that Mr  Khakwani  has  been
    properly served but merely fails to attend the hearing.  The  Secretary
    of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Staunton.

Submissions / Discussions

 6. Mr Staunton relies on the Grounds of Appeal as his starting point as to
    whether there is a material error of law.  He  asks  me  to  find  that
    there is a material error of law and thereafter to go on and remake the
    decision dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal.   He  contends  that  the
    conclusion in  the  decision  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  not
    discharged her burden of proof in demonstrating that the Appellant used
    deception is entirely inadequate.   He  points  out  that  after  brief
    consideration of the Respondent's evidence to be found at paragraphs 18
    to 22 of the decision the only point taken against the documentation is
    that the database documentation is said not to be "legible at all".  He
    submits that it is unclear on what basis a computer print-out could not
    be understood nevertheless it was apparent from the determination  that
    the judge had not requested a legible copy from the Presenting  Officer
    nor was it recorded that the representative raised any issues regarding
    the documents.

 7. However he further goes on to  comment  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge did have before her extensive evidence namely the generic witness
    statements of Rebecca Collings, Peter Millington  and  Mona  Shah.   He
    submits that all are highly material to the issue of deception and that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to engage  with  their  relevance.
    He submits that the Secretary of State does not  need  to  produce  the
    software or voice recording to establish fraud.  In any event they  are
    the property of ETS and not the Secretary of State and he refers to the
    point taken by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  at  paragraph  23.   He
    submits that the standard of proof is the balance of probabilities  and
    that this was clearly discharged in this case.

 8. Further he submits that the finding that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    found the Appellant's ability  to  speak  English  detracted  from  the
    assertion that a proxy had been used is unsustainable.  He  points  out
    in the assessment that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to note
    the passage of time (more than two years), did not recognise that there
    were many reasons why an individual would use  a  proxy  and  that  the
    Appellant's ability to converse in English was  not  determinative  of,
    nor materially detracted from, the  question  of  deception.   In  such
    circumstances he submits that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  failed
    to provide adequate reasons for rejecting  the  Respondent's  evidence.
    He submits that there was a material misdirection of law in applying an
    impermissibly high standard of proof in determining the deception issue
    and that the judge has applied a standard far  more  onerous  than  the
    balance of  probabilities.   The  judge  has  failed,  he  submits,  to
    properly reason  why  the  documentary  evidence  in  itself  does  not
    discharge the requisite standard of proof and that in failing to do  so
    the judge has imposed an  elevated  standard  of  proof  rendering  the
    decision one that materially misdirects and should be set aside.

 9. Finally the Secretary  of  State  considers  that  there  are  material
    misdirections of law so far as the judge's assessment of Article  8  is
    concerned.  These are set out in detail within the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    and that the issue of deception  clearly  infects  any  proportionality
    assessment.  He asks me to find that there are material errors  of  law
    throughout the decision, to set it aside and to remake it allowing  the
    Secretary of State's appeal.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

12. This matter is  not  assisted  by  the  failure  of  the  Appellant  to
    personally attend.  I have already ruled that he has had good notice of
    this appeal.  Whilst his instructed solicitors have come off the record
    I note that the Appellant has been personally served at his last  known
    address by first-class post and I have ruled that he has been  properly
    served and consequently that his absence is therefore, I assume, of his
    own choosing.

13. I have had the opportunity of considering  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  in
    detail and of the submissions  made  by  Mr  Staunton.   I  have  heard
    nothing of course from the Appellant nor his instructed solicitors  and
    I take it that he consequently relies on the findings of the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  However as a starting point I have to  decide  whether
    or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  I am satisfied that there are several  material  errors
    of law that make the decision unsafe.  For the reasons  set  out  above
    and the submissions of Mr Staunton and  on  due  consideration  of  the
    decision in itself I am satisfied that the judge has imposed the  wrong
    standard of proof in this matter and that the burden of  proof  is  the
    balance of probabilities not the far more  onerous  burden  applied  in
    determining the deception issue.  Further I have had the opportunity to
    consider the  print-out  of  the  spreadsheet  from  ETS.   I  find  it
    extremely difficult to support the contention made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge that it is illegible.  It is clearly legible  and  there
    is no suggestion that at  any  stage  within  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision that the Appellant's instructed solicitors  challenged
    the legibility of that document.  These errors are  material  and  make
    the decision unsafe.

14. In addition I have given due  consideration  to  the  allowing  of  the
    appeal pursuant to the European Convention  of  Human  Rights.   Whilst
    acknowledging that  the  judge  has  at  paragraphs  28  and  29  given
    consideration of SS (Congo) and Others [2015] Civ 387 and whilst noting
    that  the  Tribunal  is  required  to  attach  little  weight  to   the
    Appellant's private life with reference to Section  117B  of  the  NIAA
    2002 the First-tier Tribunal Judge fails to adopt this  requirement  in
    substance.  Further I note the submission made  quite  properly  by  Mr
    Staunton and by the Secretary of State of  reliance  upon  AM  (Section
    117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) and the rational  therein  that  an
    Appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant of  leave  to  remain
    from either Section 117B(2) or (3) whatever the degree  of  fluency  of
    his English or the strength of his financial resources.  In all of such
    circumstances I am satisfied that the judge has failed to  address  the
    issues of Article 8  within  proper  reference  to  both  the  relevant
    statutory guidance and authorities and that the finding under Article 8
    contains material errors of law and is therefore set aside.

The Remaking of the Decision

15.  Whilst  I  do  not  have  the  benefit  of  the  Appellant's  personal
    attendance, which would of course have been helpful, I have the benefit
    of all the evidence that  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    including the three generic witness statements and the  print-out  from
    ETS which I find to be legible.  Those documents are in the absence  of
    contrary evidence persuasive.  In such  circumstances  I  am  satisfied
    that the Entry Clearance Officer was entitled to issue  the  Notice  of
    Refusal that he did in September 2014 and the appeal of  the  Secretary
    of State is allowed.

Decision

16. The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

