
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35855/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th December 2015                         |On 14th April 2016            |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                            Mr Abdul Wajeed salam
                          (ANONYMITY not retained)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rees, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Isherwood


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 2nd March  1989  is  a  citizen  of  India.   The
    Appellant, who was present, was represented by Mr Rees of Counsel;  the
    Respondent was represented by Miss Isherwood a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application to remain in the United Kingdom as a
    Tier 4 (General Student) Migrant and that application  was  refused  by
    the Respondent on 5th September 2014.  The Appellant had appealed  that
    decision and his appeal was heard by First-tier Immigration Judge Bart-
    Stewart.  The judge had dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules but allowed it under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. The Respondent had made  application  to  appeal  that  decision,  such
    application being made on 13th May 2015.  The matter had come before me
    to decide firstly whether or not an error of law had been  made  and  I
    heard that matter at Field House on 15th October 2015 and  for  reasons
    provided within the decision promulgated on 21st October 2015  found  a
    material error of law had been made by the judge and issued  directions
    in respect of progress of this matter to a re-hearing.

The Proceedings - Introduction

 4. The Appellant was present.  As a preliminary point  Mr  Rees  submitted
    that the discrete issue under the Immigration Rules should be  reopened
    because in his view a  mistake  of  fact  had  been  made  in  calendar
    calculation at the First-tier hearing.  Such application was opposed by
    Miss Isherwood.

 5. Mr Rees presented a bundle which turned  out  to  be  the  same  bundle
    presented at the First-tier Tribunal.   There  was  no  fresh  evidence
    provided either by the Respondent or the Appellant.

 6. The documents before me therefore consist of:

       . Respondent's bundle available at the First-tier;

       . Nasim [2014] UKUT 25;

       . Patel [2013] UKSC 72.

 7. The Appellant's documents consist of:

       . skeleton argument dated 10th December 2015;

       . Appellant's bundle at  the  First-tier  including  those  documents
         listed at folios 1 to 15 on the index sheet to that bundle.

Evidence

 8. As noted above despite  directions  having  been  issued  inviting  the
    parties to present any fresh documents they sought  to  rely  upon,  no
    further evidence has come from  the  Appellant  and  that  includes  no
    witness statement.  I heard submissions  therefore  firstly  from  Miss
    Isherwood.  She submitted that I should dismiss the claim  and  opposed
    the suggestion by Mr Rees  that  I  should  reopen  the  issue  of  the
    calendar dates which was the matter under the  Immigration  Rules.   In
    terms of Article 8 of the ECHR she referred to the fact that there  was
    a short two page witness statement from the Appellant that said  really
    nothing about his situation in the UK in terms  of  family  or  private
    life.  The information now provided was that  his  course  rather  than
    being completed in July 2015 was continuing  well  into  2016  although
    there was no evidence in respect of any progress if at all made on such
    studies and she noted that in his application form  there  had  been  a
    reference to the fact that he had not at that point started studies.  I
    was referred to the case law of Patel and Nasim.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 9. Mr Rees submitted in terms of what he said should be the start date  in
    respect of the calendar and that the error  that  was  made  should  be
    corrected.  He then referred  me  to  his  skeleton  argument  and  the
    various cases of Patel and Nasim and CDS Brazil in order to demonstrate
    that it would be proportionate to allow  the  Appellant's  claim  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

10. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to consider the documents  and
    submissions raised.  I now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

11. In this case the burden of proof lies on the Appellant and the standard
    of proof required for both immigration and human  rights  issues  is  a
    balance of probabilities.

12. In this case I have found an error of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision that allowed the appeal under Article 8  of  the  ECHR
    for reasons set out in the decision promulgated on 21st  October  2015.
    On the same day I issued directions allowing the parties  to  file  all
    documents upon which they sought to rely upon at the resumed hearing.

13. At this resumed hearing,  somewhat  surprisingly,  there  were  no  new
    documents filed on the Appellant's behalf and while Mr Rees referred to
    an Appellant's bundle, that was essentially the same  bundle  that  had
    been before the First-tier Tribunal at  the  original  appeal  hearing.
    The resumed hearing consisted of submissions from
    the parties.  In this respect Mr Rees had provided a skeleton  argument
    which for  the  most  part  sought  to  reopen  the  matter  under  the
    Immigration Rules as well as submitting briefly that the matter  should
    be allowed alternatively under Article 8 of the ECHR.

14. At the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  the  judge  had  dealt  with  the
    discrete  point  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  namely  the   correct
    calculation of calendar dates for the requisite minimum amount of money
    required in the Appellant's account.  The judge had been fully aware of
    the Appellant's argument on this sole issue  and  directly  quoted  the
    relevant assertions from the Appellant's witness statement at paragraph
    5 of his  decision.   Furthermore  the  judge  allowed  time  for  both
    representatives to check this specific fact and recorded at paragraph 6
    that Counsel on behalf of the Appellant conceded the  calculation  made
    by the Respondent was correct and in accordance with paragraph 1A(h) of
    Appendix C of the Immigration Rules.   Counsel  thereafter  had  relied
    upon Article 8 of the ECHR.

15. I find no fresh evidence  or  documentation  to  demonstrate  that  the
    agreed calculation of dates made at the First-tier Tribunal  was  wrong
    or disclosed any legal error when looking at the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and the judge had been entitled to dismiss the appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.

16. The judge had clearly had sympathy with  the  Appellant's  position  in
    what appeared a "near miss" situation under the Immigration Rules,  and
    I inferred (correctly or incorrectly) that in part it was that sympathy
    and the fact that the Appellant had claimed he was due to complete  his
    course by July 2015 that led the judge wholly or partly  to  allow  the
    appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.  I indeed expressed  some  sympathy
    for the Appellant's position in my error  of  law  finding,  given  the
    "near miss" position and I also further expressed  some  surprise  that
    this was still a live matter in autumn 2015 if indeed the Appellant was
    due to complete his course by July 2015.

17. The issue for  this  resumed  hearing  is  essentially  the  Article  8
    decision.   As  indicated  above  there  is  no  new  evidence  on  the
    Appellant's behalf.  There is an absence of any evidence concerning the
    Appellant's progress or even start of the course of study to which this
    matter relates from the Appellant's college or any other body.

18. The Appellant does not have family life in the UK and it has never been
    suggested to the contrary.  In  terms  of  private  life  the  evidence
    within the Appellant's bundle is almost silent upon this  matter.   His
    witness statement relates almost entirely to the Immigration Rule point
    referred to above.  He provided no fresh witness  statement  to  inform
    what he had been doing in the UK, his academic progress if any  or  any
    other related matters.  There were no documents from any college or any
    other source.  The scant information that came at the  hearing  through
    submissions seemed to suggest that any proposed course  would  in  fact
    been continuing until 2016 rather than the earlier date of  July  2015.
    However there was no evidence presented to show  any  progress  on  any
    course or at what stage if any the Appellant may  be  in  any  academic
    study.  Indeed the application form of the Appellant in July  2014  did
    not indicate the Appellant  had  actually  begun  a  course  of  study.
    Accordingly the only proper inference from what is  available  is  that
    the Appellant whilst hoping to study a course, has not begun  any  such
    course nor can he point to evidence to show any start or progress  upon
    any form of educational course.  There is nothing  further  within  the
    documents or referred to, that suggests any other  aspects  of  private
    life.

19. In an examination of such private life therefore I begin  with  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act.  The Appellant's status in the UK  is  precarious
    given he has only had conditional and temporary  leave  to  remain.   I
    again refer to the case of Patel [2013] UKSC 72.  The court noted  that
    one could sympathise with Sedley in   Pankina for  commonsense  in  the
    application of the Rules to graduates who had been studying in  the  UK
    for some years.  However the Supreme Court rejected Sedley's  approach.
    Furthermore it is rather more clear now, that this Appellant  does  not
    appear to fall within that class of individuals that elicited  sympathy
    from Sedley LJ.  The case of Patel also made it clear that Article 8 is
    concerned with family and private  life  and  not  education  as  such.
    Nasim [2014] UKUT 25 noted that Patel served to refocus the nature  and
    purpose of Article 8 of the ECHR and to  recognise  that  that  Article
    limited utility in private life cases that are  far  removed  from  the
    protection of a person's moral and physical  integrity.   The  Tribunal
    analysed both case law and academic writing on Article 8  of  the  ECHR
    within that case and concluded at  paragraph  21  that  the  desire  to
    undertake a period of poststudy work  in  the  UK  lies  at  the  outer
    reaches of cases requiring an affirmative answer to the second question
    in Razgar, but even if the issue of proportionality was reached it  was
    resolved decisively in favour of the Respondent.

20. The case before me, with the very limited evidence referred  to  above,
    suggests that it  is  itself  at  the  outer  reaches  of  those  cases
    themselves described as being at the outer reaches of passing even  the
    second stage test in Razgar as noted at paragraph 21 of Nasim.

21. I find that simply excluding the Appellant from beginning a  course  of
    study or continuing one for which no evidence of  progress,  attendance
    etc., has been provided does not mean  that  the  Respondent's  refusal
    under the Immigration Rules engages the second stage  test  of  Razgar.
    Given the precarious nature of the Appellant's status and circumstances
    generally   there   are   no   exceptional   circumstances   warranting
    consideration under Article 8 (SS Congo [2015]).   Accordingly  on  any
    construction of recent Superior  Court  decisions,  Article  8  is  not
    engaged in this case.  However for the avoidance of  doubt  even  if  I
    move to the fifth stage test in Razgar and examine the  proportionality
    of the decision, then  that  decision  resolves  itself  decisively  in
    favour of the Respondent.

Decision

22. I dismiss this appeal under the Immigration Rules.

    I dismiss this appeal under the Human Rights Act.

    No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

