
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35480/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th August 2015                  |On 2nd December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Liaqat Ali Khan
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Hopkin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Singer, Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  9th  April  2015  allowing  the
    appeal of the  Respondent  (hereinafter  "the  claimant")  against  the
    Secretary of State's refusal to grant him a residence card.

 2. The claimant is a national of Pakistan born on 1st May 1972. He applied
    for a residence card on the basis that he was in a durable relationship
    with an EEA national exercising Treaty rights in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The application was refused by the Secretary of State as she considered
    that insufficient evidence had been  provided  to  establish  that  the
    claimant was in a durable relationship. The judge heard  evidence  from
    the claimant  and  his  partner  and  found  that  their  evidence  was
    overwhelmingly convincing and he accepted that the claimant  was  in  a
    durable relationship with his  partner,  who  was  a  qualified  person
    pursuant to the EEA Regulations.

 3. The appeal in the circumstances was allowed outright by the judge.   We
    agree that the judge erred in doing so.  We cannot  help  wandering  if
    the experienced judge who decided the appeal would have  erred  if  the
    Secretary of State had given him the assistance that he was entitled to
    expect but she was not represented before the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. We agree and accept that the judge was constrained by law  to  allowing
    the appeal on the basis that the Secretary of State's decision was  not
    in accordance with the law. It was not suggested  before  us  that  the
    power to allow the appeal on this basis has been limited by  amendments
    to the Regulations and/or the Nationality Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

 5. It is on that very narrow and limited  basis  that  we  set  aside  the
    decision of the judge and we substitute a decision allowing the  appeal
    to the extent that the decision is not in accordance with the  law.  It
    is for the Secretary of State to decide what action to take  given  the
    First-tier Tribunal's findings.

 6. At the hearing Mr Singer has drawn to our attention in  the  claimant's
    Rule 24 response that there is an application  for  costs  for  today's
    hearing under Rule 10 paragraph 3(d) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.  It was his point  that  the  claimant  tried  to
    agree this disposal before the hearing.

 7. We have heard submissions from both  representatives  with  regards  to
    this application.  Mr Hopkin, who appears on behalf of the Secretary of
    State, asked for further time to consider that application and  respond
    to it.  We considered that the Secretary of  State  should  be  granted
    such time and as a rider to our decision we issued directions orally at
    the hearing.

 8. The Secretary of State's times for compliance was extended slightly  by
    agreement between the parties.

 9. We have seen written submissions from Mr Hopkin. It is not clear to  us
    that the claimant's Reply which should have been before Mr  Hopkin  was
    ever received by the Secretary of State.

10. There is written evidence before us that it was  returned  unopened  to
    the claimant after the hearing. We acknowledge that  the  claimant  and
    his partner have been believed in other matters but it makes  no  sense
    to us that the Secretary of State would return a  notice  unopened.  We
    are not going to be  able  to  resolve  this  issue  without  expending
    disproportionate time and  cost.  We  find  that  someone  has  made  a
    mistake. It might be that the claimant sent it to the wrong address but
    we just do not know. Whilst the claimant might reasonably  be  expected
    to have wanted to compromise the appeal we can  think  of  no  sensible
    reason why the Secretary of State would have wanted  to  frustrate  his
    attempts at all  and  especially  not  when  the  disposal  was  agreed
    quickly before us.

11. In order to assist the claimant we would have to make  a  wasted  costs
    order. We have no other power to order costs between  the  parties.  We
    understand Mr Singer's concern  that  the  claimant  has  been  put  to
    unnecessary expense. His application is for an  order  to  protect  his
    client and not to punish the Secretary of State.

12. Clearly there is no basis for a finding that the Secretary of State has
    behaved improperly. There is no malice here. At worst the Secretary  of
    State has been negligent or unreasonable. We do not regard  failing  to
    respond to an offer before the hearing  as  inherently  "negligent"  or
    "unreasonable". Negligence is not alleged and we doubt that failing  to
    respond to an offer can be seen as negligent.  We  are  not  sure  that
    there is any duty to respond in a way that differs materially from  the
    duty to be reasonable. It might have been unreasonable if the Secretary
    of State had compounded the error of  ignoring  the  notice  (something
    that has not been proved) by, for example, declining to  respond  to  a
    follow-up letter but that is not alleged here.

13. We find it regrettable that the case was not resolved until the hearing
    but, even if the Secretary of State had received the notice, we are not
    satisfied that she had shown the degree of indifference or  worse  that
    would be necessary to support a finding of unreasonable conduct.

Decision

14. We make no order for costs.

15. We allow the Secretary of State's appeal. We set aside the decision  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  substitute  a  decision  allowing   the
    claimant's appeal to the extent that we  rule  that  the  Secretary  of
    State did not make a lawful decision and  so  the  application  remains
    outstanding.


Signed   [pic]    Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

