
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/35066/2015
     ia/35068/2015
     IA/35087/2015
     ia/00117/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 April 2018                              |On 2 May 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                   MR KAH
                                   MRS EA
                                 MASTER KMH
                                 MASTER KMM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Bhuiyan, Legal Representative, Alcott
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



1.   The appellants  are  citizen  of  Bangladesh.   The  first  and  second
    appellants are husband and wife and the remaining appellants are  their
    children.  They were born respectively in 1971, 1983, 2006 and 2008.

2.   The first appellant's wife arrived as a  student  on  29  January  2011
    with leave to remain  until  June  2012.   He  leave  was  subsequently
    extended as a student until 24  February  2015.   The  first  appellant
    joined her on 7 May 2011 accompanied by the two children and they  were
    all granted leave in line with the second-named appellant.

3.   There was a further application for leave to remain  on  the  basis  of
    the first appellant's medical condition.  This application was  refused
    on 3 December 2015.  The respondent  considered  the  medical  evidence
    about the appellant's health condition.  A consultant stated  that  the
    appellant had been referred for investigation of suspected plasma  cell
    myeloma.  The appellant had a diagnosis of  lymphoplasmacytic  lymphoma
    and required close follow-up at the hospital,  attending  clinic  on  a
    four weekly basis and he was likely to require treatment in the  future
    which would require close observation and monitoring  both  during  and
    after any necessary treatment.

4.   The respondent decided that the appellant could not make out  his  case
    under Article 3 in the light of N v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2005] UKHL 31, N v United Kingdom [2008] 47 EHRR 39 and D v
    United Kingdom [1997] 24 EHRR  423.   The  respondent  considered  that
    there was adequate medical treatment  available  to  the  appellant  in
    Bangladesh and there was no evidence to suggest that moving  him  there
    would breach his Article 3 right in respect of his medical condition.

5.   It was common ground at the  First-tier  hearing  that  the  first  and
    second appellants could not meet the requirements of  leave  to  remain
    under the Immigration Rules  under  the  parent  or  child  route  (see
    paragraph 10 of the decision of the First-tier Judge).  In relation  to
    the case outside the Rules the respondent considered whether there were
    any  exceptional  circumstances,  taking  into  account  the  need   to
    safeguard the welfare of children in the light of  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  The Secretary of  State
    stated:

         "In support of your application you have raised the fact that  your
         children are aged 8 and 6 at the time of  application.   They  have
         been in the United Kingdom for 3 years.  This  has  been  carefully
         considered.  However, you would be  returning  to  Bangladesh  with
         your children and would be able to support them whilst they  became
         used to living there and enjoying their full rights as citizens  of
         Bangladesh.  Your children may be currently enrolled  in  education
         in  the  United  Kingdom  but  it  is  clear  from  the   objective
         information available that Bangladesh has a  functioning  education
         system which your children would be able to enter.   You  have  not
         provided any evidence that indicates that you would  be  unable  to
         maintain your children in Bangladesh or that you would be unable to
         provide for their safety and welfare.


         You and your children would return to Bangladesh as a  family  unit
         and continue to enjoy your family life together.  Whilst  this  may
         involve a degree of  disruption  to  your  private  life,  this  is
         considered to be proportionate to the legitimate aim of maintaining
         effective immigration control as in accordance with our Section  55
         duties.  It has been decided that the grant of  leave  outside  the
         rules is not appropriate."

6.   The respondent accordingly  refused  the  application  and  the  appeal
    against that decision came before a First-tier Judge on 12  July  2017.
    The judge reviewed the medical evidence and set out his conclusions  as
    follows:

         "12. As I understand the medical evidence the 1st appellant suffers
             from a form of bone cancer.  He has received chemotherapy  for
             his condition.  The medical evidence does not in  my  view  in
             express  terms  state  that  his  condition  has  deteriorated
             notwithstanding  the  chemotherapy.   The  1st  appellant  has
             reported  forgetfulness   and   other   symptoms   since   the
             chemotherapy  was  completed.   He  was  booked  for  skeletal
             imaging which he did not attend.  This would, I  presume  have
             shed light on his current condition and prognosis.  No reasons
             are offered as to why he failed  to  attend  his  appointment.
             His condition  does  require  monitoring  and  there  is  real
             likelihood that he would at some time in  the  future  require
             cell transplant.   Treatment  for  bone  cancer  is  generally
             within the range of expertise of  the  medical  profession  in
             Bangladesh but the facilities for such treatment  are  not  as
             sophisticated as in the UK and there are  legitimate  concerns
             as to the capacity of the medical profession in Bangladesh  to
             administer cell transplant which he may require in the future.

         13.  This is not a death bed case.  The 1st  appellant's  condition
             falls well below the Article 3 threshold in medical  treatment
             cases that has been set by the superior courts in  the  UK  in
             cases like N and D.   There  are  no  compelling  humanitarian
             considerations that could not be resisted by a civilised state
             if the 1st appellant and his family were removed.

         14.  My attention has been drawn by respondent's representative  to
             a decision on the point by the Strasbourg court in  Paposhvili
             v Belgium (Applcn No. 41738/10).  The headnote  in  that  case
             reads:

                  'that  the  'other  very  exceptional  cases'  within  the
                  meaning of the judgment in N v the  United  Kingdom  (�43)
                  which may  raise  an  issue  under  Article  3  should  be
                  understood to refer to situations involving the removal of
                  a seriously ill person in which substantial  grounds  have
                  been shown for believing that he or she, although  not  at
                  imminent risk of dying, would face a real risk, on account
                  of the absence of appropriate treatment in  the  receiving
                  country or the lack of access to such treatment, of  being
                  exposed to a serious, rapid and  irreversible  decline  in
                  his or her state of health resulting in intense  suffering
                  or to a significant reduction  in  life  expectancy.   The
                  Court points out that these  situations  correspond  to  a
                  high threshold for the application of  Article  3  of  the
                  Convention in  cases  concerning  the  removal  of  aliens
                  suffering from serious illness'.

         15.  I glean from this decision that non  'deathbed'  health  cases
             may be 'very exceptional' where there is a risk of  a  decline
             of the quality described  which  either  results  in  'intense
             suffering' or a 'significant reduction in life expectancy.  In
             addition the court made the following observations:

             (i)  It is for the  authorities  of  the  returning  state  to
                  dispel any doubts whether the care generally available  in
                  the receiving state  was  sufficient  and  appropriate  in
                  practice.

             (ii) The state must also  consider  whether  the  person  will
                  actually gain access  to  what  facilities  are  available
                  having regard to accessibility, cost, the existence  of  a
                  social and family network and distances to be travelled.

         16.  In my opinion the circumstances of this  case  do  not  engage
             Article 3.  These are my reasons:

             (i)  There is no  medical  evidence  to  show  that  death  is
                  imminent or that it would be if the appellant were removed
                  to Bangladesh.

             (ii) There is no reliable evidence to show when the  appellant
                  is likely to require cell transplant and to show that when
                  he  does,  such  treatment  would  not  be  available   in
                  Bangladesh or in  neighbouring  countries  such  as  India
                  whose advancement in medical sciences compares  favourably
                  with the UK.

         17.  I therefore find that the 1st appellant  has  failed  to  show
             that there are substantial grounds for believing that he would
             be exposed to cruel and degrading treatment if he is  returned
             to Bangladesh.

         18.  I now turn to  consider  the  appellant's  claim  outside  the
             immigration rules.  I accept that family and private life  has
             been established and that removal would interfere with Article
             8 rights.  I must first consider the  best  interests  of  the
             children.  The appellant's children, will, as at the  date  of
             this hearing, have resided in the UK  for  almost  six  years.
             There will therefore be significant disruption to their  lives
             and in particular to  their  schooling.   They  would  have  a
             measure of difficulty in adjusting to a new school system  and
             this would be exacerbated by their lack of fluency in Bengali.
              I therefore find  that  their  best  interests  would  be  in
             remaining in the UK and within the family unit.

         19.  There are strong public interest considerations to do with the
             need to maintain an effective system of immigration that weigh
             against the appellants in the assessment  of  proportionality.
             The appellants are overstayers whose leave to remain has  long
             since expired.  The economic  wellbeing  of  the  UK  is  also
             implicated because there is no credible evidence to show  that
             these appellants would not continue to be  reliant  on  public
             funds for medical services.

         20.  A further factor is that little  weight  is  to  be  given  to
             private  and  family  life  that  has  been  formed  when  the
             immigration status of the appellants was precarious.

         21.  I recognise that the medical condition of  the  1st  appellant
             will be of increased concern to  the  2nd  appellant  if  they
             return to Bangladesh.  The 1st appellant is not on  his  death
             bed and there is no clear prognosis on  when  death  would  be
             likely to occur.  This family is at the advantage that the 1st
             appellant is able to  secure  work  as  a  medical  doctor  in
             Bangladesh.  It may be the case that she would earn sufficient
             income to afford a private education for her children and that
             this would adversely affect them.  However in my opinion  this
             is a case where the best interests of the children must  yield
             to  the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective
             immigration control and in the economic wellbeing of the UK."

7.   There was an application for permission to appeal  on  the  basis  that
    the judge had misunderstood the appellant's illness as a form  of  bone
    cancer when it was in fact a bone marrow cancer.  It had been initially
    identified as plasma cell myeloma but was later diagnosed  as  multiple
    myeloma.  The disease had been identified as lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma
    (LPL) with heavy  bone  marrow  involvement.   The  judge  had  wrongly
    assessed the availability of relevant treatment in Bangladesh  and  had
    erred  in  considering  the  availability  of  such  treatment   in   a
    neighbouring country: the only relevant country was Bangladesh.     NHS
    professionals had stated that it  was  unlikely  that  there  would  be
    available treatment in Bangladesh for the  appellant's  condition.   It
    was said that the appellant was not even fit to travel.

8.   It did not necessarily have to be a death bed  case  given  the  recent
    Strasbourg jurisprudence and the  judge  had  erred  in  confining  the
    position to the "old restrictive approach" of N v UK  which  the  judge
    had "sadly followed". The best  interests  of  the  children  had  been
    inadequately considered.

9.   Permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  22
    February 2018.

10.  At the hearing before me it was acknowledged that at the  time  of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Judge and at the time when the grounds of
    appeal from that decision were drafted, the parties did  not  have  the
    benefit of the decision in AM (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ 64  which  had
    been given on 30 January 2018.

11.  It was submitted that the judge had not considered the  evidence  about
    the availability of treatment in Bangladesh and there was reference  in
    the bundle to the appellant not being fit to travel.  I was taken to  a
    letter dated 6 November 2016  where  the  consultant  stated  that  she
    "would have concerns about his fitness to travel at the current  time."
    A consultant had said there was no facility to  treat  the  appellant's
    condition in Bangladesh - there was no facility for the  proposed  cell
    transplantation.

12.  Mr Nath submitted that it was required that the Tribunal should  follow
    the case of AM.  It had not been stated that the appellant  was  unable
    to travel.  The judge had stated in paragraph 13 of his  decision  that
    it was not a death bed case and that  the  appellant's  condition  fell
    below the Article 3 threshold.

13.  The judge had correctly summarised the effect  of  Paposhvili  and  had
    not misdirected himself in referring to the  possibility  of  obtaining
    treatment in neighbouring  countries.   Treatment  could  be  available
    internationally given current medical developments.   The  case  of  AM
    confirmed that the judge's decision was correct.

14.  For the appellant it was submitted that treatment could  not  be  given
    for  the  appellant  in  Bangladesh  and  there  were   problems   with
    accessibility and cost which had not been adequately considered.

15.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered the material before me.  I remind  myself  that  I
    can only interfere with the decision of the First-tier Judge if it  was
    flawed in law.  The problem for the appellants in this case is that the
    judge was criticised for applying the old restrictive approach set  out
    in N v UK as I have mentioned above but  since  the  determination  the
    Court of Appeal has confirmed in AM that N v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department is binding authority so far as the Court of Appeal  was
    concerned "regarding the test to be applied in  domestic  law  in  this
    type of case...".  (see paragraph 30 of  the  judgment  of  Sales  LJ).
    This was common ground between the parties even  though  in  Paposhvili
    the European Court of Human Rights had "decided to clarify  or  qualify
    to some degree the test previously laid down  in  N  v  United  Kingdom
    which corresponds with that set out by  the  House  of  Lords  in  N  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department."

16.  Mr Nath submitted that the appeal was correctly decided  by  the  judge
    at the time of the decision and that it was correct in the light of AM.

17.  I do not find that the judge  materially  misdirected  himself  in  his
    consideration of the appellant's medical condition  or  in  overlooking
    relevant evidence.  The judge had in mind the interests of the children
    and the degree of disruption they would suffer.   He  referred  to  the
    public interest considerations and the precarious immigration status of
    the appellants.

18.  The judge took into account the fact that the medical condition of  the
    first appellant would be of increasing concern to his wife  on  return.
    However I  do  not  find  that  he  erred  or  misdirected  himself  in
    concluding that in the particular circumstances the best  interests  of
    the children had to yield to the public interest in the maintenance  of
    effective immigration control and in the economic wellbeing of the  UK.
    This was not a death bed case and the judge was entitled to  find  that
    the appellant could properly be returned to Bangladesh.  I  accept  the
    submissions of Mr Nath. It is not established that the appellant is not
    fit to travel. The reference in paragraph 16 (II) of  the  decision  to
    the possibility in the alternative of the appellant receiving treatment
    in a neighbouring country does not in my view indicate an error on  the
    part of the judge still less a material error in the  circumstances  of
    this case.

19.  I do not find that the judge erred in deciding as  he  did  as  at  the
    date of the hearing and his approach has been confirmed subsequently by
    the Court of Appeal in AM (Zimbabwe.)

Notice of Decision

20.  For the reasons I have given the determination of the First-tier  Judge
    was not materially flawed in law.  The  appeal  is  dismissed  and  his
    decision shall stand.

Anonymity Order

21.  In the circumstances  of  this  case  it  is  appropriate  to  make  an
    anonymity order.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Fee Award

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 30 April 2018

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
