
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/35643/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons promulgated     |
|On 4 December 2014                   |On 22  June 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Rana Muhammad  Usman
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    In person.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Adio promulgated on 26 August 2014 allowing Mr Usman's  appeal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State dated 13 August 2013  to  refuse
    to vary leave to remain and to remove him from the UK.

 2. Although before me the Secretary of State is the appellant and Mr Usman
    the respondent, for the sake of consistency with the proceedings before
    the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer  to  Mr  Usman  as  the
    Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

Background

 3. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on  28  August  1989.  The
    Appellant was granted successive periods of leave as a Tier 4 (General)
    student, initially from 14 March 2011, and more recently from 7  August
    2012 until 20 April 2014. This latter period of leave was to enable the
    Appellant to undertake a course at City of London Academy. However,  on
    20 February 2013 the Respondent received information from the  City  of
    London Academy to the effect that the  Appellant  had  ceased  studying
    there. In such circumstances the Respondent decided on 2 April 2013  to
    curtail the Appellant's leave with effect from 1 June  2013.  (This  in
    effect gave the Appellant a period in which he could seek to regularise
    his status.) On 1 June 2013 the Appellant made  a  further  application
    for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student migrant.

 4. The Appellant's application was  refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
    combined Notice of  Immigration  Decision  and  'reasons  for  refusal'
    letter dated 13 August 2013, which  also  communicated  a  decision  to
    remove him from the UK pursuant  to  section  47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006. The decision to  refuse  variation  of
    leave to remain was taken with reference to paragraph 245ZX(d)  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Essentially the Respondent was  not  satisfied  that
    the Appellant met  the  maintenance  requirements.  The  Appellant  had
    provided evidence of sponsorship by his brother, but  the  requirements
    of paragraph 13 of Appendix C of the Rules required any such  funds  if
    not held by the applicant himself or an official financial sponsor,  to
    be held by a parent (or parents), or a legal guardian (or guardians).

 5. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal to the extent that the
    Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law.

 7. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on 4 November 2014.

Consideration

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the Appellant could  not  meet
    the requirements of the Rules. Both of his parents were dead and "there
    is no satisfactory documentary evidence to show  that  the  Appellant's
    brother is now the legal guardian in law" (paragraph 8).

 9. However, the  Judge  noted  that  the  Appellant  had  been  granted  a
    variation of leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student migrant on 7
    August 2012 pursuant to an  application  which  had  also  relied  upon
    financial sponsorship from his brother. No issue had been taken at that
    time in respect of the requirements  of  paragraph  13  of  Appendix  C
    (which as Mr Whitwell acknowledged before me had come into effect on 21
    April 2011).

10. In such circumstances the Judge accepted that there was  "an  issue  of
    fairness here and the legitimate expectation created in the mind of the
    Appellant that his application will be dealt with in a similar  way  in
    which it was dealt previously", such that the Judge concluded that "the
    Respondent's decision is not in accordance with the law" (paragraph 8).
    See further at paragraph 9: "If the Respondent  wants  to  depart  from
    this [i.e. accepting financial sponsorship from the Appellant's brother
    as previously] then adequate notice  should  have  been  given  to  the
    Appellant".

11. The Respondent seeks to impugn the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    with reference to the decision in Marghia (procedural fairness)  [2014]
    UKUT 00366 (IAC), which is relied upon in support of a submission  that
    the Judge erred in determining the case on the basis  of  'substantive'
    rather than 'procedural' fairness. Further to this it has  been  argued
    that the effect of the Judge's decision was to negate the  Respondent's
    ability to set, change, and administer the Immigration Rules. In so far
    as the Appellant had any legitimate expectation it was  only  that  any
    application would be determined in accordance with the Rules and law.

12. I reject the Respondent's challenge. This is not a case where the Judge
    has essentially determined that the factual merits  fairly  required  a
    particular  outcome  -  and  had  thereby  misunderstood  or  otherwise
    misapplied the notion of 'procedural fairness'. This is exactly a  case
    where  the  Judge  determined  that  the  procedures  adopted  by   the
    Respondent were unfair in that the Respondent had changed her  approach
    to  the  Appellant  without  prior   notice   (or   indeed   subsequent
    explanation) in circumstances where there had been no  relevant  change
    of the Rules or otherwise any change in the law.  Whether  or  not  any
    particular sequence of events or circumstances  constitutes  procedural
    unfairness is a mixed question of fact and law. I  do  not  detect  any
    misdirection in law, and in my judgement it was open to  the  Judge  on
    the facts to conclude that the procedure  adopted  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant was unfair.

13. I do not find any material error of law, and accordingly  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

14. I pause to make the following observation. The Appellants' parents  are
    both dead. Moreover the Appellant is of an age where it would be absurd
    for him to have a legal guardian given that  he  does  not  lack  legal
    capacity by reason of age  or  mental  disability.  There  is  no  very
    obvious public policy justification for declining to accept genuine and
    legitimate financial sponsorship from a close relative  in  lieu  of  a
    parent. Whilst I acknowledge that Mr Whitwell did not have instructions
    on the point, I also note that nothing obvious occurred to him  by  way
    of justification. Why should a genuine student of full  age  and  legal
    capacity, and who meets all other requirements  of  the  Rules  but  is
    personally impecunious, be prevented from pursuing studies when he  has
    genuine sponsorship from a third party relative in circumstances  where
    he cannot  have  such  sponsorship  through  a  parent  because  he  is
    parentless? It is unclear whether it was just such thinking that led to
    the acceptance of the Appellant's brother as a financial  sponsor  when
    leave was granted in August 2012; however, the Respondent will no doubt
    wish to give consideration  to  such  matters  when  reconsidering  the
    Appellant's application in accordance with the law.

15.  In  this  latter  context  the  Appellant  indicated  that  since  the
    application and decision that are the subject of  the  appeal,  matters
    have moved on in respect of  his  studies.  It  was  indicated  to  the
    Appellant that he may  wish  to  seek  advice  as  to  what  additional
    information and/or variation of his earlier application  he  might  now
    wish to put to the Respondent for consideration.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained no error of law
    and stands.

17. The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

18. Mr Usman's appeal remains allowed to the extent that  the  Respondent's
    decision was not in accordance with the law.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     17 June 2015
