
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35508/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 31 March 2016                           |On 14 April 2016                 |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ELZA MARIA BALINO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr W Rees instructed by Hoole & Co, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Y J  Jones)  allowing  the  appeal  of  Elza
    Balbino (hereafter the "claimant") on Art 8 grounds.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Brazil who was born on 1 October 1956.  On
    11 March 2004, she married a Polish national in Brazil.  Most recently,
    the claimant, her husband and daughter came to the  UK  on  17  October
    2005.  The claimant was granted leave to remain in the UK as the spouse
    of an EEA national valid until 21 June 2007.  On 25 October  2007,  the
    claimant was granted a residence card as the spouse of an EEA  national
    valid until 25 October 2012.

 3. The claimant's marriage broke down due to  domestic  violence.   On  22
    October 2012, an application was made on her  behalf  for  a  permanent
    residence card based upon her marriage and residence in the UK with her
    EEA husband.  On 10 September 2013, the Secretary of State refused that
    application and  on  24  September  2013,  the  claimant  appealed  the
    decision.  On 2 April 2014, at the appeal  hearing,  the  Secretary  of
    State withdrew her original refusal  of  a  permanent  residence  card.
    Thereafter,  the  Secretary  of  State  reconsidered   the   claimant's
    application based upon a retained  right  of  residence  following  the
    claimant's divorce on 1 May 2014.  In a decision dated 24 August  2014,
    the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  claimant's  application  for  a
    permanent residence card.  The Secretary of  State  was  not  satisfied
    that the claimant met the requirements of Reg 15(1)(f)  with  reference
    to Reg 10(5).

The Appeal

 4. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Before  Judge  Jones
    the claimant argued that she was entitled to a permanent residence card
    based upon Reg 15 read with  Reg  10(5).   Judge  Jones  dismissed  the
    claimant's appeal on that ground as she  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    claimant had established five years continuous period of  residence  in
    accordance with the Regulations or that she had  a  retained  right  of
    residence as a former family member of an EEA national.  In particular,
    Judge  Jones  was  not  satisfied  that  the  claimant's  husband   was
    exercising treaty rights at the date of divorce.

 5. Before Judge Jones, the claimant also relied upon Art 8.   Judge  Jones
    concluded that she was required to consider the claimant's Art 8 ground
    by virtue of s.86 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.
    Having  considered  all  the  claimant's  circumstances,  Judge   Jones
    concluded that the  claimant's  removal  would  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with her private life in the UK and consequently a  breach
    of Art 8.

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the judge had erred  in  considering  Art  8
    since no enforcement decision had  been  taken  against  the  claimant.
    Permission was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 22 April
    2015, but on 5 June 2015 the Upper Tribunal (UTJ  Jordan)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal.

 7. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Submissions

 8. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr  Richards  submitted  that  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in Amirteymour and Others (EEA  appeals;
    human rights) [2015] UKUT 466 (IAC) held that, in  the  absence  of  an
    s.120 notice and a response raising rt 8, a Tribunal could not consider
    an individual's Art 8 claim when the decision appealed  against  was  a
    decision to refuse a residence card  under  the  EEA  Regulations.   He
    submitted that, therefore, Judge Jones had erred in law in  considering
    and thereafter allowing the claimant's appeal under Art 8.

 9.  Mr  Rees,  who  represented  the  claimant,  sought   to   distinguish
    Amirteymour on the basis that the claimant's  removal  was  "imminent".
    He referred me to para 58 of Judge Jones' determination where  she  had
    said:

         "... taking into account all the matters  above  I  find  that  the
         appellant's removal, although  not  a  subject  of  enforcement  at
         present, would be a breach of her established  private  life  under
         Article 8.  Her removal from the UK will be disproportionate."

Discussion

10. I reject Mr Rees' submissions which are inconsistent with  the  binding
    case law of the Court of Appeal and its approval of the decision of the
    Upper Tribunal in Amirteymour.

11. Even if the claimant's removal was imminent, and in the absence of  any
    removal directions there is no evidence to support such a position, the
    case  law  is  entirely  clear.   Without  a  decision  to  remove   an
    individual, the First-tier Tribunal cannot, in an  appeal  against  the
    refusal of a residence card under the EEA Regulations, consider the Art
    8 rights of the individual unless in response to a s.120 notice  Art  8
    is raised.

12. That is clear from the Upper Tribunal's decision in  Amirteymour  where
    the head note reads as follows:

         "Where no notice under Section 120 of the 2002 Act has been  served
         and where no EEA decision to remove has  been  made,  an  appellant
         cannot bring a Human Rights challenge to removal in an appeal under
         the EEA Regulations."

13. Amirteymour was approved by the Court of Appeal in  TY  (Sri  Lanka)  v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1233.  At [35], Jackson LJ (with  whom  Black  and
    Briggs LJJ agreed) said this:

         "It is impossible to say that the Secretary of State's decision  to
         withhold a residence card (a decision which is  correct  under  the
         EEA Regulations) will or could cause the UK to be in breach of  the
         Refugee Convention or ECHR.   The UK will  only  be  in  breach  of
         those Conventions if in the future the appellant makes an asylum or
         human rights  claim,  which  the  Secretary  of  State  and/or  the
         Tribunals incorrectly reject."

14. At  [36],  Jackson  LJ  specifically  approved  the  UT's  decision  in
    Amirteymour.  The Court of Appeal upheld the Upper Tribunal's  decision
    that the appellant, in an appeal under the EEA Regulations,  could  not
    raise a claim for asylum or based upon human rights (in particular  Art
    8) and the First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction  to  consider  those
    claims.

15. It does not appear that Judge Jones'  attention  was  referred  to  the
    relevant authorities.   Nevertheless, the Court of Appeal's decision is
    binding upon both the First-tier tribunal and the Upper  Tribunal  and,
    in line with the decision in Amirteymour, means that Judge Jones had no
    jurisdiction to consider the claimant's Art  8  rights  where  she  was
    considering an appeal against a refusal to grant a residence card under
    the EEA Regulations where no removal decision  had  been  made  and  no
    s.120 notice had been served on the claimant.

Decision and Disposal

16. For these reasons, therefore, the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  in
    allowing the claimant's appeal under Art 8.  It had no jurisdiction  to
    consider Art 8.  I set aside that decision.

17. Mr Rees invited me to remit the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    consider up-to-date evidence in relation to the claimant's  case  under
    the EEA Regulations.  However, the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to
    dismiss the claimant's appeal under the EEA  Regulations  and,  indeed,
    the Immigration Rules has not been challenged by the claimant either by
    seeking permission to appeal against those decisions or by raising  the
    issue in a Rule 24 Notice.

18. Therefore, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the claimant's
    appeal under the EEA Regulations and the Immigration Rules  stands  and
    there is no basis for remitting this appeal.


                                                                      Signed



                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the claimant's appeal has been dismissed on all relevant grounds, no  fee
award is payable.

                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

