

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35957/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 September 2014                          |On 19 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

                        GAYAN KAVINDA BANDARA HERATH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellants:       Ms U Bhatt (of Counsel), instructed by VMD Solicitors
Respondent:   Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The framework of this error of law appeal can be gleaned from my ruling
    and directions dated 13th July 2014, appended hereto.  The  substantive
    hearing of this appeal has now been completed.

 2. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,  judgment  was  given  ex  tempore,
    allowing the appeal for the following reasons, in summary.

 3. First, I consider that the decision  making  process  of  the  FtT  was
    unfair.  This manifested itself  in  several  respects.   There  was  a
    failure to consider the materials transmitted by fax  to  the  Tribunal
    late in the afternoon of the day preceding the hearing.   There  was  a
    kindred failure  to  appreciate  that  the  Appellant  had  a  genuine,
    objectively verifiable reason for not attending the hearing on  medical
    grounds. In consequence, the  FtT  did  not  consider  its  adjournment
    powers.  Related  to  this,  the  Judge  clearly  considered  that  the
    Appellant's non-attendance was adverse to his case: this is  explicitly
    stated in [10] of the determination.  Furthermore, the Judge failed  to
    recognise that the Appellant's solicitors had been active on his behalf
    throughout the preceding period, embracing  the  eve  of  the  hearing,
    prompting another,  factually  incorrect,  adverse  assessment  of  the
    Appellant. Finally, there was a clear failure to engage with  the  case
    made on behalf of the Appellant in the materials lodged on his  behalf,
    including the solicitors' skeleton argument. For  this  combination  of
    reasons, the fairness of  the  hearing  at  first  instance  cannot  be
    defended.

 4. Second, there is a misdirection in law in the  determination.   In  the
    impugned letter of decision, reference is made to  paragraph  245AA  of
    the Immigration Rules.  Further, this specific provision of  the  Rules
    was addressed in the solicitor's skeleton argument.  However, the  FtT,
    incorrectly,  adverted  to  what  is  described  as   "the   evidential
    flexibility policy".  There was a failure to recognise that  the  legal
    regime was contained in paragraph 245AA.  This, in turn, precipitated a
    failure on the part of the  FtT  to  review  whether  the  Respondent's
    approach to paragraph 245AA  was  in  accordance  with  the  law.   The
    question for this Tribunal is whether, if this issue had been correctly
    addressed, it might have been resolved in the Appellant's favour.   The
    threshold is not an elevated  one.   I  answer  this  question  in  the
    affirmative, having regard to the potential sustainability of the range
    of arguments formulated both in writing and in oral submissions  by  Ms
    Bhatt on behalf of the Appellant. Whether any  of  them  is  ultimately
    sustainable is not a matter for  this  Tribunal  in  an  error  of  law
    appeal. Thus I consider this error to be material.

    Decision and Directions

 5. For the reasons elaborated above, I set aside the determination of  the
    FtT.

 6. The following directions will apply:

    (a)  I remit the case  to  a  differently  constituted  FtT  for  fresh
         hearing and determination.


    (b)  The  Appellant's  solicitors  will  assemble  a  composite  bundle
         containing all of the disparate materials, in coherent and  logical
         sequence, with index and pagination.  This will be lodged with  the
         FtT and served on the Respondent within 21 days of the date hereof.

    Finally, I note what was said on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  about  an
    appropriate and convenient location for the FtT rehearing and I endorse
    this.












                                    [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                     Date: 12 September 2014
