

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: IA/35125/2014




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |              Decision & Reasons      |
|On 29th September 2015                |Promulgated                           |
|                                      |On 30th September 2015                |
|                                      |                                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               SAMER MIKHAILE
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Ward, James & Co solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Secretary of State (SSHD)  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  a
      decision by FtT Judge M P W Harris who allowed  Mr  Mikhaile's  appeal
      against a decision to refuse to issue him with a residence card  under
      the Immigration (European Economic  Are)  Regulations  2006  (the  EEA
      Regulations).


       Background


   2. Mr Mikhaile sought a residence  card  following  his  marriage  to  Ms
      Simono Borriello, an Italian citizen. The couple were interviewed by a
      representative of the SSHD. The judge had a bundle of  documents  from
      the respondent which included records of the interviews  carried  out.
      He also had documentary  evidence  from  the  couple  and  heard  oral
      evidence from them and from Ms Boriello's mother.


       Error of law


   3. The SSHD sought and was granted permission on  the  grounds  that  the
      reasons given by the judge were inadequate; he should have 'gone  into
      greater detail concerning the discrepancies identified in the  reasons
      for refusal letter and the reasons for  allowing  the  appeal  despite
      these discrepancies'.


   4. The judge in his decision records that the SSHD  did  not  attend  the
      hearing. He comments ([13]) that it would have  been  easier  had  the
      interview records been put before him in a format  which  placed  them
      alongside one another. He confirms he has read the  records  and  that
      the discrepancies itemised in the decision  letter  were  present.  He
      also records that the couple were asked over 250  questions  each  and
      that there were a  considerable  number  of  answers  which  were  not
      identified  as  being  of  concern.   The   judge   finds   that   the
      'unproblematic'  answers  are  consistent  with  the  marriage   being
      genuine.


   5. The judge further  states  that  the  problematic  answers  should  be
      weighed against the  unproblematic  ones  in  his  overall  assessment
      ([13]). He accepted that evidence of cohabitation does not  of  itself
      show a marriage to be genuine but it does support such a claim ([14]).
      In [15] the judge states that he found the evidence of Mrs Sprano  (Mr
      Mikhaile's mother in law)  credible  and  that  she  gave  significant
      corroboration that the couple lived together 'genuinely as husband and
      wife' 'having spent a month living with them  in  this  country'.   In
      [17] the judge refers to  the  oral  evidence  and  witness  statement
      evidence providing plausible explanations for the noted  discrepancies
      and found the couple to each be credible witnesses.


   6.  Although  the  judge  has  not  set  out  in  detail   exactly   what
      discrepancies  were  identified  by  the  SSHD  and  what   were   not
      discrepancies, it is plain from the decision that the judge  had  read
      and taken account of and considered the evidence before him both  oral
      and documentary. He referred in the decision to the reasons  given  by
      the SSHD for not believing that the marriage was genuine,  albeit  not
      reproducing the SSHD's decision.


   7. The SSHD relies upon Budhathoki [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) as support for
      her proposition that the judge failed to  "identify  and  resolve  key
      conflict in the evidence and explain in clear and  brief  terms  their
      reasons, so that the parties can  understand  why  they  have  won  or
      lost".  The  judge  in  an  albeit  brief  judgment   identified   the
      conflicting evidence by reference to documents submitted by the  SSHD.
      He made clear credibility findings. There can be no doubt  as  to  the
      reasons why the judge allowed the appeal and this is plainly  apparent
      from the decision.


   8. The SSHD is simply disagreeing with the outcome of the appeal.


   9. There is no error of law.


  10. There is no error of law in the decision of the FtT judge.


  11. I do not set aside the decision.


  12. The decision of the FtT stands.



                                    Date 29th September 2015
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
