

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/35080/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Promulgated on                       |
|2 October 2014                       |14 November 2014                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                JIANGUO ZHANG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Harrington, instructed by Gloucester Law
Centre.
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of China who came to the United Kingdom  as
    a Work Permit Holder and remained during the period of his work, so far
    as we know, entirely lawfully.  He was taken seriously ill.  He applied
    for leave to remain because of his medical treatment  and  was  granted
    leave to remain  from  8  December  2009  for  three  years;  that  was
    discretionary leave.  Before the conclusion of that period, indeed on 5
    November 2012, he applied for further leave to remain.  The application
    form is in the  Home  Office's  file  and  Mr  Richards  has  read  the
    important parts of the Form FLR(O) which was submitted by the appellant
    on the date we have mentioned.  The application was  in  the  following
    words:

        "I was previously  granted  discretionary  leave  for  three  years
        because  of  my  severe  illness.   I  seek  a  further  period  of
        discretionary leave."

 2. The application, made on the date that it was, was  the  subject  of  a
    response  which  treated  it  as  subject  to  the  amendments  to  the
    Immigration Rules which came into force on 9  July  2012,  and  it  was
    refused.  The appellant appealed and Judge Troup dismissed his  appeal.



 3.  The  appeal  to  this  Tribunal  is  largely  based  on  a  legitimate
    expectation which has, it is fair to say, taken a good deal of  teasing
    out but which relies on the Secretary of State's policy,  published  at
    about the time when  the  amendments  to  the  immigration  rules  were
    introduced and which relates to discretionary leave  granted  before  9
    July  2012.   The  transitional  arrangements  declared,  so   far   as
    individuals who have such leave are concerned, that those who before  9
    July 2012,

        "... had been granted leave under the DL Policy  in  force  at  the
        time will normally continue to be  dealt  with  under  that  policy
        through to settlement if they qualify  for  it  (normally  after  a
        period accruing six years continuous discretionary leave).  Further
        leave applications for those granted after three years DL before  9
        July 2012 are subject to an active review".

 4. There are other considerations  which  are  set  out  in  that  policy,
    including in particular, any evidence of  criminal  behaviour  and  any
    change of circumstances.  Although none of those matters  are  said  at
    present to apply to the appellant, we do not think it would be right to
    attempt to substitute for the decision made in the appellant's  case  a
    decision by us that the appellant is entitled to  discretionary  leave.
    What he is entitled to, however, is a decision which is made  according
    to the correct provisions and policies.  The decision which he received
    was one  which  was  based  entirely  on  the  new  immigration  rules,
    apparently in  ignorance  of  the  possibility  that  the  transitional
    provisions for those with grants of discretionary leave applied to him.



 5. Reading the application as we do, it is clear to  us  that  it  was  an
    application for the further period of three years  discretionary  leave
    which the policy envisaged and we shall therefore allow the  appeal  on
    the ground that the Secretary of State's decision  in  the  appellant's
    case was one which was not in accordance with the law.  The application
    therefore remains outstanding for the Secretary of State  to  determine
    it in accordance with the correct provisions  and  policies.   To  that
    extent therefore the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.




                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 10 November 2014
