
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35571/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th September 2014                           |On 3rd  October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               Raja Akif Ahmed
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Syed Ali, Immigration Aid


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Upson made following a hearing at Bradford on 13th May 2014.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  27th  April  1982.   He
    arrived in the UK as a student on 25th January 2011.  On  29th  October
    2012 he made an application for leave to remain in the UK on the  basis
    of his private and family life.

 3. He married his wife, a British citizen, on 14th July 2012  against  the
    wishes of both of their parents.   She  has  a  child  from  her  first
    marriage who lives with her during the week and with his British father
    every weekend.  The couple also have their own child born on 19th April
    2013.

 4. In the reasons for refusal letter the Secretary of State accepted  that
    the claimant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his British
    partner who had lived in the UK all her  life  and  was  in  employment
    here.  She had not, however, been provided with evidence of  the  birth
    of the child.

 5. It is not disputed  that  the  claimant  cannot  meet  the  maintenance
    requirements of the Immigration Rules since his wife, although she  has
    worked in the past, is on sick leave and claiming benefits.

 6. The Immigration Judge wrote as follows:

         "I  have  had  regard  to  Section  55  Borders,  Citizenship   and
         Immigration Act 2009 and the best interests of the children in this
         case.  I find that the Appellant is the father of a  British  child
         whose mother  is  also  British.   In  addition  I  find  that  the
         Appellant's wife is the mother of  another  child  who  is  also  a
         British citizen.  His father lives in the UK and I find that he has
         care of his  son  every  weekend.   I  find  that  removal  of  the
         Appellant from the UK would be to cause  the  Appellant's  wife  to
         have to make  a  decision  about  where  she  should  live.   I  am
         satisfied that she would be unlikely to  choose  to  accompany  the
         Appellant out of the UK if that would cause her to leave her  older
         son behind.  In those circumstances I find that the Appellant would
         inevitably be separated from his own son.  The  best  interests  of
         his son are better served if he has the  benefit  of  life  in  the
         company of both parents."

 7. The judge then referred to the case of Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules -
    correct approach) [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC)  and  the  requirement,  for
    Article 8 purposes,  to  consider  whether  there  were  arguably  good
    grounds for granting leave to remain outside the Rules  if  there  were
    compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised  under  them.   He
    wrote:

         "I am satisfied that the existence of the children amount  to  such
         circumstances."

 8. The judge then set out the test outlined in Razgar and  on  that  basis
    allowed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had allowed the appeal on the basis  that  the  claimant  had
    children who were British citizens which justified a departure from the
    Immigration Rules.  The judge had given inadequate reasons  as  to  why
    simply  having  children  amounts  to  good  grounds   and   compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them.

10. Permission to appeal was granted for the reasons set out in the grounds
    by Judge Cruthers on 8th July 2014.

Submissions

11. Mrs Pettersen relied on her grounds and submitted that  the  judge  had
    failed to consider the Secretary of  State's  interest  in  maintaining
    immigration control and the possibility  of  the  claimant  making  the
    correct application for entry clearance in the normal way.

12. Mr Ali submitted that there was no error in  this  determination.   The
    judge was entitled to consider that this was an appropriate case  which
    should be allowed outside the Rules.   The  claimant  and  sponsor  had
    custody of both children but the first child could not be taken outside
    the jurisdiction because  he  resided  with  his  natural  father  each
    weekend.

Findings and Conclusions

13. The reasoning in this judgment is a little  compressed  which  made  it
    vulnerable to appeal.  Had the judge set out his reasoning more clearly
    it is unlikely that permission to appeal  would  have  been  sought  or
    granted. Nevertheless the phrase in the grounds

         "inadequate reasons as to why simply  having  children  amounts  to
         arguably good grounds"

    is not a proper reflection of the facts of this case.

14. This is not a matter of choice. The  claimant  and  sponsor  could  not
    relocate to Pakistan if they wished to do so. Whilst the  second  child
    could accompany the claimant and his wife back to  Pakistan  either  to
    live with him  there  or  whilst  he  made  an  application  for  entry
    clearance, the first child simply could not do so.  He  lives  part  of
    the week with his British father and his consent would be  required  to
    remove him from the jurisdiction.  The  facts  of  this  case  are  far
    removed from the facts in Gulshan.

15. Mrs Pettersen sought to argue that the judge had not  properly  weighed
    in the  balance  the  Secretary  of  State's  interest  in  maintaining
    immigration control and the  claimant's  ability  to  apply  for  entry
    clearance but this is not the basis upon which leave was sought. In any
    event, although it is an argument in favour of the Secretary of  State,
    it was clearly not one which found favour with the judge.  At  the  end
    of the day the assessment of proportionality is a matter for him.

Decision

16. The judge did not err in law and his decision stands.   The  claimant's
    appeal is allowed.

Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

