
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/35697/2014
                                                               IA/35695/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26th August 2015                  |On 15th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mr AMIN RAMSA
                                                            First Respondent
                             And Mrs RAMZI BASMA
                                                           Second Respondent
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Burrett, instructed by Cardinal Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     This is an appeal brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
    decision of the First tier Tribunal  (Judge  Adio)  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross on 8 April 2015. In this decision, I shall refer to  the  parties
    as they were in the First tier, i.e. that Mr Amin Basma  is  the  First
    Appellant, Mrs Ramsie Basma is the Second Appellant, and the  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department is the Respondent.

2     Judge Adio had allowed the  Appellants'  appeals  against  immigration
    decisions taken by the Respondent on 18th August 2014. Those  decisions
    purported to be decisions to refuse to vary the  Appellants'  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, together with a decision under section 47
    Immigration and Nationality and Asylum  Act  2006  to  remove  them  to
    Lebanon. I will return to the nature of those decisions, below.

    Background

3     The Appellants were born in  Sierra  Leone  on  3  March  1951  on  18
    January 1958 respectively. This was at the  time  before  Sierra  Leone
    gained  independence.  They  possess,  respectively,  British  Overseas
    Citizenship ('BOC'), and British Protected Person's ('BPP') status.  It
    is common ground that neither form of citizenship  grants  a  right  of
    abode in the United Kingdom. Both are of Lebanese descent, each  having
    a father of Lebanese nationality.

4     Their immigration history is that in 1999 they left Sierra Leone  when
    civil war broke out. They travelled to the  United  States  of  America
    where they engaged in business, but ultimately  having  to  leave  that
    country in 2010, not having proper permission to remain there.

5     They travelled to the United Kingdom  in  October  2010.  They  allege
    that they were admitted to the United  Kingdom  without  any  condition
    being endorsed  onto  their  passports.  The  Appellants  travelled  to
    Lebanon in 2011, and again 2012 to visit the first  Appellant's  father
    when he was ill.

6     Upon  returning  to  the  United  Kingdom  on  5th  October  2012,  an
    Immigration Officer queried  their  entitlement  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom and allowed them to  enter  the  country  only  with  temporary
    admission, granted on 5th October 2012, valid until 19th October  2012.
    That temporary admission was later extended on 30th November  2013  and
    then again until 28th of  February  2014.   On  25  February  2014  the
    Appellants applied for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  outside  of  the
    immigration rules.

7     In her  decision  dated  18th  August  2014  the  Secretary  of  State
    considered their entitlement for leave to remain under the  immigration
    rules and decided that neither satisfied any relevant rule. It was also
    recorded that in 2005 the Appellants had been refused to be  registered
    as British citizens when they made an application for the  same  whilst
    resident in the United States. The reason for such refusal was  on  the
    basis that as either a British Overseas Citizen or a British  Protected
    Person,  they  would  need  to  demonstrate  that  they  had  no  other
    nationality in  order  to  be  registered  as  British  citizens.   The
    Secretary of State had asserted in 2005 that both had or were  entitled
    to Lebanese nationality through their respective fathers.

8     On 18th August  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  made  an  immigration
    decision refusing to vary their leave, and making the section  47  2006
    Act removal decisions.

9     The Appellants appealed against those decisions,  the  appeals  coming
    before Judge Adio on 8th April 2015. The Appellants asserted that  they
    did not hold Lebanese nationality and referred to a variety  of  health
    problems  which  they  experienced.  The  Judge   considered   evidence
    regarding the Appellants' possible entitlement to Lebanese citizenship.



10    The Judge directed himself as to the relevant issue in the  appeal  by
    stating:

         "... the issue of whether  the  Appellants'  human  rights  can  be
         considered has to be linked with whether they can also  be  removed
         from the United Kingdom."

11    The Judge found that  the  fact  that  the  Appellants  had  possessed
    Lebanese identity  cards  did  not  necessarily  mean  that  they  were
    entitled to Lebanese citizenship, and held that:

         ".. the Secretary of State has not provided enough grounds to  show
         that it was lawful to return the Appellants to Lebanon,  a  country
         in which they have never lived and where it is not conclusive  that
         they have Lebanese citizenship.' (Para 18).

12    Further, at para 19:

         "... I have no conclusive evidence before me that either  Appellant
         is a Lebanese citizen and therefore the decision of the  Respondent
         to remove them to Lebanon is unlawful. Any findings with regards to
         an Article 8 claim will be academic as this cannot  be  related  to
         any particular country as the Appellants cannot be removed  to  any
         country."

13    The appeal was allowed, in the  section  'Notice  of  decision'  after
    para 19 on the grounds  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

14    In grounds of appeal dated 7th May 2015  the  Respondent  argued  that
    the Judge had erred in law in allowing the appeal on the basis that  he
    had purported to find that the proposed destination of Lebanon was  not
    one to which the Respondent could return the Appellants, on the  ground
    that there was no conclusive evidence that they were Lebanese citizens.
    She referred to paras 60 and 61 of  KF  Iran  [2005]  UKIAT  00109.  By
    considering whether or not the proposed removal destination was one  to
    which the Respondent could  return  the  Appellants,  this  was  not  a
    material issue on which a ground of appeal arose before the Tribunal.

15    The Respondent also argued that appearing to  require  the  Respondent
    to provide conclusive evidence that the Appellants were  Lebanese,  the
    Judge reversed the burden of proof onto the Respondent, and  failed  to
    direct himself in law that it was for the Appellant to demonstrate that
    the decision to remove them to Lebanon was unlawful.

16    Permission was granted by Judge of the First tier  Tribunal  Nicholson
    on 30.6.15, agreeing that the  point  raised  was  arguable,  and  also
    referring to MS (Palestinian Territories) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 25.

    The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

    The nature of the immigration decisions in the present appeal

17    When the appeal came before me I raised with  the  representatives  an
    issue regarding the validity of  the  notice  of  immigration  decision
    dated 18th August 2014.  Mr Kandola had in  fact  identified  the  same
    issue.

18    It seems to me whatever immigration decision should  have  been  taken
    in this matter, it was not  a  refusal  to  vary  leave.  There  is  no
    satisfactory evidence that the Appellants have ever had leave to  enter
    or remain in the United Kingdom. Rather, when they last sought entry on
    5.10.12, they were granted  temporary  admission  and  that  was  later
    extended. However, temporary admission is not leave to enter or remain,
    and therefore when they applied on 25.2.14  for  ILR,  they  cannot  be
    treated as having made applications to vary their leave  to  remain.  A
    refusal of that application should not have resulted in  a  refusal  to
    vary leave.

19    The decisions under appeal  therefore  appear  to  have  made  not  in
    accordance with the law.

20    However, this is an appeal which by transitional provisions  continues
    to be governed by Part 5 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 ('NIAA 2002') in its form prior to amendment  by  the  Immigration
    Act 2014. Sections 86(3) and (4)  NIAA 2002 provide that:

         "(3) The Tribunal must allow the appeal in so far as it thinks that-



         (a)      a decision against which  the  appeal  is  brought  or  is
         treated as being  brought  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law
         (including immigration rules), or ...

         (b)      ...

         (4) For the purposes of subsection (3) a  decision  that  a  person
         should be removed from the United Kingdom under a  provision  shall
         not be regarded as unlawful if it could have been lawfully made  by
         reference to removal under another provision."

21    It seems to me that the Appellant's application for  indefinite  leave
    to remain, given that they had not entered the UK  illegally,  nor  had
    they been granted leave to enter or remain, should have been treated as
    an application for indefinite leave to enter. The Respondent could,  if
    minded to refuse that application, have refused the Appellants leave to
    enter; an immigration decision under s.82(2)(a) NIAA 2002, which, given
    that the Appellants' application raised human rights issues, would have
    attracted an in-country right of appeal  under  s.92(4)(a)  NIAA  2002.
    Therefore the Respondent's erroneous decision to refuse to vary  leave,
    and to make a removal decision under s.47 of the 2006  Act,  would  not
    have resulted in the appeal being allowed by the FtT, if the issue  had
    been identified, as the Respondent could have  used  her  powers  under
    para 8, Schedule 2 of the Immigration Act 1971 to remove the Appellants
    consequent to a refusal of leave to enter.

22    The issue of the erroneous decision of  the  Respondent  is  therefore
    academic, but it  is  appropriate  to  acknowledge  the  point  and  to
    identify why the error was academic. After  discussion  of  the  issue,
    both parties agreed with my analysis.

23    I therefore then proceeded  to  consider  the  grounds  of  appeal  as
    relied upon by the Respondent Secretary of State.

24    At this juncture, Mr Burrett, for the Appellants,  accepted  that  the
    Judge had materially erred in law.

25    I agree.

    Discussion

26    Whether the relevant  immigration  decisions  were  refusals  to  vary
    leave such the Appellants had  no  leave  to  remain  (s.82(2)(d)  NIAA
    2002),  or decisions to refuse leave to enter (s.82(2)(a)  NIAA  2002),
    the relevant grounds of appeal on which the Appellants were entitled to
    rely in either case would be:

    * that the decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  immigration  rules
         (s.84(1)(a) NIAA 2002);

    * that the decision  is  otherwise  not  in  accordance  with  the  law
         (s.84(1)() NIAA 2002); or

    * that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom in  consequence
         of the immigration  decision  would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's
         obligations under the Refugee Convention or would be unlawful under
         section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 as being  incompatible  with
         the appellant's  (ECHR) Convention Rights (s.84(1)(g) NIAA 2002).

27    It has long since been acknowledged that the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction
    is to determine the potential human rights considerations arising  from
    the appellant's hypothetical  removal;  the  practical  possibility  of
    removal and successful entry into the proposed removal destination  are
    not  matters  for  consideration  by  the  Tribunal  in  its  appellate
    jurisdiction: see the following cases:

    * KF Iran [2005] UKIAT 000109 [paras 60-61 (as specifically  relied  on
         by the Respondent in the grounds of appeal:

             "60. Section 84 does not permit an appeal on the grounds  that
             the proposed destination is outside  Schedule  2.  Removal  in
             consequence of the immigration decision may or may not  breach
             the ECHR or Refugee Convention  but  that  does  not  turn  on
             whether the  country  of  proposed  destination  falls  within
             Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act.

             61. This conclusion is not affected by section  84(2)(e);  the
             same question arises as to the content of the  "decision"  and
             whether it includes the  specified  destination  country.  The
             "decision" does not include the country of destination."

    * JM (Liberia) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1402, paras 25-29;

    * MS (Palestinian Territories) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 25 para 40:

             "There is no right of appeal against an  immigration  decision
             under section 82(2)(h) on  the  ground  that  the  country  or
             territory stated in the notice of the decision is not one that
             would satisfy the requirements of para 8(1)(c) of  Schedule  2
             to the 1971 Act."

28    The one caveat to that proposition is when  a  decision  to  remove  a
    person from the United Kingdom will take place by a  known  route,  and
    there is an argument that the journey itself would give rise to a  real
    risk of serious harm: see HH (Somalia) & Ors v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 426:

         "84.     In conclusion, our provisional view is that the Directives
         read together require that the issues of safety during  return  (as
         opposed to technical obstacles to return) should be  considered  as
         part of the decision on entitlement. Only  technical  obstacles  of
         the kind we have sought to identify may legitimately be deferred to
         the point at which removal directions are being made or considered.
         We are aware that the entitlements which appear to  follow  may  be
         considered an unintended consequence of the Directives;  but  this,
         as we have said, is an issue for another day. Our provisional view,
         in the light of the Directive, is that if there is a real issue  on
         safety on return the Secretary of State must engage with it in  his
         decision on entitlement to protection, and his  conclusion  can  be
         the subject of appeal. In any case in which the Home Secretary  did
         not deal with safety during return (because  he  did  not  consider
         that any issue arose) but  where  the  appellant  raises  a  cogent
         argument that there might not be a safe route of return, the appeal
         tribunal would have to deal with that issue, possibly after calling
         for information from the Home Secretary as to  his  intentions.  In
         any  event,  as  it  seems  to  us  at  present,  the  decision  on
         entitlement must be taken within a reasonable time  and  cannot  be
         left until the Home Secretary is in a position to set safe  removal
         directions.

         ...

         122.     It has been sufficient for the purposes of  resolving  the
         issues before us to confirm, as this court  has  said  on  previous
         occasions (albeit only obiter) that where the route and  manner  of
         return are known or can be implied, the first  tier  tribunal  must
         consider whether the applicant would be put at risk if returned  by
         that route. We have not found it necessary  to  resolve  the  wider
         question whether that tribunal must always consider  that  question
         whenever the applicant  puts  it  in  issue,  although  our  strong
         provisional view is that  it  must.  If  that  is  right,  it  will
         inevitably have  important  consequences  for  the  status  of  the
         applicant pending directions finally being  issued  to  secure  his
         removal or deportation. We have not had directly  to  address  that
         issue but it is bound to arise in the near future.  Conceivably  it
         might require a reference to the ECJ in due course, but that is not
         necessary in this case and no-one has suggested it."

29    However, it was not part  of  the  Appellants'  case  in  the  present
    appeal that any proposed route of return would give  rise  to  risk  of
    harm.

30    Further, there is  no  burden  on  the  Respondent  to  establish  any
    individual's nationality. The burden in the present  case  remained  on
    the Appellants to establish that  their  proposed  removal  to  Lebanon
    would be contrary to the immigration rules, not in accordance with  the
    law (ignoring, for that purpose, para 8, Schedule 2 of the  Immigration
    Act 1971), or whether removal there would be in breach of  the  Refugee
    or ECHR conventions.

31    The Judge  thus  misdirected  himself  in  law  as  to  the  statutory
    function of the First tier Tribunal. This was a material error of law.

32    As  a  result,  no  findings  of  fact  have  been  made  as  to  what
    circumstances the Appellants may encounter upon their proposed  removal
    to Lebanon. Mr Burrett, for the Appellants, clarified that  one  ground
    for resisting removal to Lebanon would be that such  removal  would  be
    contrary to para  276ADE  of  the  immigration  rules:  the  Appellants
    contend that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  their
    integration into the country to which they would have to go if required
    to leave the UK.  They have a variety of health problems,  and  receive
    disability benefits here in the UK.   Aside  from  a  few  weeks  on  2
    separate visits, their evidence  is  that  they  have  never  lived  in
    Lebanon. No findings have made in relation to any of those  matters  or
    as to the extent of any family support within Lebanon; both  Appellants
    have relatives there.

33    Both parties were of  the  view  that  the  matter  was  suitable  for
    remittal to the First tier Tribunal. I agree: para 7.2 of the  Practice
    Statement dated 13.11.14 provides that the Upper Tribunal is likely  on
    when setting aside a First tier  decision  to  proceed  to  remake  the
    decision, instead of remitting the case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:-.

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case  to  be  put  to  and  considered  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal; or

         (b) the nature or extent of any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2,  it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

    I am satisfied that both of those  conditions  apply;  the  Appellants'
    real case was never considered by the  First  tier,  and  all  relevant
    facts will have to be found.

34    One issue which may need to be determined at any remitted  hearing  is
    whether the Appellants actually possess Lebanese  nationality.  I  note
    that the Appellants have not applied for a certificate  of  entitlement
    to a right of abode in the UK, and have not sought to rely upon Part 14
    of the Immigration Rules relating to statelessness. Further, as we have
    seen, it is not necessary to determine the Appellants' nationality  for
    the purposes of considering whether they may be  admitted  to  Lebanon,
    became that issue is not relevant to the appeal.

35    However, on the hypothetical assumption that they will be admitted  to
    Lebanon, whether they  possess  Lebanese  nationality  may  affect  the
    quality and security of their residence  there,  their  entitlement  to
    assistance etc. I do not rule that such a finding must be made: I leave
    it to the First tier Tribunal and the parties to determine whether such
    a finding is actually required. However,  proper  translations  of  the
    Lebanese identity  cards  within  the  Respondent's  bundle  should  be
    obtained prior to the remitted hearing.

    Decision

36    I find that the making of the First tier decision involved the  making
    of a material error of law.

    I set aside the First tier decision.

    I allow the Respondent's appeal  to  the  extent  that  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First tier Tribunal for a complete  re-hearing  of  the
    appeal, by a Judge other than Judge Adio.





    Directions on remittal

      i) All witness or other evidence to be relied on by the Appellants  to
         be filed and served, in a consolidated bundle, 5  days  before  the
         remitted hearing before the First tier Tribunal.

     ii) Both parties to file and serve skeleton arguments 5 days before the
         remitted hearing, setting out clearly the  legal  arguments  to  be
         advanced in the appeals.

    iii) ELH next hearing: 3  hours;  no  interpreter.  (None  specified  on
         original form IAFT1. If any required, Appellants to notify Tribunal
         as soon as possible.)


Signed:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan      Date: 14.9.14

