
[pic]
IAC-hw-mp-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/35220/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 August 2015                     |On  20 August 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MRS OLAVINE PETA-GAY CAMPBELL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Khan, Counsel, instructed by Ashgar & Co,
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Amin, promulgated on 23 March 2015, in  which
    she allowed  the  respondent's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary  of  State  not  to  issue  her  with  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a derived right of residence pursuant to Regulation 15A
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the  EEA
    Regulations").

 2. The respondent arrived in the United Kingdom on 26 May 2000 with a  six
    month visitor's visa.  She has not returned to Jamaica since.  In  2007
    she   met  her  partner,  Michael  Broomfield,   and   they   began   a
    relationship.  On 8 September 2008 she gave birth to the couple's child
    who is a British citizen.  The child has a number of  medical  problems
    including obesity, acanthosis, insulin insensitivity and sleep  apnoea.
    He is also diabetic and in addition to the  physical  difficulties  has
    Special Educational Needs in respect of which there is a  Statement  of
    Educational Needs in place.  He attends mainstream school but  requires
    a considerable degree of intervention.

 3. The child goes to  see  a  psychologist  at  the  Great  Ormond  Street
    Hospital every two weeks; he also has other consultant's  appointments;
    he also needs help going to and from school and requires a considerable
    degree of care at home, particularly at  night  time.   The  respondent
    does not work and is the child's primary carer.   Mr  Bloomfield  works
    full-time.

 4. The Secretary of State's case as set out in the refusal letter  and  in
    the submissions made to the First-tier Tribunal is that no evidence had
    been provided to show as to why Mr Broomfield was not in a position  to
    care for the child if she were to leave from  the  United  Kingdom  and
    that no reason  had  been  offered  as  to  why  he  could  not  assume
    responsibility for him.  She concluded that it had not been shown  that
    the respondent's removal from the United Kingdom would force the  child
    to leave the EU.  For that reason she concluded that  the  requirements
    of Regulation 15A (4A) (a), (c) and Regulation 15A  (7)(b)(i)  had  not
    been met and thus no derivative residence card was to be issued.

 5. On appeal First-tier Tribunal Judge Amin found:-

      i) that the respondent has primary responsibility for the child  which
         is not shared with the father and that  there  is  no  dispute  the
         child suffers from a number of ailments as described [31];

     ii) that the respondent takes care  of  the  child's  daily  emotional,
         physical and medical needs [32] and it  is  not  feasible  for  the
         father to do so [33];

    iii) that the removal of the respondent would  have  a  significant  and
         substantial impact on the child who would not be there to accompany
         him to hospital appointments, take him to and from  school,  assist
         with medication and sleep patterns or provide the strong  emotional
         and caring support that is currently provided [35];

     iv) that there is no alternative care available to  the  child  as  the
         father would have to leave his job with no one  to  take  over  the
         child if the mother were to be removed [36]; that this would have a
         dramatic impact on the family life and  the  child  would  need  to
         adjust to his father taking care of  him  in  the  absence  of  the
         mother [36] and that the quality of the child's life would thus  be
         seriously impaired and he would be deprived of emotional support;

      v) the respondent has shown that she has  primary  responsibility  for
         the child and therefore qualifies for a derivative residence card.

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-



      i) the judge had erred in her approach to Regulation 15(4A)(c)  as  to
         the fact that the father had not had as much involvement  with  the
         child's day-to-day care did not mean he would be unable  to  assume
         that and that an disinclination or reluctance on the  part  of  the
         child's father was not enough to satisfy the  requirements  of  the
         Regulations [2];

     ii) applying MA and SM (Zambrano: EU children outside EU)  Iran  [2013]
         UKUT 380 there is insufficient evidence  to  show  that  the  child
         would be unable to remain in the United Kingdom if  the  respondent
         were required to leave as he lives with his British citizen  father
         who would be able to assume caring responsibilities [4, 5];

    iii) the fact that the mother may decide to take the child with her  was
         a separate consideration and did not lead to  the  conclusion  that
         the child would be forced to leave the UK.

 7. On 3 June 2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Foudy  granted  permission
    stating:-

         "(ii)    The grounds argue that the judge had erred in his approach
             to Zambrano and his assessment of whether the relevant British
             child would have to leave the UK if the appeal of  his  mother
             failed.  The grounds also  argue  that  the  judge  failed  to
             attach sufficient weight to the  public  interest  factors  in
             reaching his decision.

         (iii)    it is not clear what factors weighed in the  judge's  mind
             when he decided that there were exceptional  features  in  the
             appellant's case to justify allowing the appeal.  This lack of
             reasoning is an arguable error of law."

Submissions

 8. Miss Holmes submitted that the judge had erred in allowing  the  appeal
    given that the father was clearly capable of looking  after  the  child
    and thus was distinguishable from the fathers in MA and SM.   She  drew
    particular attention to paragraph 73.

 9. Mr Khan submitted that the judge had not erred  in  law  and  had  been
    entitled to reach a finding of fact that the mother in  this  case  was
    the primary carer.  He sought to rely in particular on the decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in Hines v London Borough of  Lambeth  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 660, particularly at [23].  He submitted that in the  circumstances
    the judge had been entitled to conclude that the mother was  a  primary
    carer and had concluded given the impact on the child that his  quality
    of life was so impaired  that  he  was  effectively  being  forced  and
    compelled to leave the United Kingdom.  He submitted she  was  entitled
    to take into account the impact on the  child  given  the  decision  in
    Hines.  Mr Khan submitted further that this case could be distinguished
    from those in which the support was purely financial and thus  did  not
    fall within the exceptions referred to in Hines at [24].

10. In reply, Miss Holmes submitted that there was insufficient evidence to
    show that the relevant high threshold had been met.

11. Mr Khan accepted that were I to find an error of law then  the  correct
    course of action would be to re-make the appeal by dismissing it, there
    being no alternative action.

12. I reserved my decision.

    The law

14. Regulations 15A of the EEA Regulations provides, so far as is  relevant
    to the facts of this case:

         15A. Derivative Right of Residence

         A person ("P") who is not an exempt person and  who  satisfies  the
         criteria in (2), (3),  (4)  (4A)  or  (5)  of  this  regulation  is
         entitled to a derivative right to reside in the United Kingdom  for
         as long as P satisfied the relevant criteria.

         (4) ...

         (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -

         P is the primary carer of a British citizen ("the relevant  British
         citizen");

         The relevant British Citizen is residing  in  the  United  Kingdom;
         and,

         The relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in the UK or
         in another EEA state of P were required to leave.

         (5) ...

         (7) P is to be regarded as a "primary carer" of another person if

             (a) P is a direct relative or a legal guardian of that person;
             and

             (b) P-

                  (i) is the person who has primary responsibility for  that
                  person's care; or

                  (ii) shares equally the responsibility for  that  person's
                  care with one other person

         who is not an exempt person.

         (7A) Where P is to be regarded as a primary carer of another person
         by virtue  of  paragraph  (7)(b)(ii)  the  criteria  in  paragraphs
         (2)(b)(iii), (4)(b) and (4A)(c) shall be considered  on  the  basis
         that both P and the person with whom care responsibility is  shared
         would be required to leave the United Kingdom.

         (7B) Paragraph (7A) does not apply if the  person  with  whom  care
         responsibility is shared acquired a derivative right to  reside  in
         the United Kingdom as a  result  of  this  regulation  prior  to  P
         assuming equal care responsibility.

         (8) P will not be regarded as having responsibility for a  person's
         care for the purpose of paragraph  (7)  on  the  sole  basis  of  a
         financial contribution towards that person's care.

         (9) A person who otherwise satisfies the criteria in paragraph (2),
         (3), (4), (4A) or (5) will not be entitled to a derivative right to
         reside in the United Kingdom where the Secretary of State has  made
         a decision under

             (a) regulation 19(3)(b), 20(1) or 20A(1); or

             (b) regulation 21B(2), where that decision was taken in the
             preceding twelve months.

15. Regulation 15A(4A) was inserted to comply with  the  CJEU's  ruling  in
    Ruiz Zambrano v ONEM [2012] EUECJ C-34-09  where CJEU held:

         i) Article 20 of the TFEU "precludes national measures  which  have
         the effect of depriving citizens  of  the  European  Union  of  the
         genuine enjoyment of the  substance  of  the  rights  conferred  by
         virtue  of  their  status  as  citizens  of  the  European   Union"
         (paragraph 42); and

         ii) A refusal to grant a right of  residence  to  a  third  country
         national with dependent minor children in the  member  state  where
         those  children  are  nationals  and  reside  has  such  an  effect
         (paragraph 43), because "[i]t must be assumed that such  a  refusal
         would lead to a situation where those  children,  citizens  of  the
         European Union, would have to leave the territory of  the  European
         Union in order to accompany their parents".

16. The CJEU considered the matter again in Murat  Dereci  [2011]  CJEU  C-
    256/11 the Court clarifying that denial of the genuine enjoyment of the
    substance of EU citizenship rights corresponded to  the  situation  'in
    which the Union citizen has, in fact, to leave not only  the  territory
    of the Member State of which he is a national but also the territory of
    the Union as a whole', a situation described as exceptional.  The Court
    did not expand on what circumstances might  oblige  an  EU  citizen  to
    leave the territory of the European Union, though it held [68] that:

         "... the mere fact that it might appear desirable to a national  of
         a Member State, for economic reasons or in order to keep his family
         together in the territory of the Union' for residence rights to  be
         granted was insufficient in  itself  to  conclude  that  denial  of
         residence would cause such departure ..."

17. The scope of the principle in Zambrano was considered in detail by  the
    Court of Appeal in Harrison v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1736 where Elias  LJ
    (with whom Ward and Pitchford LJJ agreed) held [63] that  the  Zambrano
    principle would not apply except where the EU  citizen  is  effectively
    forced to leave the territory of the EU.

18. I am assisted by Hickinbottom J's distillation in R (ota Sanneh) v  DWP
    and HMRC [2013] EWHC 793 (Admin) of the relevant  principles  extracted
    from the cases referred to  above.  He  summarised  the  principles  as
    follows [19]:-

         i) All nationals of all member states are EU citizens.  It  is  for
         each member state to determine how nationality of that state may be
         acquired,  but,  once  it  is  acquired  by  an  individual,   that
         individual has the right to enjoy the substance of the rights  that
         attach to the status of EU citizen, including the right  to  reside
         in the territory  of  the  EU.  That  applies  equally  to  minors,
         irrespective of the nationality of their parents, and  irrespective
         of whether one or both parents have EU citizenship.

         ii) An EU citizen must have the  freedom  to  enjoy  the  right  to
         reside in the EU, genuinely and in  practice.  For  a  minor,  that
         freedom may be jeopardised if, although legally entitled to  reside
         in the EU, he  is  compelled  to  leave  EU  territory  because  an
         ascendant relative upon whom he is dependent is compelled to leave.
         That relative may be compelled to leave by  dint  of  direct  state
         action (e.g. he is the subject of  an  order  for  removal)  or  by
         virtue of being driven to leave and reside in a non-EU  country  by
         force of economic necessity (e.g. by having insufficient  resources
         to provide for his EU child(ren) because the state  refuses  him  a
         work permit). The rights of an EU child will not be infringed if he
         is not compelled to leave. Therefore, even where a non-EU ascendant
         relative is compelled to leave EU territory, the article 20  rights
         of an EU child will not be infringed if there is another  ascendant
         relative who has the right of residence in the EU, and who can  and
         will in practice care for the child.

         iii) It is for the national courts to determine, as a  question  of
         fact on the evidence before it, whether  an  EU  citizen  would  be
         compelled to leave the EU to follow a non-EU national upon whom  he
         is dependent.

         iv) Nothing less than such compulsion will engage articles  20  and
         21 of the TFEU. In particular, EU law will not be engaged where the
         EU citizen is not compelled to leave the EU, even if the quality or
         standard of life of the EU citizen is diminished as a result of the
         non-EU national upon whom he is dependent is (for example)  removed
         or prevented from working; although (a) diminution in  the  quality
         of life might engage EU law if (and only if) it  is  sufficient  in
         practice to compel the a relevant ascendant relative, and hence the
         EU dependent citizen, to leave, and (b) such actions as removal  or
         prevention of work may result in an interference  with  some  other
         right, such as the right to respect for family life under article 8
         of the European Convention on Human Rights.

         v) Although such article 8 rights are similar in scope  to  the  EU
         rights conferred by article 7 of the Charter of Fundamental  Rights
         of the European Union, the provisions of the Charter are  addressed
         to member states only when they are implementing EU law. If EU  law
         is not engaged, then the domestic  courts  have  to  undertake  the
         examination of the right to family life under article 8;  but  that
         is an entirely distinct area of protection.

         vi) The overriding of the general national right to refuse a non-EU
         national a right  of  residence,  by  reference  to  the  effective
         enjoyment of the right to reside of  a  dependent  EU  citizen,  is
         described in both Dereci (paragraph 67) and Harrison (paragraph 66)
         as "exceptional", meaning  (as  explained  in  the  latter),  as  a
         principle, it will not be regularly engaged.

19. The applicable principles where, as here, there is another relative who
    may be able to care for the child, are further elaborated  in  Hines  v
    Lambeth  [2014] EWCA Civ 660 where Vos LJ held [21], [23]-[24]:

         20. Accordingly, in my judgment, the  judge  was  right,  applying
             Harrison, to conclude  as  he  did  in  paragraph  21  of  his
             judgment that the claimant was only entitled to  accommodation
             if Brandon would be effectively compelled to leave the  United
             Kingdom if she left. He was also right to point out that  what
             amounts to circumstances of compulsion may differ from case to
             case. As Elias LJ said: "to the extent  that  the  quality  or
             standard of  life  [of  the  EU  citizen]  will  be  seriously
             impaired by excluding the non EU national, that is  likely  in
             practice to infringe the right of residence itself because  it
             will effectively compel the EU citizen to  give  up  residence
             and travel with the non-EU national". It is  for  this  reason
             that the welfare of the child in this case  comes  into  play,
             again as the judge held.

         21. ...

         23. I have no doubt that the test applicable under regulation  15A
             (4A)(c) is clear and can be given effect without  contravening
             EU law. The reviewer  has  to  consider  the  welfare  of  the
             British citizen child and the extent to which the  quality  or
             standard of his life will be impaired if the non-EU citizen is
             required to leave. This is all for the  purpose  of  answering
             the  question  whether  the  child  would,  as  a  matter   of
             practicality, be unable to remain in the UK. This  requires  a
             consideration, amongst other things, of the impact  which  the
             removal of the primary carer would have on the child, and  the
             alternative care available for the child.

         24. There was much discussion  in  argument  as  to  the  kind  of
             alternative care that might be required in order to avoid  the
             conclusion that the child would be forced to leave.  It  would
             be undesirable, I  think,  for  the  court  to  lay  down  any
             guidelines in this regard, but it was, as I have said,  common
             ground that an available adoption  or  foster  care  placement
             would not be adequate for this purpose. That  is  because  the
             quality of the  life  of  the  child  would  be  so  seriously
             impaired by his removal from his mother to be placed in foster
             care that he would be effectively compelled  to  leave.  I  do
             not, however, think that all things being equal the removal of
             a child from the care of one responsible parent to the care of
             another responsible  parent  would  normally  be  expected  so
             seriously to impair his quality and standard of life  that  he
             would be effectively  forced  to  leave  the  UK.  Apart  from
             anything else, he would, even if he did leave, still only have
             the care of one of his previously two joint carers.

21. It is not disputed that a British child cannot be compelled by  law  to
    leave the United Kingdom, (other than by way of extradition proceedings
    or pursuant to a court order that he be returned  to  a  parent  abroad
    under the Hague Conventions). The question is  thus  whether  he  would
    effectively have to leave the EU if his mother is refused  a  right  of
    residence.  This is, as was noted in Harrison, a highly-fact  sensitive
    matter.

22. The EEA Regulations require two questions of fact to be answered:

          1) Is the applicant the primary carer of a British citizen; and,

          2) If so, would the relevant British citizen be unable to  reside
             in the UK or in  another  EEA  state  if  the  applicant  were
             required to leave?

23. If the answer to the first question is yes,  it  does  not  necessarily
    follow that the answer to the second question  must  be  yes.  That  is
    because there may be another person able to provide care,  and  as  the
    case law establishes, the threshold of establishing compulsion is  high
    - see Harrison at [66]-[70]. It is not  the  same  test  as  showing  a
    breach of article 8.

24. It is not disputed that the child in this case has significant medical,
    emotional and educational needs.  While he is in mainstream  education,
    it is only with significant additional assistance. It is  evident  that
    he has problems at night given breathing difficulties.   In  this  case
    the judge made a finding of fact: that the mother is a primary carer  -
    that is not the same as sole  carer.   I  am  satisfied  that  she  was
    entitled on the evidence before her to reach such a  conclusion,  given
    the continuous nature of the care given.  It is also a  question  which
    is distinct from whether the father could also become  a  joint  carer;
    that is an issue for the second question identified at [22] above.   It
    is not doubted that the mother is a direct relative of  the  child  and
    whilst the father is here and is an exempt person.

25. While it may be argued  that  the  judge  does  not  properly  consider
    regulation (7A) (b) in the context of the case law, it  is  clear  that
    she addressed at [32] onwards  the  nature  of  how  responsibility  is
    shared.  Given that the father, mother and child live as a family  unit
    which is dependant financially on the father's earnings, it  cannot  in
    reality be said that he does not share responsibility  for  the  child.
    The judge does, however, give  adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  for
    concluding that sharing of responsibility is not equal.

26. The next question then is whether the child would be compelled to leave
    the UK (and thus the EEA) were his mother to leave. The judge concluded
    [36]-[37] that that would be so, relying on Hines and  a  finding  that
    there would be serious impairment to the child's quality of life.

27. While it is clear from Harrison that economic difficulties  are  not  a
    sufficient consideration, it is clear also from Hines  that  a  serious
    impairment of the child's welfare  may  be  sufficient,  albeit  rarely
    where there are two parents in the picture as here. A  conclusion  that
    there is such an impairment is inevitably fact-sensitive and a  finding
    of fact to be reached by the First-tier  Tribunal.   Here,   the  judge
    found that even were the father to take over responsibility,  which  he
    could, there would nonetheless be such a  serious  impairment  that  he
    would be compelled to leave.

28. The challenge to that specific conclusion is  on  the  basis  that  the
    father could care for the child as though that were the sole criterion.
    That, however, as both MA & SM and Hines make clear is not  always  the
    case. Here, there is a finding of an impairment  which  is  not  simply
    related  to  financial  criteria.  While  the  judge's  conclusion   is
    undoubtedly generous, and may well be one I would not have reached,  it
    is not irrational, and is justified by the evidence she heard.  It  was
    entirely a fact-specific finding.

29. Accordingly, for these reasons, I find that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not involve the making of  an  error  of  law  and  I
    uphold it.

Summary of conclusions

1    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.


Signed        Date: 20 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

