
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA355492013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 May 2016                       |On 9 June 2016                       |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                         ninfa fraciels armoa olmedo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Paraguay  born  on  22  July  1984.   She
    arrived in this country as a visitor on 15 May  2004  and  was  granted
    leave to remain as a student, her latest leave expiring  on  21  August
    2012.  She made an application for further leave to remain  on  4  July
    2012 and this application was refused on 8 August 2013.   This  is  the
    refusal the subject of the appeal proceedings before me.  The appellant
    has a partner who came to the UK in October  2004.   He  unsuccessfully
    attempted to extend his visa and he has overstayed.  The appellant  has
    a son who came to the UK in April 2007 at the age of 6 and  a  daughter
    who had been born in London on 17 October 2008.  She had a third  child
    born in 2014.

2.   The judge stated that the appeal was solely under  Article  8  and  she
    dismissed it for reasons given in her determination.

3.   In the grounds of appeal it was argued that the judge was in  error  in
    so determining the matter because the  appellant's  primary  submission
    was that she satisfied  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules as someone who had lived lawfully and continuously in
    the UK for more than ten years and who had passed the 'Life in  the  UK
    Test' and the B1 English exam.   It  was  submitted  that  the  judge's
    failure to consider this ground at all  in  her  determination  was  an
    error of law.  The focus of the submissions from both  parties  at  the
    hearing was on the argument that the appellant met the requirements for
    a grant of indefinite leave to  remain  under  paragraph  276B  of  the
    Rules.  Article 8 was argued as a secondary or alternative ground  only
    if the primary submission was not accepted.  Reference is made  in  the
    grounds to a letter written on 3 March 2015 raising the issue under the
    Immigration Rules.  The focus of the appeal should  have  been  on  the
    appellant rather than her family as she had accrued the  relevant  time
    under Section 3C to meet the lawful  residence  requirements.   At  the
    date of the appeal the appellant's elder child had been in the  UK  for
    more than seven years and the test was  one  of  reasonableness  rather
    than insurmountable obstacles.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted against the judge's decision  on  both
    the points made under the Rules as  well  as  on  Article  8.   In  the
    Secretary of State's response it was noted  that  the  letter  dated  3
    March 2015 was not attached to the grounds as received by the Secretary
    of State and submitting that the judge had directed  herself  correctly
    in relation to Article 8.

5.   At the hearing before me Mr Haywood relied on  the  grounds  submitting
    that the judge had not dealt with the case argued under paragraph 276B.
     In relation to the point made by the respondent in the response  there
    was a letter dated 3 March 2015.  This had been sent to the Home Office
    and the Tribunal.  Under the heading "Statement of additional  grounds"
    the letter read:

         "Our client has instructed us that she has now been in the  UK  for
         more than 10 years lawfully and continuously.   She  believes  that
         she now meets the criteria for  a  grant  of  indefinite  leave  to
         remain as per paragraph 276B of the Rules."

6.   Mr Tarlow pointed out that there was a letter dated 3 March 2015  which
    was simply a covering letter for the appellant's  bundle.   However  it
    appears that there was another letter of  the  same  date  raising  the
    matters which I have identified.  Mr Tarlow  submitted  that  he  would
    need to take instructions as to whether to withdraw the decision  under
    paragraph 276D.

7.   It does appear to me on the material that I have  that  the  judge  may
    not have  fully  appreciated  the  arguments  that  the  appellant  was
    attempting to advance.  The primary focus of the  submissions  was  not
    Article 8 but the Rules.  It may well be that the judge's attention was
    not drawn to the significance of the letter dated 3 March  2015  or  if
    she had had her attention drawn to  it  would  have  assumed  that  the
    reference was simply made to the letter accompanying the  bundle.   The
    argument does appear to have been advanced under the Rules but  it  may
    well be that the Presenting Officer was not fully seized of  the  point
    that was being put forward.  The statement that the appeal  was  solely
    brought under Article 8 does not appear to reflect the  case  that  the
    appellants were attempting to bring.  I make no criticism of the  judge
    for this and it is not clear that the respondent appreciated it either.

8.   In the premises it does not appear that the appellants'  arguments  had
    the hearing they might have merited and I have come to  the  conclusion
    that the only fair outcome in this case is that the matter should be re-
    determined by the First-tier Tribunal.  This will give  the  respondent
    the opportunity to consider whether to re-visit the decision under 276B
    as Mr Tarlow indicated might be the position.  Counsel  invited  me  to
    remit for a fresh hearing without preserving findings of  fact  and  Mr
    Tarlow did not dissent from the proposition.  I note  that  the  First-
    tier Judge in fact accepted that the  appellant  had  given  a  largely
    truthful account subject to some  reservations  about  the  appellant's
    evidence "going to the heart of the issue in this human rights appeal".
     I agreed that in the circumstances it  might  be  confusing  if  these
    aspects resurfaced because of course it  is  the  appellant's  position
    that it was the case under the  Rules  rather  than  the  human  rights
    aspects which were the focus of the case  as  it  was  intended  to  be
    brought.

Notice of Decision

9.   In the premises I accept that the appeal should be  heard  as  a  fresh
    matter with none of the findings of fact being preserved.  The decision
    of the First-tier Judge was flawed on the basis that I  have  indicated
    and the matter is remitted to be heard afresh by a different First-tier
    Judge.

ANONYMITY

The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and I make none.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award  and  because  the  matter  is  still
ongoing I make no fee order.


Signed   Date 8 June 2016
G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
